Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets by Joanne Rowling, 1965- Published: 1999 J J J J J I I I I I Table of Contents Chapter I … The Worst Birthday.
Chapter III … The Burrow.
Chapter V … The Whomping Willow.
Chapter IX … The Writing on the Wall.
Chapter XI … The Dueling Club.
Chapter XIII … The Very Secret Diary.
Chapter XIV … Cornelius Fudge.
Chapter XVI … The Chamber of Secrets.
Chapter XVII … The Heir of Slytherin.
Not for the first time, an argument had broken out over breakfast at number four, Privet Drive.
Mr. Vernon Dursley had been woken in the early hours of the morning by a loud, hooting noise from his nephew Harry's room.
"Third time this week!"
"If you can't control that owl, it'll have to go!"
Harry tried, yet again, to explain.
"She's bored," he said.
"I know what'll happen if that owl's let out."
He exchanged dark looks with his wife, Petunia.
"I want more bacon."
"Pass the frying pan."
"You've forgotten the magic word," said Harry irritably.
The effect of this simple sentence on the rest of the family was incredible.
Dudley gasped and fell of his chair with a crash that shook the whole kitchen.
Mrs. Dursley gave a small scream and clapped her hands to her mouth; Mr. Dursley jumped to his feet, veins throbbing in his temple.
"I meant please!"
"I didn't mean—" "WHAT HAVE I TOLD YOU," thundered his uncle, spraying spit over the table.
"But I—" "HOW DARE YOU THREATEN DUDLEY!"
I WILL NOT TOLERATE MENTION OF YOUR ABNORMALITY UNDER THIS ROOF!"
Harry stared from his purple-faced uncle to his pale aunt, who was trying to heave Dudley to his feet.
Ever since Harry had come home for the summer holidays, Uncle Vernon had been treating him like a bomb that might go off at any moment, because Harry Potter wasn't a normal boy.
As a matter of fact, he was not normal as it is possible to be.
Harry Potter was a wizard—a wizard fresh from his first year at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry.
He missed Hogwarts so much it was like having a constant stomachache.
Uncle Vernon was large and neckless, with an enormous black mustache; Aunt Petunia was horse-faced and bony; Dudley was blond, pink, and porky.
Harry, on the other hand, was small and skinny, with brilliant green eyes and jet-black hair that was always untidy.
He wore round glasses, and on his forehead was a thin, lightning-shaped scar.
It was this scar that made Harry so particularly unusual, even for a wizard.
Harry's parents had died in Voldemort's attack, but Harry had escaped with his lightning scar, and somehow—nobody understood why Voldemort's powers had been destroyed the instant he had failed to kill Harry.
So Harry had been brought up by his dead mother's sister and her husband.
And then, exactly a year ago, Hogwarts had written to Harry, and the whole story had come out.
Of course, his hopes hadn't been high; they'd never given him a real present, let alone a cake—but to ignore it completely… At that moment, Uncle Vernon cleared his throat importantly and said, "Now, as we all know, today is a very important day."
Harry looked up, hardly daring to believe it.
"This could well be the day I make the biggest deal of my career," said Uncle Vernon.
Harry went back to his toast.
Of course, he thought bitterly, Uncle Vernon was talking about the stupid dinner party.
He'd been talking of nothing else for two weeks.
Some rich builder and his wife were coming to dinner and Uncle Vernon was hoping to get a huge order from him (Uncle Vernon's company made drills).
"I think we should run through the schedule one more time," said Uncle Vernon.
Petunia, you will be—?"
"In the lounge," said Aunt Petunia promptly, "waiting to welcome them graciously to our home."
"I'll be waiting to open the door."
Dudley put on a foul, simpering smile.
"They'll love him!"
"Excellent, Dudley," said Uncle Vernon.
Then he rounded on Harry.
"I'll be in my bedroom, making no noise and pretending I'm not there," said Harry tonelessly.
"Exactly," said Uncle Vernon nastily.
"My perfect little gentleman!"
"I'll be in my room, making no noise and pretending I'm not there," said Harry dully.
Now, we should aim to get in a few good compliments at dinner.
Petunia, any ideas?"
"Vernon tells me you're a wonderful golfer, Mr. Mason… Do tell me where you bought your dress, Mrs. Mason…" "Perfect… Dudley?"
"How about: ‹We had to write an essay about our hero at school, Mr. Mason, and I wrote about you.›" This was too much for both Aunt Petunia and Harry.
"And you, boy?"
Harry fought to keep his face straight as he emerged.
"I'll be in my room, making no noise and pretending I'm not there," he said.
"Too right, you will," said Uncle Vernon forcefully.
When dinner's over, you take Mrs. Mason back to the lounge for coffee, Petunia, and I'll bring the subject around to drills.
With any luck, I'll have the deal signed and sealed before the News at Ten.
Harry couldn't feel too excited about this.
"You stay out of your aunt's way while she's cleaning."
Harry left through the back door.
It was a brilliant, sunny day.
He crossed the lawn, slumped down on the garden bench, and sang under his breath: "Happy birthday to me… happy birthday to me…" No cards, no presents, and he would be spending the evening pretending not to exist.
He gazed miserably into the hedge.
He had never felt so lonely.
More than anything else at Hogwarts, more even than playing Quidditch, Harry missed his best friends, Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger.
They, however, didn't seem to be missing him at all.
Neither of them had written to him all summer, even though Ron had said he was going to ask Harry to come and stay.
Countless times, Harry had been on the point of unlocking Hedwig's cage by magic and sending her to Ron and Hermione with a letter, but it wasn't worth the risk.
Underage wizards weren't allowed to use magic outside of school.
But the long silence from Ron and Hermione had made Harry feel so cut off from the magical world that even taunting Dudley had lost its appeal—and now Ron and Hermione had forgotten his birthday.
What wouldn't he give now for a message from Hogwarts?
From any witch or wizard?
He'd almost be glad of a sight of his archenemy, Draco Malfoy, just to be sure it hadn't all been a dream… Not that his whole year at Hogwarts had been fun.
At the very end of last term, Harry had come face-to-face with none other than Lord Voldemort himself.
Voldemort might be a ruin of his former self, but he was still terrifying, still cunning, still determined to regain power.
Harry had slipped through Voldemort's clutches for a second time, but it had been a narrow escape, and even now, weeks later, Harry kept waking in the night, drenched in cold sweat, wondering where Voldemort was now, remembering his livid face, his wide, mad eyes… Harry suddenly sat bolt upright on the garden bench.
He had been staring absent-mindedly into the hedge—and the hedge was staring back.
Two enormous green eyes had appeared among the leaves.
Harry jumped to his feet just as a jeering voice floated across the lawn.
"I know what day it is," sang Dudley, waddling toward him.
The huge eyes blinked and vanished.
"I know what day it is," Dudley repeated, coming right up to him.
"Well done," said Harry.
"So you've finally learned the days of the week."
"Today's your birthday," sneered Dudley.
Haven't you even got friends at that freak place?"
"Better not let your mum hear you talking about my school," said Harry coolly.
Dudley hitched up his trousers, which were slipping down his fat bottom.
"Why're you staring at the hedge?"
"I'm trying to decide what would be the best spell to set it on fire," said Harry.
Dudley stumbled backward at once, a look of panic on his fat face.
He's doing you know what!"
Harry paid dearly for his moment of fun.
As neither Dudley nor the hedge was in any way hurt, Aunt Petunia knew he hadn't really done magic, but he still had to duck as she aimed a heavy blow at his head with the soapy frying pan.
Then she gave him work to do, with the promise he wouldn't eat again until he'd finished.
While Dudley lolled around watching and eating ice cream, Harry cleaned the windows, washed the car, mowed the lawn, trimmed the flowerbeds, pruned and watered the roses, and repainted the garden bench.
The sun blazed overhead, burning the back of his neck.
It was half past seven in the evening when at last, exhausted, he heard Aunt Petunia calling him.
And walk on the newspaper!"
Harry moved gladly into the shade of the gleaming kitchen.
On top of the fridge stood tonight's pudding: a huge mound of whipped cream and sugared violets.
A loin of roast pork was sizzling in the oven.
The Masons will be here soon!"
She was already wearing a salmon-pink cocktail dress.
Harry washed his hands and bolted down his pitiful supper.
The moment he had finished, Aunt Petunia whisked away his plate.
As he passed the door to the living room, Harry caught a glimpse of Uncle Vernon and Dudley in bow ties and dinner jackets.
"Remember, boy—one sound…" Harry crossed to his bedroom on tiptoe slipped inside, closed the door, and turned to collapse on his bed.
The trouble was, there was already someone sitting on it.
Harry managed not to shout out, but it was a close thing.
The little creature on the bed had large, batlike ears and bulging green eyes the size of tennis balls.
Harry knew instantly that this was what had been watching him out of the garden hedge that morning.
As they stared at each other, Harry heard Dudley's voice from the hall.
The creature slipped off the bed and bowed so low that the end of its long, thin nose touched the carpet.
"Er—hello," said Harry nervously.
He wanted to ask, "What are you?"
"Er—I don't want to be rude or anything, but—this isn't a great time for me to have a house-elf in my bedroom."
Aunt Petunias high, false laugh sounded from the living room.
The elf hung his head.
"Not that I'm not pleased to meet you," said Harry quickly, "but, er, is there any particular reason you're here?"
To his horror, the elf burst into tears—very noisy tears.
"Never… never ever…" Harry thought he heard the voices downstairs falter.
"I'm sorry," he whispered, "I didn't mean to offend you or anything."
"You can't have met many decent wizards," said Harry, trying to cheer him up.
"Don't—what are you doing?"
"And I thought I had it bad staying here for another four weeks," he said.
Can't anyone help you?
Almost at once, Harry wished he hadn't spoken.
"Harry Potter speaks not of his triumph over He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named."
Speak not the name!"
"Sorry," said Harry quickly.
Thinking about Ron was painful, too.
"Ah, sir," he gasped, dabbing his face with a corner of the grubby pillowcase he was wearing.
He has braved so many dangers already!
There was a silence broken only by the chink of knives and forks from downstairs and the distant rumble of Uncle Vernon's voice.
It's all that's keeping me going.
You don't know what it's like here.
I don't belong here.
He is too great, too good, to lose.
Harry Potter must not put himself in peril.
He is too important, sir!"
"What terrible things?"
"Who's plotting them?"
But why are you warning me?"
A sudden, unpleasant thought struck him.
Harry, however, was completely lost.
"He hasn't got a brother, has he?"
"Well then, I can't think who else would have a chance of making horrible things happen at Hogwarts," said Harry.
"I mean, there's Dumbledore, for one thing—you know who Dumbledore is, don't you?"
A sudden silence fell downstairs.
Two seconds later Harry, heart thudding madly, heard Uncle Vernon coming into the hall, calling, "Dudley must have left his television on again, the little tyke!"
In the wardrobe!"
"You've just ruined the punch line of my Japanese golfer joke… One more sound and you'll wish you'd never been born, boy!"
He stomped flat-footed from the room.
"See what it's like here?"
"Friends who don't even write to Harry Potter?"
"I expect they've just been—wait a minute," said Harry, frowning.
"How do you know my friends haven't been writing to me?"
Stepping nimbly out of Harry's reach, he pulled a thick wad of envelopes from the inside of the pillowcase he was wearing.
Harry could make out Hermione's neat writing, Ron's untidy scrawl, and even a scribble that looked as though it was from the Hogwarts gamekeeper, Hagrid.
Ah, sir, this is a danger you must not face!
Say you won't go back, sir!"
"No," said Harry angrily.
"Give me my friends' letters!"
Mouth dry, stomach lurching, Harry sprang after him, trying not to make a sound.
Aunt Petunia's masterpiece of a pudding, the mountain of cream and sugared violets, was floating up near the ceiling.
"No," croaked Harry.
The pudding fell to the floor with a heart-stopping crash.
Cream splattered the windows and walls as the dish shattered.
There were screams from the dining room and Uncle Vernon burst into the kitchen to find Harry, rigid with shock, covered from head to foot in Aunt Petunias pudding.
At first, it looked as though Uncle Vernon would manage to gloss the whole thing over.
("Just our nephew—very disturbed—meeting strangers upsets him, so we kept him upstairs…") He shooed the shocked Masons back into the dining room, promised Harry he would flay him to within an inch of his life when the Masons had left, and handed him a mop.
Aunt Petunia dug some ice-cream out of the freezer and Harry, still shaking, started scrubbing the kitchen clean.
Uncle Vernon might still have been able to make his deal—if it hadn't been for the owl.
Aunt Petunia was just passing around a box of after-dinner mints when a huge barn owl swooped through the dining room window, dropped a letter on Mrs. Mason's head, and swooped out again.
Mrs. Mason screamed like a banshee and ran from the house shouting about lunatics.
Harry stood in the kitchen, clutching the mop for support, as Uncle Vernon advanced on him, a demonic glint in his tiny eyes.
It did not contain birthday greetings.
Dear Mr. Potter, We have received intelligence that a Hover Charm was used at your place of residence this evening at twelve minutes past nine.
As you know, underage wizards are not permitted to perform spells outside school, and further spell-work on your part may lead to expulsion from said school (Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery, 1875, Paragraph C).
We would also ask you to remember that any magical activity that risks notice by members of the non-magical community (Muggles) is a serious offense under section 13 of the International Confederation of Warlocks' Statute of Secrecy.
Enjoy your holidays!
"You didn't tell us you weren't allowed to use magic outside school," said Uncle Vernon, a mad gleam dancing in his eyes.
"Forgot to mention it… Slipped your mind, I daresay…" He was bearing down on Harry like a great bulldog, all his teeth bared.
"Well, I've got news for you, boy… I'm locking you up… You're never going back to that school… never… and if you try and magic yourself out—they'll expel you!"
And laughing like a maniac, he dragged Harry back upstairs.
Uncle Vernon was as bad as his word.
The following morning, he paid a man to fit bars on Harry's window.
They let Harry out to use the bathroom morning and evening.
Otherwise, he was locked in his room around the clock.
He lay on his bed watching the sun sinking behind the bars on the window and wondered miserably what was going to happen to him.
What was the good of magicking himself out of his room if Hogwarts would expel him for doing it?
Yet life at Privet Drive had reached an all-time low.
The cat-flap rattled and Aunt Petunias hand appeared, pushing a bowl of canned soup into the room.
Harry, whose insides were aching with hunger, jumped off his bed and seized it.
The soup was stone-cold, but he drank half of it in one gulp.
Then he crossed the room to Hedwig's cage and tipped the soggy vegetables at the bottom of the bowl into her empty food tray.
She ruffled her feathers and gave him a look of deep disgust.
Supposing he was still alive in another four weeks, what would happen if he didn't turn up at Hogwarts?
Would someone be sent to see why he hadn't come back?
The room was growing dark.
Exhausted, stomach rumbling, mind spinning over the same unanswerable questions, Harry fell into an uneasy sleep.
He dreamed that he was on show in a zoo, with a card reading UNDERAGE WIZARD attached to his cage.
People goggled through the bars at him as he lay, starving and weak, on a bed of straw.
"Stop it," Harry muttered as the rattling pounded in his sore head.
"Leave me alone… cut it out… I'm trying to sleep…" He opened his eyes.
Moonlight was shining through the bars on the window.
Ron Weasley was outside Harry's window.
Chapter III The Burrow.
"Ron, how did you—What the—?"
Harry's mouth fell open as the full impact of what he was seeing hit him.
Ron was leaning out of the back window of an old turquoise car, which was parked in midair.
Grinning at Harry from the front seats were Fred and George, Ron's elder twin brothers.
"All right, Harry?"
"What's been going on?"
"He works for the Ministry," said Ron.
"You know we're not supposed to do spells outside school—" "You should talk," said Harry, staring at the floating car.
"Oh, this doesn't count," said Ron.
It's Dad's, we didn't enchant it.
"We've come to take you home with us."
"But you can't magic me out either—" "We don't need to," said Ron, jerking his head toward the front seat and grinning.
"You forget who I've got with me."
"Tie that around the bars," said Fred, throwing the end of a rope to Harry.
"Don't worry," said Fred, "and stand back."
Harry moved back into the shadows next to Hedwig, who seemed to have realized how important this was and kept still and silent.
The car revved louder and louder and suddenly, with a crunching noise, the bars were pulled clean out of the window as Fred drove straight up in the air.
Harry ran back to the window to see the bars dangling a few feet above the ground.
Panting, Ron hoisted them up into the car.
When the bars were safely in the back seat with Ron, Fred reversed as close as possible to Harry's window.
"Get in," Ron said.
"But all my Hogwarts stuff—my wand—my broomstick—" "Where is it?"
"Locked in the cupboard under the stairs, and I can't get out of this room—" "No problem," said George from the front passenger seat.
"Out of the way, Harry."
Fred and George climbed catlike through the window into Harry's room.
You had to hand it to them, thought Harry, as George took an ordinary hairpin from his pocket and started to pick the lock.
"A lot of wizards think it's a waste of time, knowing this sort of Muggle trick," said Fred, "but we feel they're skills worth learning, even if they are a bit slow."
There was a small click and the door swung open.
"So—we'll get your trunk—you grab anything you need from your room and hand it out to Ron," whispered George.
"Watch out for the bottom stair—it creaks," Harry whispered back as the twins disappeared onto the dark landing.
Harry dashed around his room, collecting his things and passing them out of the window to Ron.
Then he went to help Fred and George heave his trunk up the stairs.
Harry heard Uncle Vernon cough.
At last, panting, they reached the landing, then carried the trunk through Harry's room to the open window.
Fred climbed back into the car to pull with Ron, and Harry and George pushed from the bedroom side.
Inch by inch, the trunk slid through the window.
Uncle Vernon coughed again.
"A bit more," panted Fred, who was pulling from inside the car.
"THAT RUDDY OWL!"
"I've forgotten Hedwig!"
Harry tore back across the room as the landing light clicked on—he snatched up Hedwig's cage, dashed to the window, and passed it out to Ron.
For a split second, Uncle Vernon stood framed in the doorway; then he let out a bellow like an angry bull and dived at Harry, grabbing him by the ankle.
Ron, Fred, and George seized Harry's arms and pulled as hard as they could.
HE'S GETTING AWAY!"
As soon as Harry was in the car and had slammed the door shut, Ron yelled, "Put your foot down, Fred!"
Harry couldn't believe it—he was free.
He rolled down the window, the night air whipping his hair, and looked back at the shrinking rooftops of Privet Drive.
Uncle Vernon, Aunt Petunia, and Dudley were all hanging, dumbstruck, out of Harry's window.
"See you next summer!"
"Let Hedwig out," he told Ron.
George handed the hairpin to Ron and, a moment later, Hedwig soared joyfully out of the window to glide alongside them like a ghost.
"So—what's the story, Harry?"
"What's been happening?"
There was a long, shocked silence when he had finished.
"Very fishy," said Fred finally.
"Definitely dodgy," agreed George.
"So he wouldn't even tell you who's supposed to be plotting all this stuff?"
"I don't think he could," said Harry.
"I told you, every time he got close to letting something slip, he started banging his head against the wall."
He saw Fred and George look at each other.
"What, you think he was lying to me?"
Someone's idea of a joke.
Can you think of anyone at school with a grudge against you?"
"Yes," said Harry and Ron together, instantly.
"Draco Malfoy," Harry explained.
"He hates me."
"Not Lucius Malfoy's son?"
"Must be, it's not a very common name, is it?"
"I've heard Dad talking about him," said George.
""And when You-Know-Who disappeared," said Fred, craning around to look at Harry, "Lucius Malfoy came back saying he'd never meant any of it.
Harry had heard these rumors about Malfoy's family before, and they didn't surprise him at all.
Draco Malfoy made Dudley Dursley look like a kind, thoughtful, and sensitive boy.
"Yeah, Mum's always wishing we had a house-elf to do the ironing," said George.
Judging by the fact that Draco Malfoy usually had the best of everything, his family was rolling in wizard gold; he could just see Malfoy strutting around a large manor house.
Sending the family servant to stop Harry from going back to Hogwarts also sounded exactly like the sort of thing Malfoy would do.
"I'm glad we came to get you, anyway," said Ron.
It wouldn't be the first time he'd collapsed on a delivery.
"The owl Mum and Dad bought Percy when he was made prefect," said Fred from the front.
"But Percy wouldn't lend him to me," said Ron.
"Said he needed him."
"Percy's been acting very oddly this summer," said George, frowning.
"And he has been sending a lot of letters and spending a load of time shut up in his room… I mean, there's only so many times you can polish a prefect badge… You're driving too far west, Fred," he added, pointing at a compass on the dashboard.
Fred twiddled the steering wheel.
"So, does your dad know you've got the car?"
"What does your dad do at the Ministry of Magic, anyway?"
"He works in the most boring department," said Ron.
"The Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office."
This Muggle woman bought it, took it home, and tried to serve her friends tea in it.
He takes it apart, puts spells on it, and puts it back together again.
If he raided our house he'd have to put himself under arrest.
"That's the main road," said George, peering down through the windshield.
"We'll be there in ten minutes… Just as well, it's getting light…" A faint pinkish glow was visible along the horizon to the east.
Fred brought the car lower, and Harry saw a dark patchwork of fields and clumps of trees.
"We're a little way outside the village," said George.
Lower and lower went the flying car.
The edge of a brilliant red sun was now gleaming through the trees.
They had landed next to a tumbledown garage in a small yard, and Harry looked out for the first time at Ron's house.
It looked as though it had once been a large stone pigpen, but extra rooms had been added here and there until it was several stories high and so crooked it looked as though it were held up by magic (which, Harry reminded himself, it probably was).
Four or five chimneys were perched on top of the red roof.
A lopsided sign stuck in the ground near the entrance read, "THE BURROW".
Around the front door lay a jumble of rubber boots and a very rusty cauldron.
Several fat brown chickens were pecking their way around the yard.
"It's not much," said Ron.
"It's wonderful," said Harry happily, thinking of Privet Drive.
They got out of the car.
"Right," said Ron.
"Come on, Harry, I sleep at the—" Ron had gone a nasty greenish color, his eyes fixed on the house.
The other three wheeled around.
Mrs. Weasley was marching across the yard, scattering chickens, and for a short, plump, kind-faced woman, it was remarkable how much she looked like a saber-toothed tiger.
"Ah," said Fred.
"Oh, dear," said George.
Mrs. Weasley came to a halt in front of them, her hands on her hips, staring from one guilty face to the next.
She was wearing a flowered apron with a wand sticking out of the pocket.
"So," she said.
"Morning, Mum," said George, in what he clearly thought was a jaunty, winning voice.
"Have you any idea how worried I've been?"
"Sorry, Mum, but see, we had to—" All three of Mrs. Weasley's sons were taller than she was, but they cowered as her rage broke over them.
"YOU COULD DO WITH TAKING A LEAF OUT OF PERCY'S BOOK!"
"You could have died, you could have been seen, you could have lost your father his job—" It seemed to go on for hours.
Mrs. Weasley had shouted herself hoarse before she turned on Harry, who backed away.
"I'm very pleased to see you, Harry, dear," she said.
"Come in and have some breakfast."
She turned and walked back into the house and Harry, after a nervous glance at Ron, who nodded encouragingly, followed her.
The kitchen was small and rather cramped.
There was a scrubbed wooden table and chairs in the middle, and Harry sat down on the edge of his seat, looking around.
He had never been in a wizard house before.
The clock on the wall opposite him had only one hand and no numbers at all.
Written around the edge were things like Time to make tea, Time to feed the chickens, and You're late.
Books were stacked three deep on the mantelpiece, books with titles like Charm Your Own Cheese, Enchantment in Baking, and One Minute Feasts—It's Magic!
Mrs. Weasley was clattering around, cooking breakfast a little haphazardly, throwing dirty looks at her sons as she threw sausages into the frying pan.
"I don't blame you, dear," she assured Harry, tipping eight or nine sausages onto his plate.
Just last night we were saying we'd come and get you ourselves if you hadn't written back to Ron by Friday.
"It was cloudy, Mum!"
"You keep your mouth closed while you're eating!"
Mrs. Weasley snapped.
"They were starving him, Mum!"
At that moment there was a diversion in the form of a small, redheaded figure in a long nightdress, who appeared in the kitchen, gave a small squeal, and ran out again.
"Ginny," said Ron in an undertone to Harry.
"Yeah, she'll be wanting your autograph, Harry," Fred said with a grin, but he caught his mother's eye and bent his face over his plate without another word.
Nothing more was said until all four plates were clean, which took a surprisingly short time.
"Blimey, I'm tired," yawned Fred, setting down his knife and fork at last.
"I think I'll go to bed and—" "You will not," snapped Mrs. Weasley.
"You can go up to bed, dear," she added to Harry.
"Now, let's see what Lockhart's got to say on the subject—" And she pulled a heavy book from the stack on the mantelpiece.
There was a big photograph on the front of a very good-looking wizard with wavy blond hair and bright blue eyes.
Mrs. Weasley beamed down at him.
"Oh, he is marvelous," she said.
"He knows his household pests, all right, it's a wonderful book…" "Mum fancies him," said Fred, in a very audible whisper.
"Don't be so ridiculous, Fred," said Mrs. Weasley, her cheeks rather pink.
"All right, if you think you know better than Lockhart, you can go and get on with it, and woe betide you if there's a single gnome in that garden when I come out to inspect it."
The garden was large, and in Harry's eyes, exactly what a garden should be.
"Muggles have garden gnomes, too, you know," Harry told Ron as they crossed the lawn.
"Yeah, I've seen those things they think are gnomes," said Ron, bent double with his head in a peony bush, "like fat little Santa Clauses with fishing rods…" There was a violent scuffling noise, the peony bush shuddered, and Ron straightened up.
"This is a gnome," he said grimly.
It was small and leathery looking, with a large, knobby, bald head exactly like a potato.
Ron held it at arm's length as it kicked out at him with its horny little feet; he grasped it around the ankles and turned it upside down.
"This is what you have to do," he said.
He let go of the gnome's ankles: It flew twenty feet into the air and landed with a thud in the field over the hedge.
"Pitiful," said Fred.
"I bet I can get mine beyond that stump."
Harry learned quickly not to feel too sorry for the gnomes.
"See, they're not too bright," said George, seizing five or six gnomes at once.
Soon, the crowd of gnomes in the field started walking away in a straggling line, their little shoulders hunched.
"They'll be back," said Ron as they watched the gnomes disappear into the hedge on the other side of the field.
"They love it here… Dad's too soft with them; he thinks they're funny…" Just then, the front door slammed.
They hurried through the garden and back into the house.
Mr. Weasley was slumped in a kitchen chair with his glasses off and his eyes closed.
He was a thin man, going bald, but the little hair he had was as red as any of his children's.
"What a night," he mumbled, groping for the teapot as they all sat down around him.
"Find anything, Dad?"
"All I got were a few shrinking door keys and a biting kettle," yawned Mr. Weasley.
"Just Muggle-baiting," sighed Mr. Weasley.
Mrs. Weasley had appeared, holding a long poker like a sword.
Mr. Weasley's eyes jerked open.
He stared guiltily at his wife.
"C-cars, Molly, dear?"
"Yes, Arthur, cars," said Mrs. Weasley, her eyes flashing.
"Imagine a wizard buying a rusty old car and telling his wife all he wanted to do with it was take it apart to see how it worked, while really he was enchanting it to make it fly."
Mr. Weasley blinked.
And for your information, Harry arrived this morning in the car you weren't intending to fly!"
He looked around, saw Harry, and jumped.
Very pleased to meet you, Ron's told us so much about—" "Your sons flew that car to Harry's house and back last night."
"What have you got to say about that, eh?"
"Did you really?"
"Come on, I'll show you my bedroom."
They slipped out of the kitchen and down a narrow passageway to an uneven staircase, which wound its way, zigzagging up through the house.
On the third landing, a door stood ajar.
Harry just caught sight of a pair of bright brown eyes staring at him before it closed with a snap.
"Ginny," said Ron.
Harry stepped in, his head almost touching the sloping ceiling, and blinked.
It was like walking into a furnace: Nearly everything in Ron's room seemed to be a violent shade of orange: the bedspread, the walls, even the ceiling.
Then Harry realized that Ron had covered nearly every inch of the shabby wallpaper with posters of the same seven witches and wizards, all wearing bright orange robes, carrying broomsticks, and waving energetically.
"Your Quidditch team?"
Harry stepped over a pack of Self-Shuffling playing cards on the floor and looked out of the tiny window.
Then he turned to look at Ron, who was watching him almost nervously, as though waiting for his opinion.
"It's a bit small," said Ron quickly.
Ron's ears went pink.
Life at the Burrow was as different as possible from life on Privet Drive.
The ghoul in the attic howled and dropped pipes whenever he felt things were getting too quiet, and small explosions from Fred and George's bedroom were considered perfectly normal.
What Harry found most unusual about life at Ron's, however, wasn't the talking mirror or the clanking ghoul: It was the fact that everybody there seemed to like him.
Mrs. Weasley fussed over the state of his socks and tried to force him to eat fourth helpings at every meal.
Mr. Weasley liked Harry to sit next to him at the dinner table so that he could bombard him with questions about life with Muggles, asking him to explain how things like plugs and the postal service worked.
"Ingenious, really, how many ways Muggles have found of getting along without magic."
Harry heard from Hogwarts one sunny morning about a week after he had arrived at the Burrow.
He and Ron went down to breakfast to find Mr. and Mrs. Weasley and Ginny already sitting at the kitchen table.
Ginny seemed very prone to knocking things over whenever Harry entered a room.
She dived under the table to retrieve the bowl and emerged with her face glowing like the setting sun.
Pretending he hadn't noticed this, Harry sat down and took the toast Mrs. Weasley offered him.
"Letters from school," said Mr. Weasley, passing Harry and Ron identical envelopes of yellowish parchment, addressed in green ink.
For a few minutes there was silence as they all read their letters.
Harry's told him to catch the Hogwarts Express as usual from King's Cross station on September first.
There was also a list of the new books he'd need for the coming year.
Fred, who had finished his own list, peered over at Harry's.
"You've been told to get all Lockhart's books, too!"
"The new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher must be a fan—bet it's a witch."
At this point, Fred caught his mother's eye and quickly busied himself with the marmalade.
"That lot won't come cheap," said George, with a quick look at his parents.
"Lockhart's books are really expensive…" "Well, we'll manage," said Mrs. Weasley, but she looked worried.
"I expect we'll be able to pick up a lot of Ginny's things secondhand."
"Oh, are you starting at Hogwarts this year?"
Harry asked Ginny.
She nodded, blushing to the roots of her flaming hair, and put her elbow in the butter dish.
Fortunately no one saw this except Harry, because just then Ron's elder brother Percy walked in.
He was already dressed, his Hogwarts prefect badge pinned to his sweater vest.
"Morning, all," said Percy briskly.
Then he ripped open Hermione's letter and read it out loud: "Dear Ron, and Harry if you're there, "I hope everything went all right and that Harry is okay and that you didn't do anything illegal to get him out, Ron, because that would get Harry into trouble, too.
"I'm very busy with schoolwork, of course ("How can she be?"
"Well, that fits in nicely, we can go and get all your things then, too," said Mrs. Weasley, starting to clear the table.
"What're you all up to today?"
It was surrounded by trees that blocked it from view of the village below, meaning that they could practice Quidditch there, as long as they didn't fly too high.
They couldn't use real Quidditch balls, which would have been hard to explain if they had escaped and flown away over the village; instead they threw apples for one another to catch.
They took turns riding Harry's Nimbus Two Thousand, which was easily the best broom; Ron's old Shooting Star was often outstripped by passing butterflies.
Five minutes later they were marching up the hill, broomsticks over their shoulders.
They had asked Percy if he wanted to join them, but he had said he was busy.
Harry had only seen Percy at mealtimes so far; he stayed shut in his room the rest of the time.
"Wish I knew what he was up to," said Fred, frowning.
His exam results came the day before you did; twelve O.W.L.
If we're not careful, we'll have another Head Boy in the family.
Bill was the oldest Weasley brother.
He and the next brother, Charlie, had already left Hogwarts.
"Dunno how Mum and Dad are going to afford all our school stuff this year," said George after a while.
He felt a bit awkward.
Mrs. Weasley woke them all early the following Wednesday.
After a quick half a dozen bacon sandwiches each, they pulled on their coats and Mrs. Weasley took a flowerpot off the kitchen mantelpiece and peered inside.
"We're running low, Arthur," she sighed.
After you, Harry dear!"
And she offered him the flowerpot.
Harry stared at them all watching him.
"W-what am I supposed to do?"
"Sorry, Harry, I forgot."
"I went on the Underground—" "Really?"
"Harry, watch us first."
He took a pinch of glittering powder out of the flowerpot, stepped up to the fire, and threw the powder into the flames.
"You must speak clearly, dear," Mrs. Weasley told Harry as George dipped his hand into the flowerpot.
"And be sure to get out at the right grate…" "The right what?"
"But, dear, if he got lost, how would we ever explain to his aunt and uncle?"
"They wouldn't mind," Harry reassured her.
"Dudley would think it was a brilliant joke if I got lost up a chimney, don't worry about that—" "Well… all right… you go after Arthur," said Mrs. Weasley.
"Now, when you get into the fire, say where you're going—" "And keep your elbows tucked in," Ron advised.
"And your eyes shut," said Mrs. Weasley.
"The soot—" "Don't fidget," said Ron.
"Or you might well fall out of the wrong fireplace—" "But don't panic and get out too early; wait until you see Fred and George."
He took a deep breath, scattered the powder into the flames, and stepped forward; the fire felt like a warm breeze; he opened his mouth and immediately swallowed a lot of hot ash.
It felt as though he was being sucked down a giant drain.
Dizzy and bruised, covered in soot, he got gingerly to his feet, holding his broken glasses up to his eyes.
He was quite alone, but where he was, he had no idea.
A glass case nearby held a withered hand on a cushion, a bloodstained pack of cards, and a staring glass eye.
Evil-looking masks stared down from the walls, an assortment of human bones lay upon the counter, and rusty, spiked instruments hung from the ceiling.
The sooner he got out of here, the better.
Nose still stinging where it had hit the hearth, Harry made his way swiftly and silently toward the door, but before he'd got halfway toward it, two people appeared on the other side of the glass—and one of them was the very last person Harry wanted to meet when he was lost, covered in soot, and wearing broken glasses: Draco Malfoy.
Harry looked quickly around and spotted a large black cabinet to his left; he shot inside it and pulled the doors closed, leaving a small crack to peer through.
Seconds later, a bell clanged, and Malfoy stepped into the shop.
The man who followed could only be Draco's father.
He had the same pale, pointed face and identical cold, gray eyes.
Mr. Malfoy crossed the shop, looking lazily at the items on display, and rang a bell on the counter before turning to his son and saying, "Touch nothing, Draco."
Malfoy, who had reached for the glass eye, said, "I thought you were going to buy me a present."
"I said I would buy you a racing broom," said his father, drumming his fingers on the counter.
"What's the good of that if I'm not on the House team?"
Special permission from Dumbledore so he could play for Gryffindor.
"…everyone thinks he's so smart, wonderful Potter with his scar and his broomstick—" "You have told me this at least a dozen times already," said Mr. Malfoy, with a quelling look at his son.
A stooping man had appeared behind the counter, smoothing his greasy hair back from his face.
How may I be of assistance?
"The Ministry wouldn't presume to trouble you, sir, surely?"
Mr. Malfoy's lip curled.
The name Malfoy still commands a certain respect, yet the Ministry grows ever more meddlesome.
"Let me see…" "Can I have that?"
"Ah, the Hand of Glory!"
Best friend of thieves and plunderers!
"The teachers all have favorites, that Hermione Granger—" "I would have thought you'd be ashamed that a girl of no wizard family beat you in every exam," snapped Mr. Malfoy.
"Wizard blood is counting for less everywhere—" "Not with me," said Mr. Malfoy, his long nostrils flaring.
"In that case, perhaps we can return to my list," said Mr. Malfoy shortly.
Harry watched nervously as Draco drew nearer and nearer to his hiding place, examining the objects for sale.
Draco paused to examine a long coil of hangman's rope and to read, smirking, the card propped on a magnificent necklace of opals, Caution: Do Not Touch.
Cursed—Has Claimed the Lives of Nineteen Muggle Owners to Date.
Draco turned away and saw the cabinet right in front of him.
He walked forward… he stretched out his hand for the handle… "Done," said Mr. Malfoy at the counter.
"Come, Draco—" Harry wiped his forehead on his sleeve as Draco turned away.
Harry waited for a minute in case he came back, then, quietly as he could, slipped out of the cabinet, past the glass cases, and out of the shop door.
Clutching his broken glasses to his face, Harry stared around.
He had emerged into a dingy alleyway that seemed to be made up entirely of shops devoted to the Dark Arts.
Two shabby-looking wizards were watching him from the shadow of a doorway, muttering to each other.
Feeling jumpy, Harry set off, trying to hold his glasses on straight and hoping against hope he'd be able to find a way out of here.
An old wooden street sign hanging over a shop selling poisonous candles told him he was in Knockturn Alley.
This didn't help, as Harry had never heard of such a place.
Trying to stay calm, he wondered what to do.
"Not lost are you, my dear?"
An aged witch stood in front of him, holding a tray of what looked horribly like whole human fingernails.
She leered at him, showing mossy teeth.
Harry backed away.
"I'm fine, thanks," he said.
Harry's heart leapt.
So did the witch; a load of fingernails cascaded down over her feet and she cursed as the massive form of Hagrid, the Hogwarts gamekeeper, came striding toward them, beetle-black eyes flashing over his great bristling beard.
Harry croaked in relief.
Her shrieks followed them all the way along the twisting alleyway out into bright sunlight.
"Yer a mess!"
"I told you, I was lost— what were you doing down there, anyway?"
Yer not on yer own?"
"I've got to go and find them…" They set off together down the street.
"Lousy Muggles," growled Hagrid.
She ran down to meet them, her bushy brown hair flying behind her.
Harry and Hermione looked around; sprinting up the crowded street were Ron, Fred, George, Percy, and Mr. Weasley.
"Harry," Mr. Weasley panted.
"We hoped you'd only gone one grate too far…" He mopped his glistening bald patch.
"Molly's frantic—she's coming now—" "Where did you come out?"
"Knockturn Alley," said Hagrid grimly.
"We've never been allowed in," said Ron enviously.
"I should ruddy well think not," growled Hagrid.
"Oh, Harry—oh, my dear—you could have been anywhere—" Gasping for breath she pulled a large clothes brush out of her bag and began sweeping off the soot Hagrid hadn't managed to beat away.
Mr. Weasley took Harry's glasses, gave them a tap of his wand, and returned them, good as new.
If you hadn't found him, Hagrid!
"See yer at Hogwarts!"
And he strode away, head and shoulders taller than anyone else in the packed street.
"Malfoy and his father."
"Did Lucius Malfoy buy anything?"
"No, he was selling."
"So he's worried," said Mr. Weasley with grim satisfaction.
"Oh, I'd love to get Lucius Malfoy for something…" "You be careful, Arthur," said Mrs. Weasley sharply as they were bowed into the bank by a goblin at the door.
"So you don't think I'm a match for Lucius Malfoy?"
"But you're Muggles!"
What's that you've got there?
Oh, you're changing Muggle money.
He pointed excitedly at the ten-pound notes in Mr. Granger's hand.
The vaults were reached by means of small, goblin-driven carts that sped along miniature train tracks through the bank's underground tunnels.
There was a very small pile of silver Sickles inside, and just one gold Galleon.
Harry felt even worse when they reached his vault.
He tried to block the contents from view as he hastily shoved handfuls of coins into a leather bag.
Back outside on the marble steps, they all separated.
Percy muttered vaguely about needing a new quill.
Fred and George had spotted their friend from Hogwarts, Lee Jordan.
Mrs. Weasley and Ginny were going to a secondhand robe shop.
Mr. Weasley was insisting on taking the Grangers off to the Leaky Cauldron for a drink.
"And not one step down Knockturn Alley!"
Harry, Ron, and Hermione strolled off along the winding, cobbled street.
The bag of gold, silver, and bronze jangling cheerfully in Harry's pocket was clamoring to be spent, so he bought three large strawberry-and-peanut-butter ice creams, which they slurped happily as they wandered up the alley, examining the fascinating shop windows.
"A study of Hogwarts prefects and their later careers," Ron read aloud off the back cover.
"That sounds fascinating…" "Go away," Percy snapped.
"Course, he's very ambitious, Percy, he's got it all planned out… he wants to be Minister of Magic…" Ron told Harry and Hermione in an undertone as they left Percy to it.
They were by no means the only ones making their way to the bookshop.
The crowd seemed to be made up mostly of witches around Mrs. Weasley's age.
A harassed-looking wizard stood at the door, saying, "Calmly, please, ladies… Don't push, there… mind the books, now…" Harry, Ron, and Hermione squeezed inside.
"Oh, there you are, good," said Mrs. Weasley.
She sounded breathless and kept patting her hair.
The real Lockhart was wearing robes of forget-me-not blue that exactly matched his eyes; his pointed wizard's hat was set at a jaunty angle on his wavy hair.
A short, irritable-looking man was dancing around taking photographs with a large black camera that emitted puffs of purple smoke with every blinding flash.
"Out of the way, there," he snarled at Ron, moving back to get a better shot.
"This is for the Daily Prophet—" "Big deal," said Ron, rubbing his foot where the photographer had stepped on it.
He looked up.
He saw Ron and then he saw Harry.
Then he leapt to his feet and positively shouted, "It can't be Harry Potter?"
The crowd parted, whispering excitedly; Lockhart dived forward, seized Harry's arm, and pulled him to the front.
The crowd burst into applause.
"Nice big smile, Harry," said Lockhart, through his own gleaming teeth.
"Together, you and I are worth the front page."
When he finally let go of Harry's hand, Harry could hardly feel his fingers.
"Ladies and gentlemen," he said loudly, waving for quiet.
The perfect moment for me to make a little announcement I've been sitting on for some time!
He and his schoolmates will, in fact, be getting the real magical me.
Yes, ladies and gentlemen, I have great pleasure and pride in announcing that this September, I will be taking up the post of Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry!"
Staggering slightly under their weight, he managed to make his way out of the limelight to the edge of the room, where Ginny was standing next to her new cauldron.
"You have these," Harry mumbled to her, tipping the books into the cauldron.
"I'll buy my own—" "Bet you loved that, didn't you, Potter?"
He straightened up and found himself face-to-face with Draco Malfoy, who was wearing his usual sneer.
"Famous Harry Potter," said Malfoy.
"Can't even go into a bookshop without making the front page."
"Leave him alone, he didn't want all that!"
It was the first time she had spoken in front of Harry.
She was glaring at Malfoy.
"Potter, you've got yourself a girlfriend!"
Ginny went scarlet as Ron and Hermione fought their way over, both clutching stacks of Lockhart's books.
"Oh, it's you," said Ron, looking at Malfoy as if he were something unpleasant on the sole of his shoe.
"Bet you're surprised to see Harry here, eh?"
"Not as surprised as I am to see you in a shop, Weasley," retorted Malfoy.
"I suppose your parents will go hungry for a month to pay for all those."
Ron went as red as Ginny.
He dropped his books into the cauldron, too, and started toward Malfoy, but Harry and Hermione grabbed the back of his jacket.
"Well, well, well—Arthur Weasley."
It was Mr. Malfoy.
He stood with his hand on Draco's shoulder, sneering in just the same way.
"Lucius," said Mr. Weasley, nodding coldly.
"Busy time at the Ministry, I hear," said Mr. Malfoy.
"All those raids… I hope they're paying you overtime?"
He reached into Ginny's cauldron and extracted, from amid the glossy Lockhart books, a very old, very battered copy of A Beginner's Guide to Transfiguration.
"Obviously not," Mr. Malfoy said.
"Dear me, what's the use of being a disgrace to the name of wizard if they don't even pay you well for it?"
Mr. Weasley flushed darker than either Ron or Ginny.
"We have a very different idea of what disgraces the name of wizard, Malfoy," he said.
"Clearly," said Mr. Malfoy, his pale eyes straying to Mr. and Mrs. Granger, who were watching apprehensively.
"The company you keep, Weasley… and I thought your family could sink no lower—" There was a thud of metal as Ginny's cauldron went flying; Mr. Weasley had thrown himself at Mr. Malfoy, knocking him backward into a bookshelf.
In an instant he had pulled Mr. Weasley and Mr. Malfoy apart.
Mr. Weasley had a cut lip and Mr. Malfoy had been hit in the eye by an Encyclopedia of Toadstools.
He was still holding Ginny's old Transfiguration book.
He thrust it at her, his eyes glittering with malice.
"Here, girl—take your book—it's the best your father can give you—" Pulling himself out of Hagrid's grip he beckoned to Draco and swept from the shop.
The assistant looked as though he wanted to stop them leaving, but he barely came up to Hagrid's waist and seemed to think better of it.
They hurried up the street, the Grangers shaking with fright and Mrs. Weasley beside herself with fury.
It definitely wasn't his favorite way to travel.
Chapter V The Whomping Willow.
The end of the summer vacation came too quickly for Harry's liking.
He was looking forward to getting back to Hogwarts, but his month at the Burrow had been the happiest of his life.
On their last evening, Mrs. Weasley conjured up a sumptuous dinner that included all of Harry's favorite things, ending with a mouthwatering treacle pudding.
Fred and George rounded off the evening with a display of Filibuster fireworks; they filled the kitchen with red and blue stars that bounced from ceiling to wall for at least half an hour.
Then it was time for a last mug of hot chocolate and bed.
It took a long while to get started next morning.
They were up at dawn, but somehow they still seemed to have a great deal to do.
Mrs. Weasley dashed about in a bad mood looking for spare socks and quills; people kept colliding on the stairs, half-dressed with bits of toast in their hands; and Mr. Weasley nearly broke his neck, tripping over a stray chicken as he crossed the yard carrying Ginny's trunk to the car.
Harry couldn't see how eight people, six large trunks, two owls, and a rat were going to fit into one small Ford Anglia.
He had reckoned, of course, without the special features that Mr. Weasley had added.
When at last they were all in the car, Mrs. Weasley glanced into the back seat, where Harry, Ron, Fred, George, and Percy were all sitting comfortably side by side, and said, "Muggles do know more than we give them credit for, don't they?"
She and Ginny got into the front seat, which had been stretched so that it resembled a park bench.
"I mean, you'd never know it was this roomy from the outside, would you?"
He barely had time to wonder when he'd see it again when they were back George had forgotten his box of Filibuster fireworks.
Five minutes after that, they skidded to a halt in the yard so that Fred could run in for his broomstick.
They had almost reached the highway when Ginny shrieked that she'd left her diary.
By the time she had clambered back into the car, they were running very late, and tempers were running high.
Mr. Weasley glanced at his watch and then at his wife.
Harry had caught the Hogwarts Express the previous year.
The tricky part was getting onto platform nine and three-quarters, which wasn't visible to the Muggle eye.
What you had to do was walk through the solid barrier dividing platforms nine and ten.
It didn't hurt, but it had to be done carefully so that none of the Muggles noticed you vanishing.
"Percy first," said Mrs. Weasley, looking nervously at the clock overhead, which showed they had only five minutes to disappear casually through the barrier.
Percy strode briskly forward and vanished.
Mr. Weasley went next; Fred and George followed.
"I'll take Ginny and you two come right after us," Mrs. Weasley told Harry and Ron, grabbing Ginny's hand and setting off.
In the blink of an eye they were gone.
"Let's go together, we've only got a minute," Ron said to Harry.
Harry made sure that Hedwig's cage was safely wedged on top of his trunk and wheeled his trolley around to face the barrier.
Both of them bent low over the handles of their trolleys and walked purposefully toward the barrier, gathering speed.
A few feet away from it, they broke into a run and— CRASH.
Ron ran to pick up Hedwig, who was causing such a scene that there was a lot of muttering about cruelty to animals from the surrounding crowd.
"Why can't we get through?"
Harry hissed to Ron.
A dozen curious people were still watching them.
"We're going to miss the train," Ron whispered.
"I don't understand why the gateway's sealed itself—" Harry looked up at the giant clock with a sickening feeling in the pit of his stomach.
Ten seconds… nine seconds… He wheeled his trolley forward cautiously until it was right against the barrier and pushed with all his might.
The metal remained solid.
Three seconds… two seconds… one second… "It's gone," said Ron, sounding stunned.
What if Mum and Dad can't get back through to us?
Have you got any Muggle money?"
And they marched off through the crowd of curious Muggles, out of the station and back onto the side road where the old Ford Anglia was parked.
Ron unlocked the cavernous trunk with a series of taps from his wand.
They heaved their luggage back in, put Hedwig on the back seat, and got into the front.
"Check that no one's watching," said Ron, starting the ignition with another tap of his wand.
Harry stuck his head out of the window: Traffic was rumbling along the main road ahead, but their street was empty.
"Okay," he said.
Ron pressed a tiny silver button on the dashboard.
Harry could feel the seat vibrating beneath him, hear the engine, feel his hands on his knees and his glasses on his nose, but for all he could see, he had become a pair of eyeballs, floating a few feet above the ground in a dingy street full of parked cars.
"Let's go," said Ron's voice from his right.
And the ground and the dirty buildings on either side fell away, dropping out of sight as the car rose; in seconds, the whole of London lay, smoky and glittering, below them.
Then there was a popping noise and the car, Harry, and Ron reappeared.
"Uh-oh," said Ron, jabbing at the Invisibility Booster.
"It's faulty—" Both of them pummeled it.
The car vanished.
Then it flickered back again.
Ron yelled, and he slammed his foot on the accelerator; they shot straight into the low, woolly clouds and everything turned dull and foggy.
"We need to see the train to know what direction to go in," said Ron.
"Dip back down again—quickly—" They dropped back beneath the clouds and twisted around in their seats, squinting at the ground.
"I can see it!"
The Hogwarts Express was streaking along below them like a scarlet snake.
"Due north," said Ron, checking the compass on the dashboard.
A minute later, they burst out into a blaze of sunlight.
It was a different world.
The wheels of the car skimmed the sea of fluffy cloud, the sky a bright, endless blue under the blinding white sun.
"All we've got to worry about now are airplanes," said Ron.
They looked at each other and started to laugh; for a long time, they couldn't stop.
It was as though they had been plunged into a fabulous dream.
This, thought Harry, was surely the only way to travel—past swirls and turrets of snowy cloud, in a car full of hot, bright sunlight, with a fat pack of toffees in the glove compartment, and the prospect of seeing Fred's and George's jealous faces when they landed smoothly and spectacularly on the sweeping lawn in front of Hogwarts castle.
They made regular checks on the train as they flew farther and farther north, each dip beneath the clouds showing them a different view.
London was soon far behind them, replaced by neat green fields that gave way in turn to wide, purplish moors, a great city alive with cars like multicolored ants, villages with tiny toy churches.
He and Ron had pulled off their sweaters, but Harry's T-shirt was sticking to the back of his seat and his glasses kept sliding down to the end of his sweaty nose.
He had stopped noticing the fantastic cloud shapes now and was thinking longingly of the train miles below, where you could buy ice-cold pumpkin juice from a trolley pushed by a plump witch.
Why hadn't they been able to get onto platform nine and three-quarters?
"Can't be much further, can it?"
"Ready for another check on the train?"
It was much darker beneath the canopy of clouds.
Ron put his foot on the accelerator and drove them upward again, but as he did so, the engine began to whine.
Harry and Ron exchanged nervous glances.
"It's probably just tired," said Ron.
"It's never been this far before…" And they both pretended not to notice the whining growing louder and louder as the sky became steadily darker.
Stars were blossoming in the blackness.
Harry pulled his sweater back on, trying to ignore the way the windshield wipers were now waving feebly, as though in protest.
"Not far," said Ron, more to the car than to Harry, "not far now," and he patted the dashboard nervously.
When they flew back beneath the clouds a little while later, they had to squint through the darkness for a landmark they knew.
Harry shouted, making Ron and Hedwig jump.
Narrow jets of steam were issuing from under the hood.
Harry found himself gripping the edges of his seat very hard as they flew toward the lake.
The car gave a nasty wobble.
Glancing out of his window, Harry saw the smooth, black, glassy surface of the water, a mile below.
Ron's knuckles were white on the steering wheel.
The car wobbled again.
"Come on," Ron muttered.
They were over the lake—the castle was right ahead—Ron put his foot down.
There was a loud clunk, a splutter, and the engine died completely.
"Uh-oh," said Ron, into the silence.
The nose of the car dropped.
They were falling, gathering speed, heading straight for the solid castle wall.
Ron yelled, swinging the steering wheel around; they missed the dark stone wall by inches as the car turned in a great arc, soaring over the dark greenhouses, then the vegetable patch, and then out over the black lawns, losing altitude all the time.
Harry bellowed, lunging for the steering wheel, but too late— CRUNCH.
With an earsplitting bang of metal on wood, they hit the thick tree trunk and dropped to the ground with a heavy jolt.
Steam was billowing from under the crumpled hood; Hedwig was shrieking in terror; a golf-ball-size lump was throbbing on Harry's head where he had hit the windshield; and to his right, Ron let out a low, despairing groan.
"Are you okay?"
Harry said urgently.
"My wand," said Ron, in a shaky voice.
"Look at my wand."
It had snapped, almost in two; the tip was dangling limply, held on by a few splinters.
Harry opened his mouth to say he was sure they'd be able to mend it up at the school, but he never even got started.
At that very moment, something hit his side of the car with the force of a charging bull, sending him lurching sideways into Ron, just as an equally heavy blow hit the roof.
Ron gasped, staring through the windshield, and Harry looked around just in time to see a branch as thick as a python smash into it.
The tree they had hit was attacking them.
Its trunk was bent almost double, and its gnarled boughs were pummeling every inch of the car it could reach.
Ron shouted, throwing his full weight against his door, but next second he had been knocked backward into Harry's lap by a vicious uppercut from another branch.
"We're done for!"
Harry yelled, and the car shot backward; the tree was still trying to hit them; they could hear its roots creaking as it almost ripped itself up, lashing out at them as they sped out of reach.
With two sharp clunks, the doors flew open and Harry felt his seat tip sideways: Next thing he knew he was sprawled on the damp ground.
Loud thuds told him that the car was ejecting their luggage from the trunk; Hedwig's cage flew through the air and burst open; she rose out of it with an angry screech and sped off toward the castle without a backward look.
Then, dented, scratched, and steaming, the car rumbled off into the darkness, its rear lights blazing angrily.
Ron yelled after it, brandishing his broken wand.
"Dad'll kill me!"
But the car disappeared from view with one last snort from its exhaust.
"Can you believe our luck?"
"Of all the trees we could've hit, we had to get one that hits back."
He glanced over his shoulder at the ancient tree, which was still flailing its branches threateningly.
"Come on," said Harry wearily, "we'd better get up to the school…" It wasn't at all the triumphant arrival they had pictured.
Stiff, cold, and bruised, they seized the ends of their trunks and began dragging them up the grassy slope, toward the great oak front doors.
"I think the feast's already started," said Ron, dropping his trunk at the foot of the front steps and crossing quietly to look through a brightly lit window.
"Hey— Harry—come and look—it's the Sorting!"
Harry hurried over and, together, he and Ron peered in at the Great Hall.
Innumerable candles were hovering in midair over four long, crowded tables, making the golden plates and goblets sparkle.
Overhead, the bewitched ceiling, which always mirrored the sky outside, sparkled with stars.
Through the forest of pointed black Hogwarts hats, Harry saw a long line of scared-looking first years filing into the Hall.
Ginny was among them, easily visible because of her vivid Weasley hair.
Meanwhile, Professor McGonagall, a bespectacled witch with her hair in a tight bun, was placing the famous Hogwarts Sorting Hat on a stool before the newcomers.
Every year, this aged old hat, patched, frayed, and dirty, sorted new students into the four Hogwarts houses (Gryffindor, Hufflepuff, Ravenclaw, and Slytherin).
Harry well remembered putting it on, exactly one year ago, and waiting, petrified, for its decision as it muttered aloud in his ear.
A very small, mousy-haired boy had been called forward to place the hat on his head.
Harry's eyes wandered past him to where Professor Dumbledore, the headmaster, sat watching the Sorting from the staff table, his long silver beard and half-moon glasses shining brightly in the candlelight.
And there at the end was Hagrid, huge and hairy, drinking deeply from his goblet.
"Hang on…" Harry muttered to Ron.
"Maybe he's ill!"
"Maybe he's left," said Harry, "because he missed out on the Defense Against Dark Arts job again!"
"Or he might have been sacked!"
Harry spun around.
He was a thin man with sallow skin, a hooked nose, and greasy, shoulder-length black hair, and at this moment, he was smiling in a way that told Harry he and Ron were in very deep trouble.
The shadowy walls were lined with shelves of large glass jars, in which floated all manner of revolting things Harry didn't really want to know the name of at the moment.
The fireplace was dark and empty.
Wanted to arrive with a bang, did we, boys?"
"No, sir, it was the barrier at King's Cross, it—" "Silence!"
"What have you done with the car?"
"You were seen," he hissed, showing them the headline: FLYING FORD ANGLIA MYSTIFIES MUGGLES.
I believe your father works in the Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office?"
"Dear, dear… his own son…" Harry felt as though he'd just been walloped in the stomach by one of the mad tree's larger branches.
"That tree did more damage to us than we—" Ron blurted out.
I shall go and fetch the people who do have that happy power.
Harry and Ron stared at each other, white-faced.
He now felt extremely sick.
Harry had seen Professor McGonagall angry on several occasions, but either he had forgotten just how thin her mouth could go, or he had never seen her this angry before.
She raised her wand the moment she entered; Harry and Ron both flinched, but she merely pointed it at the empty fireplace, where flames suddenly erupted.
"Sit," she said, and they both backed into chairs by the fire.
"Explain," she said, her glasses glinting ominously.
Ron launched into the story, starting with the barrier at the station refusing to let them through.
"…so we had no choice, Professor, we couldn't get on the train."
I believe you have an owl?"
Professor McGonagall said coldly to Harry.
Harry gaped at her.
Now she said it, that seemed the obvious thing to have done.
"I—I didn't think—" "That," said Professor McGonagall, "is obvious."
There stood the headmaster, Professor Dumbledore.
Harry's whole body went numb.
Dumbledore was looking unusually grave.
He stared down his very crooked nose at them, and Harry suddenly found himself wishing he and Ron were still being beaten up by the Whomping Willow.
There was a long silence.
Then Dumbledore said, "Please explain why you did this."
It would have been better if he had shouted.
Harry hated the disappointment in his voice.
For some reason, he was unable to look Dumbledore in the eyes, and spoke instead to his knees.
He told Dumbledore everything except that Mr. Weasley owned the bewitched car, making it sound as though he and Ron had happened to find a flying car parked outside the station.
When Harry had finished, he merely continued to peer at them through his spectacles.
"We'll go and get our stuff," said Ron in a hopeless sort of voice.
"What are you talking about, Weasley?"
"Well, you're expelling us, aren't you?"
Harry looked quickly at Dumbledore.
"Not today, Mr. Weasley," said Dumbledore.
I will be writing to both your families tonight.
He cleared his throat and said, "Professor Dumbledore, these boys have flouted the Decree for the Restriction of Underage Wizardry, caused serious damage to an old and valuable tree—surely acts of this nature—" "It will be for Professor McGonagall to decide on these boys' punishments, Severus," said Dumbledore calmly.
"They are in her House and are therefore her responsibility."
He turned to Professor McGonagall.
"You'd better get along to the hospital wing, Weasley, you're bleeding."
"Not much," said Ron, hastily wiping the cut over his eye with his sleeve.
"Professor, I wanted to watch my sister being Sorted—" "The Sorting Ceremony is over," said Professor McGonagall.
"Your sister is also in Gryffindor."
"Oh, good," said Ron.
"And speaking of Gryffindor—" Professor McGonagall said sharply, but Harry cut in: "Professor, when we took the car, term hadn't started, so—so Gryffindor shouldn't really have points taken from it—should it?"
Professor McGonagall gave him a piercing look, but he was sure she had almost smiled.
Her mouth looked less thin, anyway.
"I will not take any points from Gryffindor," she said, and Harry's heart lightened considerably.
"But you will both get a detention."
It was better than Harry had expected.
Harry knew perfectly well they'd just be disappointed that the Whomping Willow hadn't squashed him flat.
A large plate of sandwiches, two silver goblets, and a jug of iced pumpkin juice appeared with a pop.
"You will eat in here and then go straight up to your dormitory," she said.
"I must also return to the feast."
When the door had closed behind her, Ron let out a long, low whistle.
"I thought we'd had it," he said, grabbing a sandwich.
"So did I," said Harry, taking one, too.
"Can you believe our luck, though?"
"Fred and George must've flown that car five or six times and no Muggle ever saw them."
He swallowed and took another huge bite.
"Why couldn't we get through the barrier?"
"We'll have to watch our step from now on, though," he said, taking a grateful swig of pumpkin juice.
"Wish we could've gone up to the feast…" "She didn't want us showing off," said Ron sagely.
"Doesn't want people to think it's clever, arriving by flying car."
When they had eaten as many sandwiches as they could (the plate kept refilling itself) they rose and left the office, treading the familiar path to Gryffindor Tower.
The castle was quiet; it seemed that the feast was over.
They walked past muttering portraits and creaking suits of armor, and climbed narrow flights of stone stairs, until at last they reached the passage where the secret entrance to Gryffindor Tower was hidden, behind an oil painting of a very fat woman in a pink silk dress.
"Er—" said Harry.
They didn't know the new year's password, not having met a Gryffindor prefect yet, but help came almost immediately; they heard hurrying feet behind them and turned to see Hermione dashing toward them.
Where have you been?
"Well, we haven't been expelled," Harry assured her.
"You're not telling me you did fly here?"
"Skip the lecture," said Ron impatiently, "and tell us the new password."
It looked as though the whole of Gryffindor House was still awake, packed into the circular common room, standing on the lopsided tables and squashy armchairs, waiting for them to arrive.
Arms reached through the portrait hole to pull Harry and Ron inside, leaving Hermione to scramble in after them.
What an entrance!
Percy was visible over the heads of some excited first years, and he seemed to be trying to get near enough to start telling them off.
Harry nudged Ron in the ribs and nodded in Percy's direction.
Ron got the point at once.
"Got to get upstairs—bit tired," he said, and the two of them started pushing their way toward the door on the other side of the room, which led to a spiral staircase and the dormitories.
"Night," Harry called back to Hermione, who was wearing a scowl just like Percy's.
They managed to get to the other side of the common room, still having their backs slapped, and gained the peace of the staircase.
They hurried up it, right to the top, and at last reached the door of their old dormitory, which now had a sign on it saying SECOND YEARS.
They entered the familiar, circular room, with its five four-posters hung with red velvet and its high, narrow windows.
Their trunks had been brought up for them and stood at the ends of their beds.
Ron grinned guiltily at Harry.
"Cool," said Dean.
"Amazing," said Neville, awestruck.
Harry couldn't help it.
He grinned, too.
The next day, however, Harry barely grinned once.
Things started to go downhill from breakfast in the Great Hall.
Harry and Ron sat down at the Gryffindor table next to Hermione, who had her copy of Voyages with Vampires propped open against a milk jug.
There was a slight stiffness in the way she said "Morning," which told Harry that she was still disapproving of the way they had arrived.
Neville was a round-faced and accident-prone boy with the worst memory of anyone Harry had ever met.
"Mail's due any minute—I think Gran's sending a few things I forgot."
A big, lumpy package bounced off Neville's head and, a second later, something large and gray fell into Hermione's jug, spraying them all with milk and feathers.
Errol slumped, unconscious, onto the table, his legs in the air and a damp red envelope in his beak.
"Oh, no—" Ron gasped.
"It's all right, he's still alive," said Hermione, prodding Errol gently with the tip of her finger.
It looked quite ordinary to Harry, but Ron and Neville were both looking at it as though they expected it to explode.
"What's the matter?"
"She's—she's sent me a Howler," said Ron faintly.
"You'd better open it, Ron," said Neville in a timid whisper.
Harry looked from their petrified faces to the red envelope.
"What's a Howler?"
But Ron's whole attention was fixed on the letter, which had begun to smoke at the corners.
"Open it," Neville urged.
"It'll all be over in a few minutes—" Ron stretched out a shaking hand, eased the envelope from Errol's beak, and slit it open.
Neville stuffed his fingers in his ears.
A split second later, Harry knew why.
He thought for a moment it had exploded; a roar of sound filled the huge hall, shaking dust from the ceiling.
People throughout the hall were swiveling around to see who had received the Howler, and Ron sank so low in his chair that only his crimson forehead could be seen.
"LETTER FROM DUMBLEDORE LAST NIGHT, I THOUGHT YOUR FATHER WOULD DIE OF SHAME, WE DIDN'T BRING YOU UP TO BEHAVE LIKE THIS, YOU AND HARRY COULD BOTH HAVE DIED—" Harry had been wondering when his name was going to crop up.
He tried very hard to look as though he couldn't hear the voice that was making his eardrums throb.
"—ABSOLUTELY DISGUSTED—YOUR FATHER'S FACING AN INQUIRY AT WORK, IT'S ENTIRELY YOUR FAULT AND IF YOU PUT ANOTHER TOE OUT OF LINE WE'LL BRING YOU STRAIGHT BACK HOME."
A ringing silence fell.
The red envelope, which had dropped from Ron's hand, burst into flames and curled into ashes.
Harry and Ron sat stunned, as though a tidal wave had just passed over them.
A few people laughed and, gradually, a babble of talk broke out again.
Hermione closed Voyages with Vampires and looked down at the top of Ron's head.
His insides were burning with guilt.
Mr. Weasley was facing an inquiry at work.
After all Mr. and Mrs. Weasley had done for him over the summer… But he had no time to dwell on this; Professor McGonagall was moving along the Gryffindor table, handing out course schedules.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione left the castle together, crossed the vegetable patch, and made for the greenhouses, where the magical plants were kept.
At least the Howler had done one good thing: Hermione seemed to think they had now been punished enough and was being perfectly friendly again.
As they neared the greenhouses they saw the rest of the class standing outside, waiting for Professor Sprout.
Professor Sprout's arms were full of bandages, and with another twinge of guilt, Harry spotted the Whomping Willow in the distance, several of its branches now in slings.
Professor Sprout was a squat little witch who wore a patched hat over her flyaway hair; there was usually a large amount of earth on her clothes and her fingernails would have made Aunt Petunia faint.
"Oh, hello there!"
But I don't want you running away with the idea that I'm better at Herbology than she is!
There was a murmur of interest.
They had only ever worked in greenhouse one before—greenhouse three housed far more interesting and dangerous plants.
Professor Sprout took a large key from her belt and unlocked the door.
He was about to follow Ron and Hermione inside when Lockhart's hand shot out.
I've been wanting a word—you don't mind if he's a couple of minutes late, do you, Professor Sprout?"
Judging by Professor Sprout's scowl, she did mind, but Lockhart said, "That's the ticket," and closed the greenhouse door in her face.
"Harry," said Lockhart, his large white teeth gleaming in the sunlight as he shook his head.
"Harry, Harry, Harry."
Completely nonplussed, Harry said nothing.
Harry had no idea what he was talking about.
Flying a car to Hogwarts!
Well, of course, I knew at once why you'd done it.
Stood out a mile.
It was remarkable how he could show every one of those brilliant teeth even when he wasn't talking.
"Gave you a taste for publicity, didn't I?"
"Oh, no, Professor, see—" "Harry, Harry, Harry," said Lockhart, reaching out and grasping his shoulder.
Just calm down, all right?
Plenty of time for all that when you're older.
Yes, yes, I know what you're thinking!
It's all right for him, he's an internationally famous wizard already!
But when I was twelve, I was just as much of a nobody as you are now.
In fact, I’d say I was even more of a nobody!
I mean, a few people have heard of you, haven't they?
All that business with He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named!"
He glanced at the lightning scar on Harry's forehead.
"I know, I know—it's not quite as good as winning Witch Weekly's Most Charming-Smile Award five times in a row, as I have—but it's a start, Harry, it's a start."
He gave Harry a hearty wink and strode off.
Harry stood stunned for a few seconds, then, remembering he was supposed to be in the greenhouse, he opened the door and slid inside.
Professor Sprout was standing behind a trestle bench in the center of the greenhouse.
About twenty pairs of different-colored ear muffs were lying on the bench.
Now, who can tell me the properties of the Mandrake?"
To nobody's surprise, Hermione's hand was first into the air.
"It is used to return people who have been transfigured or cursed to their original state."
It is also, however, dangerous.
Who can tell me why?"
Hermione's hand narrowly missed Harry's glasses as it shot up again.
"The cry of the Mandrake is fatal to anyone who hears it," she said promptly.
"Now, the Mandrakes we have here are still very young."
She pointed to a row of deep trays as she spoke, and everyone shuffled forward for a better look.
They looked quite unremarkable to Harry, who didn't have the slightest idea what Hermione meant by the "cry" of the Mandrake.
There was a scramble as everyone tried to seize a pair that wasn't pink and fluffy.
"When I tell you to put them on, make sure your ears are completely covered," said Professor Sprout.
Harry snapped the earmuffs over his ears.
They shut out sound completely.
The leaves were growing right out of his head.
He had pale green, mottled skin, and was clearly bawling at the top of his lungs.
Professor Sprout took a large plant pot from under the table and plunged the Mandrake into it, burying him in dark, damp compost until only the tufted leaves were visible.
Professor Sprout dusted off her hands, gave them all the thumbs-up, and removed her own earmuffs.
"As our Mandrakes are only seedlings, their cries won't kill yet," she said calmly as though she'd just done nothing more exciting than water a begonia.
I will attract your attention when it is time to pack up.
She gave a sharp slap to a spiky, dark red plant as she spoke, making it draw in the long feelers that had been inching sneakily over her shoulder.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione were joined at their tray by a curly-haired Hufflepuff boy Harry knew by sight but had never spoken to.
Wasn't that your flying car?"
Ron didn't smile.
The Howler was obviously still on his mind.
"That Lockhart's something, isn't he?"
Have you read his books?
I can't tell you how glad I am I came here instead.
Professor Sprout had made it look extremely easy, but it wasn't.
The Mandrakes didn't like coming out of the earth, but didn't seem to want to go back into it either.
They squirmed, kicked, flailed their sharp little fists, and gnashed their teeth; Harry spent ten whole minutes trying to squash a particularly fat one into a pot.
By the end of the class, Harry, like everyone else, was sweaty, aching, and covered in earth.
Professor McGonagall's classes were always hard work, but today was especially difficult.
Everything Harry had learned last year seemed to have leaked out of his head during the summer.
He was supposed to be turning a beetle into a button, but all he managed to do was give his beetle a lot of exercise as it scuttled over the desktop avoiding his wand.
Ron was having far worse problems.
Unable to see what he was doing, Ron accidentally squashed his beetle with his elbow and had to ask for a new one.
Professor McGonagall wasn't pleased.
Harry was relieved to hear the lunch bell.
His brain felt like a wrung sponge.
Everyone filed out of the classroom except him and Ron, who was whacking his wand furiously on the desk.
"Stupid—useless—thing—" "Write home for another one," Harry suggested as the wand let off a volley of bangs like a firecracker.
"Oh, yeah, and get another Howler back," said Ron, stuffing the now hissing wand into his bag.
"It's your own fault your wand got snapped—" They went down to lunch, where Ron's mood was not improved by Hermione's showing them the handful of perfect coat buttons she had produced in Transfiguration.
"What've we got this afternoon?"
"Defense Against the Dark Arts," said Hermione at once.
"Why," demanded Ron, seizing her schedule, "have you outlined all Lockhart's lessons in little hearts?"
Hermione snatched the schedule back, blushing furiously.
They finished lunch and went outside into the overcast courtyard.
Hermione sat down on a stone step and buried her nose in Voyages with Vampires again.
Harry and Ron stood talking about Quidditch for several minutes before Harry became aware that he was being closely watched.
Looking up, he saw the very small, mousy-haired boy he'd seen trying on the Sorting Hat last night staring at Harry as though transfixed.
He was clutching what looked like an ordinary Muggle camera, and the moment Harry looked at him, he went bright red.
D'you think—would it be all right if—can I have a picture?"
Harry repeated blankly.
Everyone's told me.
About how you survived when You- Know-Who tried to kill you and how he disappeared and everything and how you've still got a lightning scar on your forehead—" (his eyes raked Harry's hairline) "and a boy in my dormitory said if I develop the film in the right potion, the pictures'll move."
I never knew all the odd stuff I could do was magic till I got the letter from Hogwarts.
My dad's a milkman, he couldn't believe it either.
So I'm taking loads of pictures to send home to him.
And it'd be really good if I had one of you"—he looked imploringly at Harry—"maybe your friend could take it and I could stand next to you?
And then, could you sign it?"
You're giving out signed photos, Potter?"
Loud and scathing, Draco Malfoy's voice echoed around the courtyard.
"Everyone line up!"
Malfoy roared to the crowd.
"Harry Potter's giving out signed photos!"
"No, I'm not," said Harry angrily, his fists clenching.
"Shut up, Malfoy."
"You're just jealous," piped up Colin, whose entire body was about as thick as Crabbe's neck.
I don't want a foul scar right across my head, thanks.
"Eat slugs, Malfoy," said Ron angrily.
Crabbe stopped laughing and started rubbing his knuckles in a menacing way.
"Be careful, Weasley," sneered Malfoy.
"You don't want to start any trouble or your Mommy'll have to come and take you away from school."
He put on a shrill, piercing voice.
"If you put another toe out of line—" A knot of Slytherin fifth-years nearby laughed loudly at this.
"Weasley would like a signed photo, Potter," smirked Malfoy.
"What's all this, what's all this?"
"Who's giving out signed photos?"
We meet again, Harry!"
Pinned to Lockhart's side and burning with humiliation, Harry saw Malfoy slide smirking back into the crowd.
"A double portrait, can't do better than that, and we'll both sign it for you."
Colin fumbled for his camera and took the picture as the bell rang behind them, signaling the start of afternoon classes.
"Off you go, move along there," Lockhart called to the crowd, and he set off back to the castle with Harry, who was wishing he knew a good Vanishing Spell, still clasped to his side.
"A word to the wise, Harry," said Lockhart paternally as they entered the building through a side door.
"You could've fried an egg on your face," said Ron.
"Shut up," snapped Harry.
The last thing he needed was for Lockhart to hear the phrase "Harry Potter fan club".
When the whole class was seated, Lockhart cleared his throat loudly and silence fell.
"Me," he said, pointing at it and winking as well.
He waited for them to laugh; a few people smiled weakly.
I thought we'd start today with a little quiz.
Harry looked down at his paper and read: 1.
On and on it went, over three sides of paper, right down to: 54.
Half an hour later, Lockhart collected the papers and rifled through them in front of the class.
I say so in Year with the Yeti.
He gave them another roguish wink.
Hermione, on the other hand, was listening to Lockhart with rapt attention and gave a start when he mentioned her name.
In fact"—he flipped her paper over—"full marks!
Where is Miss Hermione Granger?"
Hermione raised a trembling hand.
Take ten points for Gryffindor!
You may find yourselves facing your worst fears in this room.
In spite of himself, Harry leaned around his pile of books for a better look at the cage.
Lockhart placed a hand on the cover.
Dean and Seamus had stopped laughing now.
Neville was cowering in his front row seat.
"I must ask you not to scream," said Lockhart in a low voice.
"It might provoke them."
As the whole class held its breath, Lockhart whipped off the cover.
"Yes," he said dramatically.
"Freshly caught Cornish pixies."
He let out a snort of laughter that even Lockhart couldn't mistake for a scream of terror.
He smiled at Seamus.
"Well, they're not—they're not very—dangerous, are they?"
"Don't be so sure!"
"Devilish tricky little blighters they can be!"
The pixies were electric blue and about eight inches high, with pointed faces and voices so shrill it was like listening to a lot of budgies arguing.
The moment the cover had been removed, they had started jabbering and rocketing around, rattling the bars and making bizarre faces at the people nearest them.
"Right, then," Lockhart said loudly.
"Let's see what you make of them!"
And he opened the cage.
It was pandemonium.
The pixies shot in every direction like rockets.
Two of them seized Neville by the ears and lifted him into the air.
Several shot straight through the window, showering the back row with broken glass.
The rest proceeded to wreck the classroom more effectively than a rampaging rhino.
"Come on now—round them up, round them up, they're only pixies," Lockhart shouted.
It had absolutely no effect; one of the pixies seized his wand and threw it out of the window, too.
Lockhart gulped and dived under his own desk, narrowly avoiding being squashed by Neville, who fell a second later as the chandelier gave way.
The bell rang and there was a mad rush toward the exit.
In the relative calm that followed, Lockhart straightened up, caught sight of Harry, Ron, and Hermione, who were almost at the door, and said, "Well, I'll ask you three to just nip the rest of them back into their cage."
He swept past them and shut the door quickly behind him.
"Can you believe him?"
"He just wants to give us some hands-on experience," said Hermione, immobilizing two pixies at once with a clever Freezing Charm and stuffing them back into their cage.
"Hermione, he didn't have a clue what he was doing—" "Rubbish," said Hermione.
"You've read his books—look at all those amazing things he's done—" "He says he's done," Ron muttered.
Nothing seemed to give Colin a bigger thrill than to say, "All right, Harry?"
So with one thing and another, Harry was quite glad to reach the weekend.
He, Ron, and Hermione were planning to visit Hagrid on Saturday morning.
Harry, however, was shaken awake several hours earlier than he would have liked by Oliver Wood, Captain of the Gryffindor Quidditch team.
Harry squinted at the window.
There was a thin mist hanging across the pink- and-gold sky.
Now that he was awake, he couldn't understand how he could have slept through the racket the birds were making.
"Oliver," Harry croaked.
"It's the crack of dawn."
"Exactly," said Wood.
He was a tall and burly sixth year and, at the moment, his eyes were gleaming with a crazed enthusiasm.
"None of the other teams have started training yet; we're going to be first off the mark this year—" Yawning and shivering slightly, Harry climbed out of bed and tried to find his Quidditch robes.
"Good man," said Wood.
"Meet you on the field in fifteen minutes."
When he'd found his scarlet team robes and pulled on his cloak for warmth, Harry scribbled a note to Ron explaining where he'd gone and went down the spiral staircase to the common room, his Nimbus Two Thousand on his shoulder.
Look what I've got here!
A moving, black-and-white Lockhart was tugging hard on an arm Harry recognized as his own.
He was pleased to see that his photographic self was putting up a good fight and refusing to be dragged into view.
As Harry watched, Lockhart gave up and slumped, panting, against the white edge of the picture.
"Will you sign it?"
"No," said Harry flatly, glancing around to check that the room was really deserted.
"Sorry, Colin, I'm in a hurry—Quidditch practice—" He climbed through the portrait hole.
Wait for me!
I've never watched a Quidditch game before!"
Colin scrambled through the hole after him.
"It'll be really boring," Harry said quickly, but Colin ignored him, his face shining with excitement.
I've never flown.
Is it easy?
Is that your own broom?
Is that the best one there is?"
Harry didn't know how to get rid of him.
It was like having an extremely talkative shadow.
"I don't really understand Quidditch," said Colin breathlessly.
And two of them fly around trying to knock people off their brooms?"
"Yes," said Harry heavily, resigned to explaining the complicated rules of Quidditch.
"And what are the other balls for?"
Colin asked, tripping down a couple of steps because he was gazing open-mouthed at Harry.
But that's what the Seeker's got to do, because a game of Quidditch doesn't end until the Snitch has been caught.
"And you're the Gryffindor Seeker, aren't you?"
He guards the goal posts.
The rest of the Gryffindor team were already in the changing room.
Wood was the only person who looked truly awake.
Her fellow Chasers, Katie Bell and Angelina Johnson, were yawning side by side opposite them.
"There you are, Harry, what kept you?"
He took out his wand, tapped the board, and the arrows began to wiggle over the diagram like caterpillars.
The first board took nearly twenty minutes to explain, but there was another board under that, and a third under that one.
Harry sank into a stupor as Wood droned on and on.
"So," said Wood, at long last, jerking Harry from a wistful fantasy about what he could be eating for breakfast at this very moment up at the castle.
"I've got a question, Oliver," said George, who had woken with a start.
"Why couldn't you have told us all this yesterday when we were awake?"
Wood wasn't pleased.
"Now, listen here, you lot," he said, glowering at them all.
We're easily the best team.
He had been unconscious in the hospital wing for the final match of the previous year, meaning that Gryffindor had been a player short and had suffered their worst defeat in three hundred years.
Wood took a moment to regain control of himself.
Their last defeat was clearly still torturing him.
"So this year, we train harder than ever before… Okay, let's go and put our new theories into practice!"
Wood shouted, seizing his broomstick and leading the way out of the locker rooms.
Stiff-legged and still yawning, his team followed.
They had been in the locker room so long that the sun was up completely now, although remnants of mist hung over the grass in the stadium.
As Harry walked onto the field, he saw Ron and Hermione sitting in the stands.
"Aren't you finished yet?"
"Haven't even started," said Harry, looking jealously at the toast and marmalade Ron and Hermione had brought out of the Great Hall.
"Wood's been teaching us new moves."
He mounted his broomstick and kicked at the ground, soaring up into the air.
It felt wonderful to be back on the Quidditch field.
He soared right around the stadium at full speed, racing Fred and George.
"What's that funny clicking noise?"
Harry looked into the stands.
Colin was sitting in one of the highest seats, his camera raised, taking picture after picture, the sound strangely magnified in the deserted stadium.
"No idea," Harry lied, putting on a spurt of speed that took him as far away as possible from Colin.
"What's going on?"
I don't like it.
"He's in Gryffindor," said Harry quickly.
"What makes you say that?"
"Because they're here in person," said George, pointing.
Several people in green robes were walking onto the field, broomsticks in their hands.
"I don't believe it!"
Wood hissed in outrage.
We'll see about this!"
Wood shot toward the ground, landing rather harder than he meant to in his anger, staggering slightly as he dismounted.
Harry, Fred, and George followed.
Wood bellowed at the Slytherin Captain.
We got up specially!
You can clear off now!"
Marcus Flint was even larger than Wood.
Angelina, Alicia, and Katie had come over, too.
"But I booked the field!"
"I booked it!"
"Ah," said Flint.
"You've got a new Seeker?"
And from behind the six large figures before them came a seventh, smaller boy, smirking all over his pale, pointed face.
It was Draco Malfoy.
"Aren't you Lucius Malfoy's son?"
"Funny you should mention Draco's father," said Flint as the whole Slytherin team smiled still more broadly.
"Let me show you the generous gift he's made to the Slytherin team."
All seven of them held out their broomsticks.
None of the Gryffindor team could think of anything to say for a moment.
Malfoy was smirking so broadly his cold eyes were reduced to slits.
"Oh, look," said Flint.
"A field invasion."
Ron and Hermione were crossing the grass to see what was going on.
Ron asked Harry.
And what's he doing here?"
He was looking at Malfoy, taking in his Slytherin Quidditch robes.
"I'm the new Slytherin Seeker, Weasley," said Malfoy, smugly.
"Everyone's just been admiring the brooms my father's bought our team."
Ron gaped, open-mouthed, at the seven superb broomsticks in front of him.
"Good, aren't they?"
The Slytherin team howled with laughter.
"At least no one on the Gryffindor team had to buy their way in," said Hermione sharply.
"They got in on pure talent."
The smug look on Malfoy's face flickered.
A loud bang echoed around the stadium and a jet of green light shot out of the wrong end of Ron's wand, hitting him in the stomach and sending him reeling backward onto the grass.
Are you all right?"
Ron opened his mouth to speak, but no words came out.
The Slytherin team were paralyzed with laughter.
Flint was doubled up, hanging onto his new broomstick for support.
Malfoy was on all fours, banging the ground with his fist.
Nobody seemed to want to touch him.
"We'd better get him to Hagrid's, it's nearest," said Harry to Hermione, who nodded bravely, and the pair of them pulled Ron up by the arms.
Is he ill?
But you can cure him, can't you?"
Colin had run down from his seat and was now dancing alongside them as they left the field.
Ron gave a huge heave and more slugs dribbled down his front.
"Can you hold him still, Harry?"
"Get out of the way, Colin!"
He and Hermione supported Ron out of the stadium and across the grounds toward the edge of the forest.
"Nearly there, Ron," said Hermione as the gamekeeper's cabin came into view.
"You'll be all right in a minute—almost there—" They were within twenty feet of Hagrid's house when the front door opened, but it wasn't Hagrid who emerged.
"Quick, behind here," Harry hissed, dragging Ron behind a nearby bush.
Hermione followed, somewhat reluctantly.
"It's a simple matter if you know what you're doing!"
Lockhart was saying loudly to Hagrid.
I'll let you have a copy of my book.
I'm surprised you haven't already got one—I'll sign one tonight and send it over.
And he strode away toward the castle.
Harry waited until Lockhart was out of sight, then pulled Ron out of the bush and up to Hagrid's front door.
They knocked urgently.
Hagrid appeared at once, looking very grumpy, but his expression brightened when he saw who it was.
Hagrid didn't seem perturbed by Ron's slug problem, which Harry hastily explained as he lowered Ron into a chair.
"Better out than in," he said cheerfully, plunking a large copper basin in front of him.
"Get 'em all up, Ron."
"I don't think there's anything to do except wait for it to stop," said Hermione anxiously, watching Ron bend over the basin.
"That's a difficult curse to work at the best of times, but with a broken wand—" Hagrid was bustling around making them tea.
"What did Lockhart want with you, Hagrid?"
Harry asked, scratching Fang's ears.
An' bangin' on about some banshee he banished.
No one's lasted long fer a while now.
Hagrid looked outraged.
"He did," she said.
He gave a small burp, and a single slug fell into his outstretched hand.
"It's a disgusting thing to call someone," said Ron, wiping his sweaty brow with a shaking hand.
Most wizards these days are half-blood anyway.
He retched and ducked out of sight again.
Harry would have pointed out that trouble didn't come much worse than having slugs pouring out of your mouth, but he couldn't; Hagrid's treacle fudge had cemented his jaws together.
"Harry," said Hagrid abruptly as though struck by a sudden thought.
I've heard you've bin givin' out signed photos.
How come I haven't got one?"
Furious, Harry wrenched his teeth apart.
"I have not been giving out signed photos," he said hotly.
"If Lockhart's still spreading that around—" But then he saw that Hagrid was laughing.
"Bet he didn't like that," said Harry, sitting up and rubbing his chin.
Treacle fudge, Ron?"
"Better not risk it."
"Come an' see what I've bin growin'," said Hagrid as Harry and Hermione finished the last of their tea.
In the small vegetable patch behind Hagrid's house were a dozen of the largest pumpkins Harry had ever seen.
Each was the size of a large boulder.
"Gettin' on well, aren't they?"
"Fer the Halloween feast… should be big enough by then."
"What've you been feeding them?"
Hagrid looked over his shoulder to check that they were alone.
"Well, I've bin givin' them—you know—a bit o' help—" Harry noticed Hagrid's flowery pink umbrella leaning against the back wall of the cabin.
Harry had had reason to believe before now that this umbrella was not all it looked; in fact, he had the strong impression that Hagrid's old school wand was concealed inside it.
Hagrid wasn't supposed to use magic.
He had been expelled from Hogwarts in his third year, but Harry had never found out why—any mention of the matter and Hagrid would clear his throat loudly and become mysteriously deaf until the subject was changed.
"An Engorgement Charm, I suppose?"
"Well, you've done a good job on them."
"That's what yer little sister said," said Hagrid, nodding at Ron.
Hagrid looked sideways at Harry, his beard twitching.
He winked at Harry.
Ron snorted with laughter and the ground was sprayed with slugs.
Hagrid roared, pulling Ron away from his precious pumpkins.
It was nearly lunchtime and as Harry had only had one bit of treacle fudge since dawn, he was keen to go back to school to eat.
They had barely set foot in the cool entrance hall when a voice rang out, "There you are, Potter—Weasley."
Professor McGonagall was walking toward them, looking stern.
"You will both do your detentions this evening."
"What're we doing, Professor?"
"You will be polishing the silver in the trophy room with Mr. Filch," said Professor McGonagall.
"And no magic, Weasley—elbow grease."
Argus Filch, the caretaker, was loathed by every student in the school.
"And you, Potter, will be helping Professor Lockhart answer his fan mail," said Professor McGonagall.
"Oh no—Professor, can't I go and do the trophy room, too?"
"Certainly not," said Professor McGonagall, raising her eyebrows.
Harry didn't enjoy his shepherd's pie as much as he'd thought.
Both he and Ron felt they'd got the worse deal.
"Filch'll have me there all night," said Ron heavily.
There must be about a hundred cups in that room.
I'm no good at Muggle cleaning.
He gritted his teeth and knocked.
The door flew open at once.
Lockhart beamed down at him.
"Come in, Harry, come in."
Shining brightly on the walls by the light of many candles were countless framed photographs of Lockhart.
He had even signed a few of them.
Another large pile lay on his desk.
"You can address the envelopes!"
Lockhart told Harry, as though this was a huge treat.
Harry let Lockhart's voice wash over him, occasionally saying, "Mmm" and "Right" and "Yeah."
Now and then he caught a phrase like, "Fame's a fickle friend, Harry," or "Celebrity is as celebrity does, remember that."
The candles burned lower and lower, making the light dance over the many moving faces of Lockhart watching him.
It must be nearly time to leave, Harry thought miserably, please let it be nearly time… And then he heard something—something quite apart from the spitting of the dying candles and Lockhart's prattle about his fans.
It was a voice, a voice to chill the bone marrow, a voice of breathtaking, ice-cold venom.
Broke all records!"
"No," said Harry frantically.
"That—that voice that said—didn't you hear it?"
Lockhart was looking at Harry in high astonishment.
Perhaps you're getting a little drowsy?
Great Scott—look at the time!
We've been here nearly four hours!
I'd never have believed it—the time's flown, hasn't it?"
Harry didn't answer.
He was straining his ears to hear the voice again, but there was no sound now except for Lockhart telling him he mustn't expect a treat like this every time he got detention.
Feeling dazed, Harry left.
It was so late that the Gryffindor common room was almost empty.
Harry went straight up to the dormitory.
Ron wasn't back yet.
Harry pulled on his pajamas, got into bed, and waited.
Half an hour later, Ron arrived, nursing his right arm and bringing a strong smell of polish into the darkened room.
"My muscles have all seized up," he groaned, sinking on his bed.
And then I had another slug attack all over a Special Award for Services to the School.
Took ages to get the slime off… How was it with Lockhart?
"And Lockhart said he couldn't hear it?"
Harry could see him frowning in the moonlight.
"I know," said Harry, lying back in his four-poster and staring at the canopy above him.
"I don't get it either."
October arrived, spreading a damp chill over the grounds and into the castle.
Ginny Weasley, who had been looking pale, was bullied into taking some by Percy.
The steam pouring from under her vivid hair gave the impression that her whole head was on fire.
Raindrops the size of bullets thundered on the castle windows for days on end; the lake rose, the flower beds turned into muddy streams, and Hagrid's pumpkins swelled to the size of garden sheds.
Oliver Wood's enthusiasm for regular training sessions, however, was not dampened, which was why Harry was to be found, late one stormy Saturday afternoon a few days before Halloween, returning to Gryffindor Tower, drenched to the skin and splattered with mud.
Even aside from the rain and wind it hadn't been a happy practice session.
Fred and George, who had been spying on the Slytherin team, had seen for themselves the speed of those new Nimbus Two Thousand and Ones.
They reported that the Slytherin team was no more than seven greenish blurs, shooting through the air like missiles.
As Harry squelched along the deserted corridor he came across somebody who looked just as preoccupied as he was.
Nearly Headless Nick, the ghost of Gryffindor Tower, was staring morosely out of a window, muttering under his breath, "…don't fulfill their requirements… half an inch, if that…" "Hello, Nick," said Harry.
"Hello, hello," said Nearly Headless Nick, starting and looking round.
He wore a dashing, plumed hat on his long curly hair, and a tunic with a ruff, which concealed the fact that his neck was almost completely severed.
He was pale as smoke, and Harry could see right through him to the dark sky and torrential rain outside.
"You look troubled, young Potter," said Nick, folding a transparent letter as he spoke and tucking it inside his doublet.
"So do you," said Harry.
"Ah," Nearly Headless Nick waved an elegant hand, "a matter of no importance… It's not as though I really wanted to join… Thought I'd apply, but apparently I don't fulfill requirements."
In spite of his airy tone, there was a look of great bitterness on his face.
"But you would think, wouldn't you," he erupted suddenly, pulling the letter back out of his pocket, "that getting hit forty-five times in the neck with a blunt axe would qualify you to join the Headless Hunt?"
"Oh—yes," said Harry, who was obviously supposed to agree.
You will appreciate that it would be impossible otherwise for members to participate in hunt activities such as Horseback Head-Juggling and Head Polo.
It is with the greatest regret, therefore, that I must inform you that you do not fulfill our requirements.
Anything I can do?"
"No," said Harry.
"Not unless you know where we can get seven free Nimbus Two Thousand and Ones for our match against Sly—" The rest of Harry's sentence was drowned out by a high-pitched mewling from somewhere near his ankles.
He looked down and found himself gazing into a pair of lamp-like yellow eyes.
It was Mrs. Norris, the skeletal gray cat who was used by the caretaker, Argus Filch, as a sort of deputy in his endless battle against students.
"You'd better get out of here, Harry," said Nick quickly.
There was a thick tartan scarf bound around his head, and his nose was unusually purple.
I've had enough of it, I tell you!
Follow me, Potter!"
Harry had never been inside Filch's office before; it was a place most students avoided.
The room was dingy and windowless, lit by a single oil lamp dangling from the low ceiling.
A faint smell of fried fish lingered about the place.
Fred and George Weasley had an entire drawer to themselves.
A highly polished collection of chains and manacles hung on the wall behind Filch's desk.
It was common knowledge that he was always begging Dumbledore to let him suspend students by their ankles from the ceiling.
Filch grabbed a quill from a pot on his desk and began shuffling around looking for parchment.
"Crime… befouling the castle… suggested sentence…" Dabbing at his streaming nose, Filch squinted unpleasantly at Harry who waited with bated breath for his sentence to fall.
But as Filch lowered his quill, there was a great BANG!
"I'll have you this time, I'll have you!"
And without a backward glance at Harry, Filch ran flat-footed from the office, Mrs. Norris streaking alongside him.
Peeves was the school poltergeist, a grinning, airborne menace who lived to cause havoc and distress.
Harry didn't much like Peeves, but couldn't help feeling grateful for his timing.
Hopefully, whatever Peeves had done (and it sounded as though he'd wrecked something very big this time) would distract Filch from Harry.
Thinking that he should probably wait for Filch to come back, Harry sank into a moth-eaten chair next to the desk.
There was only one thing on it apart from his half-completed form: a large, glossy, purple envelope with silver lettering on the front.
Intrigued, Harry flicked the envelope open and pulled out the sheaf of parchment inside.
More curly silver writing on the front page said: Feel out of step in the world of modern magic?
Find yourself making excuses not to perform simple spells?
There is an answer!
Warlock D. J.
Fascinated, Harry thumbed through the rest of the envelope's contents.
Did this mean he wasn't a proper wizard?
Harry was just reading "Lesson One: Holding Your Wand (Some Useful Tips)" when shuffling footsteps outside told him Filch was coming back.
Stuffing the parchment back into the envelope, Harry threw it back onto the desk just as the door opened.
Filch was looking triumphant.
"That vanishing cabinet was extremely valuable!"
"We'll have Peeves out this time, my sweet."
Filch's pasty face went brick red.
Harry braced himself for a tidal wave of fury.
Filch hobbled across to his desk, snatched up the envelope, and threw it into a drawer.
"Have you—did you read—?"
"No," Harry lied quickly.
Filch's knobbly hands were twisting together.
"If I thought you'd read my private—not that it's mine—for a friend—be that as it may—however—" Harry was staring at him, alarmed; Filch had never looked madder.
"Very well—go—and don't breathe a word—not that—however, if you didn't read—go now, I have to write up Peeves' report—go—" Amazed at his luck, Harry sped out of the office, up the corridor, and back upstairs.
To escape from Filch's office without punishment was probably some kind of school record.
Did it work?"
Nearly Headless Nick came gliding out of a classroom.
Behind him, Harry could see the wreckage of a large black-and-gold cabinet that appeared to have been dropped from a great height.
"Thought it might distract him—" "Was that you?"
They set off up the corridor together.
Nearly Headless Nick, Harry noticed, was still holding Sir Patrick's rejection letter.
"I wish there was something I could do for you about the Headless Hunt," Harry said.
Nearly Headless Nick stopped in his tracks and Harry walked right through him.
He wished he hadn't; it was like stepping through an icy shower.
"But there is something you could do for me," said Nick excitedly.
"Harry— would I be asking too much—but no, you wouldn't want—" "What is it?"
"Oh," said Harry, not sure whether he should look sorry or happy about this.
Friends will be coming from all over the country.
It would be such an honor if you would attend.
Mr. Weasley and Miss Granger would be most welcome, too, of course—but I daresay you'd rather go to the school feast?"
He watched Harry on tenterhooks.
"Of—of course," said Harry.
Nearly Headless Nick beamed at him.
"I bet there aren't many living people who can say they've been to one of those—it'll be fascinating!"
"Why would anyone want to celebrate the day they died?"
"Sounds dead depressing to me…" Rain was still lashing the windows, which were now inky black, but inside all looked bright and cheerful.
The firelight glowed over the countless squashy armchairs where people sat reading, talking, doing homework or, in the case of Fred and George Weasley, trying to find out what would happen if you fed a Filibuster firework to a salamander.
The rest of the school was happily anticipating their Halloween feast; the Great Hall had been decorated with the usual live bats, Hagrid's vast pumpkins had been carved into lanterns large enough for three men to sit in, and there were rumors that Dumbledore had booked a troupe of dancing skeletons for the entertainment.
"A promise is a promise," Hermione reminded Harry bossily.
The temperature dropped with every step they took.
As Harry shivered and drew his robes tightly around him, he heard what sounded like a thousand fingernails scraping an enormous blackboard.
"Is that supposed to be music?"
They turned a corner and saw Nearly Headless Nick standing at a doorway hung with black velvet drapes.
"My dear friends," he said mournfully.
"Welcome, welcome… so pleased you could come…" He swept off his plumed hat and bowed them inside.
It was an incredible sight.
A chandelier overhead blazed midnight-blue with a thousand more black candles.
Their breath rose in a mist before them; it was like stepping into a freezer.
"Shall we have a look around?"
Harry suggested, wanting to warm up his feet.
"Careful not to walk through anyone," said Ron nervously, and they set off around the edge of the dance floor.
They passed a group of gloomy nuns, a ragged man wearing chains, and the Fat Friar, a cheerful Hufflepuff ghost, who was talking to a knight with an arrow sticking out of his forehead.
Harry wasn't surprised to see that the Bloody Baron, a gaunt, staring Slytherin ghost covered in silver bloodstains, was being given a wide berth by the other ghosts.
"Oh, no," said Hermione, stopping abruptly.
"Turn back, turn back, I don't want to talk to Moaning Myrtle—" "Who?"
"She haunts one of the toilets in the girls' bathroom on the first floor," said Hermione.
"She haunts a toilet?"
It's been out-of-order all year because she keeps having tantrums and flooding the place.
On the other side of the dungeon was a long table, also covered in black velvet.
The smell was quite disgusting.
Harry watched, amazed, as a portly ghost approached the table, crouched low, and walked through it, his mouth held wide so that it passed through one of the stinking salmon.
Harry asked him.
"Almost," said the ghost sadly, and he drifted away.
"I expect they've let it rot to give it a stronger flavor," said Hermione knowledgeably, pinching her nose and leaning closer to look at the putrid haggis.
They had barely turned around, however, when a little man swooped suddenly from under the table and came to a halt in midair before them.
"Hello, Peeves," said Harry cautiously.
He was wearing a bright orange party hat, a revolving bow tie, and a broad grin on his wide, wicked face.
"Heard you talking about poor Myrtle," said Peeves, his eyes dancing.
"Rude you was about poor Myrtle."
"Oh, no, Peeves, don't tell her what I said, she'll be really upset," Hermione whispered frantically.
"I didn't mean it, I don't mind her—er, hello, Myrtle."
The squat ghost of a girl had glided over.
She had the glummest face Harry had ever seen, half-hidden behind lank hair and thick, pearly spectacles.
"How are you, Myrtle?"
"It's nice to see you out of the toilet."
"Miss Granger was just talking about you—" said Peeves slyly in Myrtle's ear.
"Just saying—saying—how nice you look tonight," said Hermione, glaring at Peeves.
Myrtle eyed Hermione suspiciously.
"You're making fun of me," she said, silver tears welling rapidly in her small, see-through eyes.
"No—honestly—didn't I just say how nice Myrtle's looking?"
"Oh, yeah—" "She did—" "Don't lie to me," Myrtle gasped, tears now flooding down her face, while Peeves chuckled happily over her shoulder.
Miserable, moaning, moping Myrtle!"
"You've forgotten pimply," Peeves hissed in her ear.
Moaning Myrtle burst into anguished sobs and fled from the dungeon.
"Oh, dear," said Hermione sadly.
Nearly Headless Nick now drifted toward them through the crowd.
"Oh, yes," they lied.
"Not a bad turnout," said Nearly Headless Nick proudly.
They, and everyone else in the dungeon, fell silent, looking around in excitement, as a hunting horn sounded.
"Oh, here we go," said Nearly Headless Nick bitterly.
Through the dungeon wall burst a dozen ghost horses, each ridden by a headless horseman.
The assembly clapped wildly; Harry started to clap, too, but stopped quickly at the sight of Nick's face.
The horses galloped into the middle of the dance floor and halted, rearing and plunging.
At the front of the pack was a large ghost who held his bearded head under his arm, from which position he was blowing the horn.
Head still hanging in there?"
He gave a hearty guffaw and clapped Nearly Headless Nick on the shoulder.
"Welcome, Patrick," said Nick stiffly.
"Very amusing," said Nearly Headless Nick darkly.
"Don't mind Nick!"
"Bet he asked you to say that!"
"If I could have everyone's attention, it's time for my speech!"
"My late lamented lords, ladies, and gentlemen, it is my great sorrow…" But nobody heard much more.
Sir Patrick and the rest of the Headless Hunt had just started a game of Head Hockey and the crowd were turning to watch.
Nearly Headless Nick tried vainly to recapture his audience, but gave up as Sir Patrick's head went sailing past him to loud cheers.
Harry was very cold by now, not to mention hungry.
"I can't stand much more of this," Ron muttered, his teeth chattering, as the orchestra ground back into action and the ghosts swept back onto the dance floor.
"Let's go," Harry agreed.
They backed toward the door, nodding and beaming at anyone who looked at them, and a minute later were hurrying back up the passageway full of black candles.
"Pudding might not be finished yet," said Ron hopefully, leading the way toward the steps to the entrance hall.
And then Harry heard it.
"Harry, what're you—?"
"…kill… time to kill…" The voice was growing fainter.
Harry was sure it was moving away—moving upward.
A mixture of fear and excitement gripped him as he stared at the dark ceiling; how could it be moving upward?
Was it a phantom, to whom stone ceilings didn't matter?
"This way," he shouted, and he began to run, up the stairs, into the entrance hall.
It was no good hoping to hear anything here, the babble of talk from the Halloween feast was echoing out of the Great Hall.
Harry sprinted up the marble staircase to the first floor, Ron and Hermione clattering behind him.
"Harry, what're we—" "SHH!"
Harry strained his ears.
His stomach lurched.
"It's going to kill someone!"
"Harry, what was that all about?"
"I couldn't hear anything…" But Hermione gave a sudden gasp, pointing down the corridor.
Something was shining on the wall ahead.
They approached slowly, squinting through the darkness.
Foot-high words had been daubed on the wall between two windows, shimmering in the light cast by the flaming torches.
THE CHAMBER OF SECRETS HAS BEEN OPENED.
ENEMIES OF THE HAIR, BEWARE.
"What's that thing—hanging underneath?"
As they edged nearer, Harry almost slipped—there was a large puddle of water on the floor; Ron and Hermione grabbed him, and they inched toward the message, eyes fixed on a dark shadow beneath it.
All three of them realized what it was at once, and leapt backward with a splash.
Mrs. Norris, the caretaker's cat, was hanging by her tail from the torch bracket.
She was stiff as a board, her eyes wide and staring.
For a few seconds, they didn't move.
Then Ron said, "Let's get out of here."
"Shouldn't we try and help—" Harry began awkwardly.
"Trust me," said Ron.
"We don't want to be found here."
But it was too late.
A rumble, as though of distant thunder, told them that the feast had just ended.
The chatter, the bustle, the noise died suddenly as the people in front spotted the hanging cat.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione stood alone, in the middle of the corridor, as silence fell among the mass of students pressing forward to see the grisly sight.
Then someone shouted through the quiet.
It was Draco Malfoy.
He had pushed to the front of the crowd, his cold eyes alive, his usually bloodless face flushed, as he grinned at the sight of the hanging, immobile cat.
Chapter IX The Writing on the Wall.
What's going on?"
Attracted no doubt by Malfoy's shout, Argus Filch came shouldering his way through the crowd.
Then he saw Mrs. Norris and fell back, clutching his face in horror.
What's happened to Mrs.
And his popping eyes fell on Harry.
You've murdered my cat!
You've killed her!
I'll kill you!
Dumbledore had arrived on the scene, followed by a number of other teachers.
In seconds, he had swept past Harry, Ron, and Hermione and detached Mrs. Norris from the torch bracket.
"Come with me, Argus," he said to Filch.
"You, too, Mr. Potter, Mr. Weasley, Miss Granger."
Lockhart stepped forward eagerly.
The silent crowd parted to let them pass.
The real Lockhart lit the candles on his desk and stood back.
Dumbledore lay Mrs. Norris on the polished surface and began to examine her.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione exchanged tense looks and sank into chairs outside the pool of candlelight, watching.
The tip of Dumbledore's long, crooked nose was barely an inch from Mrs. Norris's fur.
He was looking at her closely through his half-moon spectacles, his long fingers gently prodding and poking.
Professor McGonagall was bent almost as close, her eyes narrowed.
And Lockhart was hovering around all of them, making suggestions.
Lockhart's comments were punctuated by Filch's dry, racking sobs.
He was slumped in a chair by the desk, unable to look at Mrs. Norris, his face in his hands.
Much as he detested Filch, Harry couldn't help feeling a bit sorry for him, though not nearly as sorry as he felt for himself.
If Dumbledore believed Filch, he would be expelled for sure.
Dumbledore was now muttering strange words under his breath and tapping Mrs. Norris with his wand but nothing happened: She continued to look as though she had been recently stuffed.
One of them had forgotten to remove his hair net.
At last Dumbledore straightened up.
"She's not dead, Argus," he said softly.
Lockhart stopped abruptly in the middle of counting the number of murders he had prevented.
"But why's she all—all stiff and frozen?"
I thought so!"
"But how, I cannot say…" "Ask him!"
"No second year could have done this," said Dumbledore firmly, "it would take Dark Magic of the most advanced—" "He did it, he did it!"
"He knows I'm a Squib!"
"And I don't even know what a Squib is."
"Potter and his friends may have simply been in the wrong place at the wrong time," he said, a slight sneer curling his mouth as though he doubted it.
Why was he in the upstairs corridor at all?
Why wasn't he at the Halloween feast?"
"Why go up to that corridor?"
Ron and Hermione looked at Harry.
"Without any supper?"
"I didn't think ghosts provided food fit for living people at their parties."
"We weren't hungry," said Ron loudly as his stomach gave a huge rumble.
"I suggest, Headmaster, that Potter is not being entirely truthful," he said.
This cat wasn't hit over the head with a broomstick.
Dumbledore was giving Harry a searching look.
"Innocent until proven guilty, Severus," he said firmly.
So did Filch.
"My cat has been Petrified!"
"I want to see some punishment!"
"We will be able to cure her, Argus," said Dumbledore patiently.
As soon as they have reached their full size, I will have a potion made that will revive Mrs.
"I'll make it," Lockhart butted in.
"But I believe I am the Potions master at this school."
There was a very awkward pause.
"You may go," Dumbledore said to Harry, Ron, and Hermione.
They went, as quickly as they could without actually running.
When they were a floor up from Lockhart's office, they turned into an empty classroom and closed the door quietly behind them.
Harry squinted at his friends' darkened faces.
"No," said Ron, without hesitation.
Something in Ron's voice made Harry ask, "You do believe me, don't you?"
"Course I do," said Ron quickly.
"But—you must admit it's weird…" "I know it's weird," said Harry.
What was that writing on the wall about?
The Chamber Has Been Opened… What's that supposed to mean?"
"You know, it rings a sort of bell," said Ron slowly.
"I think someone told me a story about a secret chamber at Hogwarts once… might've been Bill…" "And what on earth's a Squib?"
"Well—it's not funny really—but as it's Filch," he said.
Kind of the opposite of Muggle-born wizards, but Squibs are quite unusual.
It would explain a lot.
Ron gave a satisfied smile.
A clock chimed somewhere.
"Midnight," said Harry.
For a few days, the school could talk of little else but the attack on Mrs. Norris.
Filch kept it fresh in everyone's minds by pacing the spot where she had been attacked, as though he thought the attacker might come back.
Ginny Weasley seemed very disturbed by Mrs. Norris's fate.
According to Ron, she was a great cat lover.
"Honestly, we're much better off without her."
Ginny's lip trembled.
"Stuff like this doesn't often happen at Hogwarts," Ron assured her.
I just hope he's got time to Petrify Filch before he's expelled.
The attack had also had an effect on Hermione.
It was quite usual for Hermione to spend a lot of time reading, but she was now doing almost nothing else.
Nor could Harry and Ron get much response from her when they asked what she was up to, and not until the following Wednesday did they find out.
Harry had just opened his mouth to say hello when Justin caught sight of him, turned abruptly, and sped off in the opposite direction.
Harry found Ron at the back of the library, measuring his History of Magic homework.
"I don't believe it, I'm still eight inches short…" said Ron furiously, letting go of his parchment, which sprang back into a roll.
"And Hermione's done four feet seven inches and her writing's tiny."
"Where is she?"
"Somewhere over there," said Ron, pointing along the shelves.
"All that junk about Lockhart being so great—" Hermione emerged from between the bookshelves.
She looked irritable and at last seemed ready to talk to them.
"All the copies of Hogwarts, A History have been taken out," she said, sitting down next to Harry and Ron.
"Why do you want it?"
"The same reason everyone else wants it," said Hermione, "to read up on the legend of the Chamber of Secrets."
"And I can't find the story anywhere else—" "Hermione, let me read your composition," said Ron desperately, checking his watch.
"No, I won't," said Hermione, suddenly severe.
Ron and Hermione led the way to History of Magic, bickering.
History of Magic was the dullest subject on their schedule.
Ancient and shriveled, many people said he hadn't noticed he was dead.
He had simply got up to teach one day and left his body behind him in an armchair in front of the staff room fire; his routine had not varied in the slightest since.
Today was as boring as ever.
He had been speaking for half an hour when something happened that had never happened before.
Hermione put up her hand.
"My subject is History of Magic," he said in his dry, wheezy voice.
"I deal with facts, Miss Granger, not myths and legends."
Hermione's hand was waving in the air again.
He peered at Hermione as though he had never seen a student properly before.
He looked dimly at them all, every face turned to his.
Harry could tell he was completely thrown by such an unusual show of interest.
"Oh, very well," he said slowly.
"Let me see… the Chamber of Secrets… "You all know, of course, that Hogwarts was founded over a thousand years ago—the precise date is uncertain—by the four greatest witches and wizards of the age.
He paused, gazed blearily around the room, and continued.
But then disagreements sprang up between them.
A rift began to grow between Slytherin and the others.
Slytherin wished to be more selective about the students admitted to Hogwarts.
He believed that magical learning should be kept within all-magic families.
He disliked taking students of Muggle parentage, believing them to be untrustworthy.
"Reliable historical sources tell us this much," he said.
The story goes that Slytherin had built a hidden chamber in the castle, of which the other founders knew nothing.
There was unease in the air as everyone continued to watch him, hoping for more.
"The whole thing is arrant nonsense, of course," he said.
It does not exist.
Hermione's hand was back in the air.
"Sir—what exactly do you mean by the horror within the Chamber?"
The class exchanged nervous looks.
"There is no Chamber and no monster."
"That will do," he said sharply.
It does not exist!
There is not a shred of evidence that Slytherin ever built so much as a secret broom cupboard!
I regret telling you such a foolish story!
We will return, if you please, to history, to solid, believable, verifiable fact!"
And within five minutes, the class had sunk back into its usual torpor.
"I always knew Salazar Slytherin was a twisted old loony," Ron told Harry and Hermione as they fought their way through the teeming corridors at the end of the lesson to drop off their bags before dinner.
I wouldn't be in his house if you paid me.
His stomach had just dropped unpleasantly.
Harry had never told Ron and Hermione that the Sorting Hat had seriously considered putting him in Slytherin.
He could remember, as though it were yesterday, the small voice that had spoken in his ear when he'd placed the hat on his head a year before: You could be great, you know, it's all here in your head, and Slytherin would help you on the way to greatness, no doubt about that… But Harry, who had already heard of Slytherin House's reputation for turning out Dark wizards, had thought desperately, Not Slytherin!
"Harry—Harry—a boy in my class has been saying you're—" But Colin was so small he couldn't fight against the tide of people bearing him toward the Great Hall; they heard him squeak, "See you, Harry!"
"What's a boy in his class saying about you?"
"People here'll believe anything," said Ron in disgust.
Ron asked Hermione.
"I don't know," she said, frowning.
"Dumbledore couldn't cure Mrs. Norris, and that makes me think that whatever attacked her might not be—well—human."
As she spoke, they turned a corner and found themselves at the end of the very corridor where the attack had happened.
They stopped and looked.
The scene was just as it had been that night, except that there was no stiff cat hanging from the torch bracket, and an empty chair stood against the wall bearing the message "The Chamber of Secrets has been Opened."
"That's where Filch has been keeping guard," Ron muttered.
They looked at each other.
The corridor was deserted.
"Can't hurt to have a poke around," said Harry, dropping his bag and getting to his hands and knees so that he could crawl along, searching for clues.
"Here—and here—" "Come and look at this!"
"This is funny…" Harry got up and crossed to the window next to the message on the wall.
Hermione was pointing at the topmost pane, where around twenty spiders were scuttling, apparently fighting to get through a small crack.
A long, silvery thread was dangling like a rope, as though they had all climbed it in their hurry to get outside.
"Have you ever seen spiders act like that?"
He looked over his shoulder.
Ron was standing well back and seemed to be fighting the impulse to run.
"I—don't—like—spiders," said Ron tensely.
"I never knew that," said Hermione, looking at Ron in surprise.
"You've used spiders in Potions loads of times…" "I don't mind them dead," said Ron, who was carefully looking anywhere but at the window.
"I just don't like the way they move…" Hermione giggled.
"It's not funny," said Ron, fiercely.
Hermione was obviously still trying not to laugh.
Where did that come from?
"It was about here," said Ron, recovering himself to walk a few paces past Filch's chair and pointing.
"Level with this door."
He reached for the brass doorknob but suddenly withdrew his hand as though he'd been burned.
"What's the matter?"
"Can't go in there," said Ron gruffly.
"That's a girls' toilet."
"Oh, Ron, there won't be anyone in there," said Hermione, standing up and coming over.
It was the gloomiest, most depressing bathroom Harry had ever set foot in.
Under a large, cracked, and spotted mirror were a row of chipped sinks.
Hermione put her fingers to her lips and set off toward the end stall.
When she reached it she said, "Hello, Myrtle, how are you?"
Harry and Ron went to look.
Moaning Myrtle was floating above the tank of the toilet, picking a spot on her chin.
"This is a girls' bathroom," she said, eyeing Ron and Harry suspiciously.
"They're not girls."
"No," Hermione agreed.
"I just wanted to show them how er—nice it is in here."
She waved vaguely at the dirty old mirror and the damp floor.
"Ask her if she saw anything," Harry mouthed at Hermione.
"What are you whispering?"
"Nothing," said Harry quickly.
"We wanted to ask—" "I wish people would stop talking behind my back!"
"I do have feelings, you know, even if I am dead—" "Myrtle, no one wants to upset you," said Hermione.
That's a good one!"
"My life was nothing but misery at this place and now people come along ruining my death!"
"We wanted to ask you if you've seen anything funny lately," said Hermione quickly.
"Because a cat was attacked right outside your front door on Halloween."
"Did you see anyone near here that night?"
"I wasn't paying attention," said Myrtle dramatically.
Myrtle gave a tragic sob, rose up in the air, turned over, and dived headfirst into the toilet, splashing water all over them and vanishing from sight, although from the direction of her muffled sobs, she had come to rest somewhere in the U-bend.
Harry and Ron stood with their mouths open, but Hermione shrugged wearily and said, "Honestly, that was almost cheerful for Myrtle… Come on, let's go."
Harry had barely closed the door on Myrtle's gurgling sobs when a loud voice made all three of them jump.
Percy Weasley had stopped dead at the head of the stairs, prefect badge agleam, an expression of complete shock on his face.
"That's a girls' bathroom!"
"What were you—?"
"Just having a look around," Ron shrugged.
"Clues, you know—" Percy swelled in a manner that reminded Harry forcefully of Mrs. Weasley.
"Get—away—from—there—" Perry said, striding toward them and starting to bustle them along, flapping his arms.
"Listen, we never laid a finger on that cat!"
"You're just worried I'm going to mess up your chances of being Head Boy—" "Five points from Gryffindor!"
Percy said tersely, fingering his prefect badge.
No more detective work, or I'll write to Mum!"
And he strode off, the back of his neck as red as Ron's ears.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione chose seats as far as possible from Percy in the common room that night.
Ron was still in a very bad temper and kept blotting his Charms homework.
When he reached absently for his wand to remove the smudges, it ignited the parchment.
Fuming almost as much as his homework, Ron slammed The Standard Book of Spells, Grade 2 shut.
To Harry's surprise, Hermione followed suit.
"Who can it be, though?"
"Let's think," said Ron in mock puzzlement.
He looked at Hermione.
Hermione looked back, unconvinced.
"If you're talking about Malfoy—" "Of course I am!"
"Look at his family," said Harry, closing his books, too.
They could easily be Slytherin's descendants.
"They could've had the key to the Chamber of Secrets for centuries!"
"Handing it down, father to son…" "Well," said Hermione cautiously, "I suppose it's possible…" "But how do we prove it?"
"There might be a way," said Hermione slowly, dropping her voice still further with a quick glance across the room at Percy.
And dangerous, very dangerous.
"All right," said Hermione coldly.
"What we'd need to do is to get inside the Slytherin common room and ask Malfoy a few questions without him realizing it's us."
"But that's impossible," Harry said as Ron laughed.
"No, it's not," said Hermione.
Think about it!
No one would know it was us.
"It wears off after a while," said Hermione, waving her hand impatiently.
There was only one way to get out a book from the Restricted Section: You needed a signed note of permission from a teacher.
"Hard to see why we'd want the book, really," said Ron, "if we weren't going to try and make one of the potions."
"I think," said Hermione, "that if we made it sound as though we were just interested in the theory, we might stand a chance…" "Oh, come on, no teacher's going to fall for that," said Ron.
Since the disastrous episode of the pixies, Professor Lockhart had not brought live creatures to class.
Instead, he read passages from his books to them, and sometimes reenacted some of the more dramatic bits.
He usually picked Harry to help him with these reconstructions; so far, Harry had been forced to play a simple Transylvanian villager whom Lockhart had cured of a Babbling Curse, a yeti with a head cold, and a vampire who had been unable to eat anything except lettuce since Lockhart had dealt with him.
Harry was hauled to the front of the class during their very next Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson, this time acting a werewolf.
If he hadn't had a very good reason for keeping Lockhart in a good mood, he would have refused to do it.
The bell rang and Lockhart got to his feet.
Signed copies of Magical Me to the author of the best one!"
The class began to leave.
Harry returned to the back of the room, where Ron and Hermione were waiting.
"Wait till everyone's gone," said Hermione nervously.
She held out the piece of paper, her hand shaking slightly.
You enjoyed it?"
"Oh, yes," said Hermione eagerly.
"So clever, the way you trapped that last one with the tea-strainer—" "Well, I'm sure no one will mind me giving the best student of the year a little extra help," said Lockhart warmly, and he pulled out an enormous peacock quill.
"Yes, nice, isn't it?"
"I usually save it for book-signings."
He scrawled an enormous loopy signature on the note and handed it back to Hermione.
"So, Harry," said Lockhart, while Hermione folded the note with fumbling fingers and slipped it into her bag.
Gryffindor against Slytherin, is it not?
I hear you're a useful player.
I was a Seeker, too.
I was asked to try for the National Squad, but preferred to dedicate my life to the eradication of the Dark Forces.
Still, if ever you feel the need for a little private training, don't hesitate to ask.
"I don't believe it," he said as the three of them examined the signature on the note.
"He didn't even look at the book we wanted."
"That's because he's a brainless git," said Ron.
"But who cares, we've got what we needed—" "He is not a brainless git," said Hermione shrilly as they half ran toward the library.
"Just because he said you were the best student of the year—" They dropped their voices as they entered the muffled stillness of the library.
"I was wondering if I could keep it," she said breathlessly.
She stalked away between the lofty shelves and returned several minutes later carrying a large and moldy-looking book.
Hermione had overridden Ron's objections by pointing out that it was the last place anyone in their right minds would go, so they were guaranteed some privacy.
Moaning Myrtle was crying noisily in her stall, but they were ignoring her, and she them.
It was clear from a glance why it belonged in the Restricted Section.
It was decorated with drawings of people halfway through transforming into other people.
Harry sincerely hoped the artist had imagined the looks of intense pain on their faces.
"This is the most complicated potion I've ever seen," said Hermione as they scanned the recipe.
"Well, if you two are going to chicken out, fine," she said.
There were bright pink patches on her cheeks and her eyes were brighter than usual.
But not toenails, okay?"
"How long will it take to make, anyway?"
"However, while Hermione was checking that the coast was clear for them to leave the bathroom, Ron muttered to Harry, "It'll be a lot less hassle if you can just knock Malfoy off his broom tomorrow."
Harry woke early on Saturday morning and lay for a while thinking about the coming Quidditch match.
He was nervous, mainly at the thought of what Wood would say if Gryffindor lost, but also at the idea of facing a team mounted on the fastest racing brooms gold could buy.
He had never wanted to beat Slytherin so badly.
After half an hour of lying there with his insides churning, he got up, dressed, and went down to breakfast early, where he found the rest of the Gryffindor team huddled at the long, empty table, all looking uptight and not speaking much.
It was a muggy sort of day with a hint of thunder in the air.
Ron and Hermione came hurrying over to wish Harry good luck as he entered the locker rooms.
The team pulled on their scarlet Gryffindor robes, then sat down to listen to Wood's usual pre-match pep talk.
"Slytherin has better brooms than us," he began.
But we've got better people on our brooms.
Chest heaving with emotion, Wood turned to Harry.
"So no pressure, Harry" said Fred, winking at him.
Madam Hooch, the Quidditch teacher, asked Flint and Wood to shake hands, which they did, giving each other threatening stares and gripping rather harder than was necessary.
"On my whistle," said Madam Hooch.
"Three… two… one…" With a roar from the crowd to speed them upward, the fourteen players rose toward the leaden sky.
Harry flew higher than any of them, squinting around for the Snitch.
Harry had no time to reply.
"Close one, Harry!"
Harry dropped quickly to avoid it, and George managed to hit it hard toward Malfoy.
What was going on?
It had started to rain; Harry felt heavy drops fall onto his face, splattering onto his glasses.
He didn't have a clue what was going on in the rest of the game until he heard Lee Jordan, who was commentating, say, "Slytherin lead, sixty points to zero."
Fred and George were now flying so close to him on either side that Harry could see nothing at all except their flailing arms and had no chance to look for the Snitch, let alone catch it.
Wood had obviously got the message.
"What's going on?"
It hasn't gone for anyone else all game.
Madam Hooch was walking toward them.
Over her shoulder, Harry could see the Slytherin team jeering and pointing in his direction.
"Don't be thick," said Fred.
"It'll take your head off."
"Oliver, this is insane," said Alicia Spinner angrily.
Come on, Oliver, tell them to leave me alone!
"Get the Snitch or die trying—what a stupid thing to tell him!"
Madam Hooch had joined them.
"Ready to resume play?"
Wood looked at the determined look on Harry's face.
"All right," he said.
The rain was falling more heavily now.
Higher and higher Harry climbed; he looped and swooped, spiraled, zigzagged, and rolled.
"Training for the ballet, Potter?"
It was hovering inches above Malfoy's left ear—and Malfoy, busy laughing at Harry, hadn't seen it.
For an agonizing moment, Harry hung in midair, not daring to speed toward Malfoy in case he looked up and saw the Snitch.
He had stayed still a second too long.
Through a haze of rain and pain he dived for the shimmering, sneering face below him and saw its eyes widen with fear: Malfoy thought Harry was attacking him.
"What the—" he gasped, careening out of Harry's way.
Harry took his remaining hand off his broom and made a wild snatch; he felt his fingers close on the cold Snitch but was now only gripping the broom with his legs, and there was a yell from the crowd below as he headed straight for the ground, trying hard not to pass out.
With a splattering thud he hit the mud and rolled off his broom.
His arm was hanging at a very strange angle; riddled with pain, he heard, as though from a distance, a good deal of whistling and shouting.
He focused on the Snitch clutched in his good hand.
"Aha," he said vaguely.
He saw a glitter of teeth.
"Oh, no, not you," he moaned.
"I'll keep it like this, thanks…" He tried to sit up, but the pain was terrible.
He heard a familiar clicking noise nearby.
"I don't want a photo of this, Colin," he said loudly.
"Lie back, Harry," said Lockhart soothingly.
"It's a simple charm I've used countless times—" "Why can't I just go to the hospital wing?"
"He should really, Professor," said a muddy Wood, who couldn't help grinning even though his Seeker was injured.
It was still putting up a terrific fight.
"Stand back," said Lockhart, who was rolling up his jade-green sleeves.
"No—don't—" said Harry weakly, but Lockhart was twirling his wand and a second later had directed it straight at Harry's arm.
A strange and unpleasant sensation started at Harry's shoulder and spread all the way down to his fingertips.
It felt as though his arm was being deflated.
He didn't dare look at what was happening.
His arm didn't hurt anymore—nor did it feel remotely like an arm.
"Ah," said Lockhart.
Well, that can sometimes happen.
But the point is, the bones are no longer broken.
That's the thing to bear in mind.
As Harry got to his feet, he felt strangely lopsided.
Taking a deep breath he looked down at his right side.
What he saw nearly made him pass out again.
He tried to move his fingers.
Lockhart hadn't mended Harry's bones.
He had removed them.
"You should have come straight to me!"
"I can mend bones in a second—but growing them back—" "You will be able to, won't you?"
"You'll have to stay the night…" Hermione waited outside the curtain drawn around Harry's bed while Ron helped him into his pajamas.
It took a while to stuff the rubbery, boneless arm into a sleeve.
"How can you stick up for Lockhart now, Hermione, eh?"
Ron called through the curtain as he pulled Harry's limp fingers through the cuff.
"Anyone can make a mistake," said Hermione.
"And it doesn't hurt anymore, does it, Harry?"
"No," said Harry, getting into bed.
"But it doesn't do anything else either."
As he swung himself onto the bed, his arm flapped pointlessly.
"Re-growing bones is a nasty business."
It burned Harry's mouth and throat as it went down, making him cough and splutter.
"We won, though," said Ron, a grin breaking across his face.
Malfoy's face… he looked ready to kill!"
The door of the hospital wing burst open at that moment.
Filthy and soaking wet, the rest of the Gryffindor team had arrived to see Harry.
"Unbelievable flying, Harry," said George.
Something about having the Snitch on top of his head and not noticing.
And Harry was left alone, with nothing to distract him from the stabbing pains in his limp arm.
Hours and hours later, Harry woke quite suddenly in the pitch blackness and gave a small yelp of pain: His arm now felt full of large splinters.
For a second, he thought that was what had woken him.
Then, with a thrill of horror, he realized that someone was sponging his forehead in the dark.
The house-elf's goggling tennis ball eyes were peering at Harry through the darkness.
A single tear was running down his long, pointed nose.
"Harry Potter came back to school," he whispered miserably.
Why didn't Harry Potter go back home when he missed the train?"
"What're you doing here?"
"And how did you know I missed the train?"
"It was you!"
He was rocking backward and forward, shaking his ugly head.
"You nearly got Ron and me expelled," he said fiercely.
He blew his nose on a corner of the filthy pillowcase he wore, looking so pathetic that Harry felt his anger ebb away in spite of himself.
"Not kill you, sir, never kill you!"
Better sent home, grievously injured, than remain here sir!
"Oh, is that all?"
"I don't suppose you're going to tell me why you wanted me sent home in pieces?"
"Ah, if Harry Potter only knew!"
We house-elves were treated like vermin, sir!
"But I'm not Muggle-born—how can I be in danger from the Chamber?"
Who opened it last time?"
"Go home, Harry Potter, go home!"
"I'm not going anywhere!"
"One of my best friends is Muggle- born; she'll be first in line if the Chamber really has been opened—" "Harry Potter risks his own life for his friends!"
Harry heard it, too.
There were footsteps coming down the passageway outside.
There was a loud crack, and Harry's fist was suddenly clenched on thin air.
He slumped back into bed, his eyes on the dark doorway to the hospital wing as the footsteps drew nearer.
Next moment, Dumbledore was backing into the dormitory, wearing a long woolly dressing gown and a nightcap.
He was carrying one end of what looked like a statue.
Professor McGonagall appeared a second later, carrying its feet.
Together, they heaved it onto a bed.
Harry lay quite still, pretending to be asleep.
He heard a sharp intake of breath.
"Another attack," said Dumbledore.
"Minerva found him on the stairs."
"We think he was trying to sneak up here to visit Potter."
Harry's stomach gave a horrible lurch.
A ray of moonlight lay across its staring face.
"Yes," said Professor McGonagall.
"But I shudder to think… If Albus hadn't been on the way downstairs for hot chocolate—who knows what might have—" The three of them stared down at Colin.
Then Dumbledore leaned forward and wrenched the camera out of Colin's rigid grip.
"You don't think he managed to get a picture of his attacker?"
He opened the back of the camera.
A jet of steam had hissed out of the camera.
Harry, three beds away, caught the acrid smell of burnt plastic.
"All melted…" "What does this mean, Albus?"
Professor McGonagall asked urgently.
"It means," said Dumbledore, "that the Chamber of Secrets is indeed open again."
Professor McGonagall stared at Dumbledore.
"But, Albus… surely… who?"
"The question is not who," said Dumbledore, his eyes on Colin.
"The question is, how…" And from what Harry could see of Professor McGonagall's shadowy face, she didn't understand this any better than he did.
Harry woke up on Sunday morning to find the dormitory blazing with winter sunlight and his arm re-boned but very stiff.
He sat up quickly and looked over at Colin's bed, but it had been blocked from view by the high curtains Harry had changed behind yesterday.
"When you've finished eating, you may leave."
Harry left to look for them, wondering where they could have got to and feeling slightly hurt that they weren't interested in whether he had his bones back or not.
As Harry passed the library, Percy Weasley strolled out of it, looking in far better spirits than last time they'd met.
"Oh, hello, Harry," he said.
Gryffindor has just taken the lead for the House Cup, you earned fifty points!"
"You haven't seen Ron or Hermione, have you?"
"No, I haven't," said Percy, his smile fading.
"I hope Ron's not in another girls' toilet…" Harry forced a laugh, watched Percy walk out of sight, and then headed straight for Moaning Myrtle's bathroom.
He couldn't see why Ron and Hermione would be in there again, but after making sure that neither Filch nor any prefects were around, he opened the door and heard their voices coming from a locked stall.
"It's me," he said, closing the door behind him.
"You gave us such a fright—come in, how's your arm?"
"Fine," said Harry, squeezing into the stall.
"We've decided this is the safest place to hide it."
Harry started to tell them about Colin, but Hermione interrupted.
Ron and Hermione looked up, amazed.
Hermione and Ron listened with their mouths open.
"The Chamber of Secrets has been opened before?"
"This settles it," said Ron in a triumphant voice.
"Maybe it can make itself invisible," said Hermione, prodding leeches to the bottom of the cauldron.
"Or maybe it can disguise itself—pretend to be a suit of armor or something—I've read about Chameleon Ghouls—" "You read too much, Hermione," said Ron, pouring dead lacewings on top of the leeches.
He crumpled up the empty lacewing bag and looked at Harry.
He shook his head.
The air was suddenly thick with rumor and suspicion.
The first years were now moving around the castle in tight-knit groups, as though scared they would be attacked if they ventured forth alone.
They were taking turns covering themselves with fur or boils and jumping out at her from behind statues.
They only stopped when Percy, apoplectic with rage, told them he was going to write to Mrs. Weasley and tell her Ginny was having nightmares.
Meanwhile, hidden from the teachers, a roaring trade in talismans, amulets, and other protective devices was sweeping the school.
"They went for Filch first," Neville said, his round face fearful.
"And everyone knows I'm almost a Squib."
In the second week of December Professor McGonagall came around as usual, collecting names of those who would be staying at school for Christmas.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione signed her list; they had heard that Malfoy was staying, which struck them as very suspicious.
Unfortunately, the potion was only half finished.
Harry and Ron looked at her nervously.
Harry smiled feebly.
Potions lessons took place in one of the large dungeons.
Thursday afternoon's lesson proceeded in the usual way.
Twenty cauldrons stood steaming between the wooden desks, on which stood brass scales and jars of ingredients.
Harry's Swelling Solution was far too runny, but he had his mind on more important things.
Harry ducked swiftly down behind his cauldron, pulled one of Fred's Filibuster fireworks out of his pocket, and gave it a quick prod with his wand.
The firework began to fizz and sputter.
People shrieked as splashes of the Swelling Solution hit them.
"Anyone who has been splashed, come here for a Deflating Draft—when I find out who did this—"Harry tried not to laugh as he watched Malfoy hurry forward, his head drooping with the weight of a nose like a small melon.
There was a sudden hush.
Harry arranged his face into what he hoped was a puzzled expression.
"He knew it was me," Harry told Ron and Hermione as they hurried back to Moaning Myrtle's bathroom.
"I could tell."
Hermione threw the new ingredients into the cauldron and began to stir feverishly.
"It'll be ready in two weeks," she said happily.
"What can he do?"
A week later, Harry, Ron, and Hermione were walking across the entrance hall when they saw a small knot of people gathered around the notice board, reading a piece of parchment that had just been pinned up.
"They're starting a Dueling Club!"
"Could be useful," he said to Harry and Hermione as they went into dinner.
"Shall we go?"
Harry and Hermione were all for it, so at eight o'clock that evening they hurried back to the Great Hall.
The ceiling was velvety black once more and most of the school seemed to be packed beneath it, all carrying their wands and looking excited.
"I wonder who'll be teaching us?"
Can everyone see me?
Can you all hear me?
Now, I don't want any of you youngsters to worry—you'll still have your Potions master when I'm through with him, never fear!"
"Wouldn't it be good if they finished each other off?"
Ron muttered in Harry's ear.
Then they raised their wands like swords in front of them.
"As you see, we are holding our wands in the accepted combative position," Lockhart told the silent crowd.
There was a dazzling flash of scarlet light and Lockhart was blasted off his feet: He flew backward off the stage, smashed into the wall, and slid down it to sprawl on the floor.
Hermione was dancing on tiptoes.
"Do you think he's all right?"
Lockhart was getting unsteadily to his feet.
His hat had fallen off and his wavy hair was standing on end.
"Well, there you have it!"
I'm going to come amongst you now and put you all into pairs.
"Time to split up the dream team, I think," he sneered.
Malfoy, come over here.
Let's see what you make of the famous Potter.
Malfoy strutted over, smirking.
Behind him walked a Slytherin girl who reminded Harry of a picture he'd seen in Holidays with Hags.
Hermione gave her a weak smile that she did not return.
"Face your partners!"
Harry and Malfoy barely inclined their heads, not taking their eyes off each other.
"Wands at the ready!"
"When I count to three, cast your charms to disarm your opponents—only to disarm them—we don't want any accidents—one… two… three…" Harry swung his wand high, but Malfoy had already started on "two": His spell hit Harry so hard he felt as though he'd been hit over the head with a saucepan.
"I said disarm only!"
Lockhart shouted in alarm over the heads of the battling crowd, as Malfoy sank to his knees; Harry had hit him with a Tickling Charm, and he could barely move for laughing.
A haze of greenish smoke was hovering over the scene.
Harry leapt forward and pulled Millicent off.
It was difficult: She was a lot bigger than he was.
"Dear, dear," said Lockhart, skittering through the crowd, looking at the aftermath of the duels.
"Up you go, Macmillan… Careful there, Miss Fawcett… Pinch it hard, it'll stop bleeding in a second, Boot…" "I think I'd better teach you how to block unfriendly spells," said Lockhart, standing flustered in the midst of the hall.
Neville's round, pink face went pinker.
"How about Malfoy and Potter?"
"Now, Harry," said Lockhart.
"When Draco points his wand at you, you do this."
He raised his own wand, attempted a complicated sort of wiggling action, and dropped it.
Malfoy smirked, too.
Harry looked up nervously at Lockhart and said, "Professor, could you show me that blocking thing again?"
"You wish," said Harry out of the corner of his mouth.
Lockhart cuffed Harry merrily on the shoulder.
"Just do what I did, Harry!"
"What, drop my wand?"
But Lockhart wasn't listening.
The end of his wand exploded.
Harry watched, aghast, as a long black snake shot out of it, fell heavily onto the floor between them, and raised itself, ready to strike.
There were screams as the crowd backed swiftly away, clearing the floor.
"I'll get rid of it…" "Allow me!"
He brandished his wand at the snake and there was a loud bang; the snake, instead of vanishing, flew ten feet into the air and fell back to the floor with a loud smack.
Harry wasn't sure what made him do it.
He wasn't even aware of deciding to do it.
All he knew was that his legs were carrying him forward as though he was on casters and that he had shouted stupidly at the snake, "Leave him alone!"
And miraculously—inexplicably—the snake slumped to the floor, docile as a thick, black garden hose, its eyes now on Harry.
Harry felt the fear drain out of him.
He knew the snake wouldn't attack anyone now, though how he knew it, he couldn't have explained.
He looked up at Justin, grinning, expecting to see Justin looking relieved, or puzzled, or even grateful— but certainly not angry and scared.
"What do you think you're playing at?"
He was also dimly aware of an ominous muttering all around the walls.
Then he felt a tugging on the back of his robes.
"Come on," said Rods voice in his ear.
"Move—come on—" Ron steered him out of the hall, Hermione hurrying alongside them.
As they went through the doors, the people on either side drew away as though they were frightened of catching something.
Harry didn't have a clue what was going on, and neither Ron nor Hermione explained anything until they had dragged him all the way up to the empty Gryffindor common room.
Why didn't you tell us?"
"I'm a what?"
"You can talk to snakes!"
"I know," said Harry.
Ron repeated faintly.
"I bet loads of people here can do it."
"Oh, no they can't," said Ron.
But—I didn't realize—how can I speak a language without knowing I can speak it?"
Ron shook his head.
Both he and Hermione were looking as though someone had died.
Harry couldn't see what was so terrible.
"What does it matter how I did it as long as Justin doesn't have to join the Headless Hunt?"
Harry's mouth fell open.
"Exactly," said Ron.
"And now the whole school's going to think you're his great- great-great-great-grandson or something—" "But I'm not," said Harry, with a panic he couldn't quite explain.
"You'll find that hard to prove," said Hermione.
"He lived about a thousand years ago; for all we know, you could be."
Harry lay awake for hours that night.
Through a gap in the curtains around his four-poster he watched snow starting to drift past the tower window and wondered… Could he be a descendant of Salazar Slithering?
He didn't know anything about his father's family, after all.
The words wouldn't come.
It seemed he had to be face-to-face with a snake to do it.
"But I'm in Gryffindor," Harry thought.
"The Sorting Hat wouldn't have put me in here if I had Slytherin blood…" "Ah," said a nasty little voice in his brain, "but the Sorting Hat wanted to put you in Slytherin, don't you remember?"
Harry turned over.
Harry fretted about this next to the fire in the Gryffindor common room, while Ron and Hermione used their time off to play a game of wizard chess.
"For heaven's sake, Harry," said Hermione, exasperated, as one of Ron's bishops wrestled her knight off his horse and dragged him off the board.
"Go and find Justin if it's so important to you."
So Harry got up and left through the portrait hole, wondering where Justin might be.
Shivering, Harry walked past classrooms where lessons were taking place, catching snatches of what was happening within.
Professor McGonagall was shouting at someone who, by the sound of it, had turned his friend into a badger.
Resisting the urge to take a look, Harry walked on by, thinking that Justin might be using his free time to catch up on some work, and deciding to check the library first.
He couldn't see whether Justin was among them.
He was walking toward them when something of what they were saying met his ears, and he paused to listen, hidden in the Invisibility section.
I mean to say, if Potter's marked him down as his next victim, it's best if he keeps a low profile for a while.
Of course, Justin's been waiting for something like this to happen ever since he let slip to Potter he was Muggle-born.
Justin actually told him he'd been down for Eton.
That's not the kind of thing you bandy about with Slytherin's heir on the loose, is it?"
"You definitely think it is Potter, then, Ernie?"
Everyone knows that's the mark of a Dark wizard.
Have you ever heard of a decent one who could talk to snakes?
Enemies of the Heir, Beware.
Next thing we know, Filch's cat's attacked.
He can't be all bad, can he?"
I mean to say, he was only a baby when it happened.
He should have been blasted into smithereens.
Didn't want another Dark Lord competing with him.
I wonder what other powers Potter's been hiding?"
Harry couldn't take anymore.
Clearing his throat loudly, he stepped out from behind the bookshelves.
"Hello," said Harry.
They all looked fearfully at Ernie.
"What do you want with him?"
"I wanted to tell him what really happened with that snake at the Dueling Club," said Harry.
"Then you noticed that after I spoke to it, the snake backed off?"
"I didn't chase it at him!"
Harry said, his voice shaking with anger.
"It didn't even touch him!"
"It was a very near miss," said Ernie.
"And in case you're getting ideas," he added hastily, "I might tell you that you can trace my family back through nine generations of witches and warlocks and my blood's as pure as anyone's, so—" "I don't care what sort of blood you've got!"
"I've heard you hate those Muggles you live with," said Ernie swiftly.
"I'd like to see you try it."
Harry blundered up the corridor, barely noticing where he was going, he was in such a fury.
The result was that he walked into something very large and solid, which knocked him backward onto the floor.
"Oh, hello, Hagrid," Harry said, looking up.
Hagrid's face was entirely hidden by a woolly, snow-covered balaclava, but it couldn't possibly be anyone else, as he filled most of the corridor in his moleskin overcoat.
A dead rooster was hanging from one of his massive, gloved hands.
"Canceled," said Harry, getting up.
"What're you doing in here?"
Hagrid held up the limp rooster.
"Second one killed this term," he explained.
He peered more closely at Harry from under his thick, snow-flecked eyebrows.
"It's nothing," he said.
He walked off, his mind still full of what Ernie had said about him.
"Justin's been waiting for something like this to happen ever since he let slip to Potter he was Muggle-born…" Harry stamped up the stairs and turned along another corridor, which was particularly dark; the torches had been extinguished by a strong, icy draft that was blowing through a loose windowpane.
He was halfway down the passage when he tripped headlong over something lying on the floor.
He turned to squint at what he'd fallen over and felt as though his stomach had dissolved.
And that wasn't all.
Next to him was another figure, the strangest sight Harry had ever seen.
It was Nearly Headless Nick, no longer pearly-white and transparent, but black and smoky, floating immobile and horizontal, six inches off the floor.
His head was half off and his face wore an expression of shock identical to Justin's.
Harry got to his feet, his breathing fast and shallow, his heart doing a kind of drum-roll against his ribs.
He looked wildly up and down the deserted corridor and saw a line of spiders scuttling as fast as they could away from the bodies.
The only sounds were the muffled voices of teachers from the classes on either side.
He could run, and no one would ever know he had been there.
But he couldn't just leave them lying here… He had to get help… Would anyone believe he hadn't had anything to do with this?
As he stood there, panicking, a door right next to him opened with a bang.
Peeves the Poltergeist came shooting out.
"Why, it's potty wee Potter!"
Upside down, he spotted Justin and Nearly Headless Nick.
NO MORTAL OR GHOST IS SAFE!
RUN FOR YOUR LIVES!
Crash—crash—crash—door after door flew open along the corridor and people flooded out.
For several long minutes, there was a scene of such confusion that Justin was in danger of being squashed and people kept standing in Nearly Headless Nick.
Harry found himself pinned against the wall as the teachers shouted for quiet.
Professor McGonagall came running, followed by her own class, one of whom still had black-and-white-striped hair.
She used her wand to set off a loud bang, which restored silence, and ordered everyone back into their classes.
No sooner had the scene cleared somewhat than Ernie the Hufflepuff arrived, panting, on the scene.
"Caught in the act!"
Ernie yelled, his face stark white, pointing his finger dramatically at Harry.
"That will do, Macmillan!"
Peeves was bobbing overhead, now grinning wickedly, surveying the scene; Peeves always loved chaos.
As the teachers bent over Justin and Nearly Headless Nick, examining them, Peeves broke into song: "Oh, Potter, you rotter, oh, what have you done, You're killing off students, you think it's good fun—" "That's enough, Peeves!"
In the end, Professor McGonagall conjured a large fan out of thin air, which she gave to Ernie with instructions to waft Nearly Headless Nick up the stairs.
This Ernie did, fanning Nick along like a silent black hovercraft.
This left Harry and Professor McGonagall alone together.
"This way, Potter," she said.
"Professor," said Harry at once, "I swear I didn't—" "This is out of my hands, Potter," said Professor McGonagall curtly.
This was evidently a password, because the gargoyle sprang suddenly to life and hopped aside as the wall behind him split in two.
Even full of dread for what was coming, Harry couldn't fail to be amazed.
Behind the wall was a spiral staircase that was moving smoothly upward, like an escalator.
As he and Professor McGonagall stepped onto it, Harry heard the wall thud closed behind them.
They rose upward in circles, higher and higher, until at last, slightly dizzy, Harry saw a gleaming oak door ahead, with a brass knocker in the shape of a griffin.
He knew now where he was being taken.
This must be where Dumbledore lived.
They stepped off the stone staircase at the top, and Professor McGonagall rapped on the door.
It opened silently and they entered.
Professor McGonagall told Harry to wait and left him there, alone.
Harry looked around.
One thing was certain: of all the teachers' offices Harry had visited so far this year, Dumbledore's was by far the most interesting.
A number of curious silver instruments stood on spindle-legged tables, whirring and emitting little puffs of smoke.
The walls were covered with portraits of old headmasters and headmistresses, all of whom were snoozing gently in their frames.
There was also an enormous, claw-footed desk, and, sitting on a shelf behind it, a shabby, tattered wizard's hat—the Sorting Hat.
He cast a wary eye around the sleeping witches and wizards on the walls.
Surely it couldn't hurt if he took the hat down and tried it on again?
Just to see… just to make sure it had put him in the right House.
He walked quietly around the desk, lifted the hat from its shelf, and lowered it slowly onto his head.
It was much too large and slipped down over his eyes, just as it had done the last time he'd put it on.
Then a small voice said in his ear, "Bee in your bonnet, Harry Potter?"
"Er, yes," Harry muttered.
"Er—sorry to bother you—I wanted to ask—" "You've been wondering whether I put you in the right House," said the hat smartly.
But I stand by what I said before"—Harry's heart leapt—2you would have done well in Slytherin—" Harry's stomach plummeted.
He grabbed the point of the hat and pulled it off.
It hung limply in his hand, grubby and faded.
Harry pushed it back onto its shelf, feeling sick.
"You're wrong," he said aloud to the still and silent hat.
It didn't move.
Harry backed away, watching it.
Then a strange, gagging noise behind him made him wheel around.
He wasn't alone after all.
Standing on a golden perch behind the door was a decrepit-looking bird that resembled a half-plucked turkey.
Harry stared at it and the bird looked balefully back, making its gagging noise again.
Harry thought it looked very ill. Its eyes were dull and, even as Harry watched, a couple more feathers fell out of its tail.
Harry was just thinking that all he needed was for Dumbledore's pet bird to die while he was alone in the office with it, when the bird burst into flames.
Harry yelled in shock and backed away into the desk.
The office door opened.
Dumbledore came in, looking very somber.
"Professor," Harry gasped.
"Your bird—I couldn't do anything—he just caught fire—" To Harry's astonishment, Dumbledore smiled.
"About time, too," he said.
"He's been looking dreadful for days; I've been telling him to get a move on."
He chuckled at the stunned look on Harry's face.
Phoenixes burst into flame when it is time for them to die and are reborn from the ashes.
It was quite as ugly as the old one.
"It's a shame you had to see him on a Burning Day," said Dumbledore, seating himself behind his desk.
Fascinating creatures, phoenixes.
In the shock of Fawkes catching fire, Harry had forgotten what he was there for, but it all came back to him as Dumbledore settled himself in the high chair behind the desk and fixed Harry with his penetrating, light-blue stare.
Before Dumbledore could speak another word, however, the door of the office flew open with an almighty bang and Hagrid burst in, a wild look in his eyes, his balaclava perched on top of his shaggy black head and the dead rooster still swinging from his hand.
"I do not think that Harry attacked those people."
"Oh," said Hagrid, the rooster falling limply at his side.
And he stomped out looking embarrassed.
"You don't think it was me, Professor?"
Harry repeated hopefully as Dumbledore brushed rooster feathers off his desk.
"No, Harry, I don't," said Dumbledore, though his face was somber again.
"But I still want to talk to you."
Harry waited nervously while Dumbledore considered him, the tips of his long fingers together.
"I must ask you, Harry, whether there is anything you'd like to tell me," he said gently.
"Anything at all."
Harry didn't know what to say.
He thought, too, about what everyone was saying about him, and his growing dread that he was somehow connected with Salazar Slytherin.
"No," said Harry.
"There isn't anything, Professor…" The double attack on Justin and Nearly Headless Nick turned what had hitherto been nervousness into real panic.
Curiously, it was Nearly Headless Nick's fate that seemed to worry people most.
What could possibly do that to a ghost?
There was almost a stampede to book seats on the Hogwarts Express so that students could go home for Christmas.
"At this rate, we'll be the only ones left," Ron told Harry and Hermione.
But Harry was glad that most people were leaving.
He was tired of people skirting around him in the corridors, as though he was about to sprout fangs or spit poison; tired of all the muttering, pointing, and hissing as he passed.
Fred and George, however, found all this very funny.
They went out of their way to march ahead of Harry down the corridors, shouting, "Make way for the Heir of Slytherin, seriously evil wizard coming through…" Percy was deeply disapproving of this behavior.
"It is not a laughing matter," he said coldly.
"Oh, get out of the way, Percy," said Fred.
"Harry's in a hurry."
"Yeah, he's off to the Chamber of Secrets for a cup of tea with his fanged servant," said George, chortling.
Ginny didn't find it amusing either.
"Oh, don't," she wailed every time Fred asked Harry loudly who he was planning to attack next, or when George pretended to ward Harry off with a large clove of garlic when they met.
Harry didn't mind; it made him feel better that Fred and George, at least, thought the idea of his being Slytherin's heir was quite ludicrous.
But their antics seemed to be aggravating Draco Malfoy, who looked increasingly sour each time he saw them at it.
"It's because he's bursting to say it's really him," said Ron knowingly.
"You know how he hates anyone beating him at anything, and you're getting all the credit for his dirty work."
"Not for long," said Hermione in a satisfied tone.
At last the term ended, and a silence deep as the snow on the grounds descended on the castle.
Fred, George, and Ginny had chosen to stay at school rather than visit Bill in Egypt with Mr. and Mrs. Weasley.
Percy, who disapproved of what he termed their childish behavior, didn't spend much time in the Gryffindor common room.
He had already told them pompously that he was only staying over Christmas because it was his duty as a prefect to support the teachers during this troubled time.
Christmas morning dawned, cold and white.
Harry and Ron, the only ones left in their dormitory, were woken very early by Hermione, who burst in, fully dressed and carrying presents for them both.
"Wake up," she said loudly, pulling back the curtains at the window.
"Hermione—you're not supposed to be in here—" said Ron, shielding his eyes against the light.
"Merry Christmas to you, too," said Hermione, throwing him his present.
Harry sat up, suddenly wide awake.
"Are you sure?"
"If we're going to do it, I say it should be tonight."
At that moment, Hedwig swooped into the room, carrying a very small package in her beak.
"Hello," said Harry happily as she landed on his bed.
"Are you speaking to me again?"
They had sent Harry a toothpick and a note telling him to find out whether he'd be able to stay at Hogwarts for the summer vacation, too.
The rest of Harry's Christmas presents were far more satisfactory.
Hagrid had sent him a large tin of treacle fudge, which Harry decided to soften by the fire before eating; Ron had given him a book called Flying with the Cannons, a book of interesting facts about his favorite Quidditch team, and Hermione had bought him a luxury eagle-feather quill.
He read her card with a fresh surge of guilt, thinking about Mr. Weasley's car (which hadn't been seen since its crash with the Whomping Willow), and the bout of rule-breaking he and Ron were planning next.
The Great Hall looked magnificent.
Not only were there a dozen frost-covered Christmas trees and thick streamers of holly and mistletoe crisscrossing the ceiling, but enchanted snow was falling, warm and dry, from the ceiling.
Dumbledore led them in a few of his favorite carols, Hagrid booming more and more loudly with every goblet of eggnog he consumed.
Harry didn't even care that Draco Malfoy was making loud, snide remarks about his new sweater from the Slytherin table.
With a bit of luck, Malfoy would be getting his comeuppance in a few hours' time.
Harry and Ron had barely finished their third helpings of Christmas pudding when Hermione ushered them out of the hall to finalize their plans for the evening.
"I've got it all worked out," she went on smoothly, ignoring Harry's and Ron's stupefied faces.
She held up two plump chocolate cakes.
You know how greedy they are, they're bound to eat them.
Harry and Ron looked incredulously at each other.
"Hermione, I don't think—" "That could go seriously wrong—"But Hermione had a steely glint in her eye not unlike the one Professor McGonagall sometimes had.
"You do want to investigate Malfoy, don't you?"
"Oh, all right, all right," said Harry.
Whose hair are you ripping out?"
"I've already got mine!"
She left this on my robes when she was trying to strangle me!
"Have you ever heard of a plan where so many things could go wrong?"
But to Harry's and Ron's utter amazement, stage one of the operation went just as smoothly as Hermione had said.
Harry had perched the chocolate cakes on the end of the banisters.
"How thick can you get?"
Grinning stupidly, they stuffed the cakes whole into their large mouths.
For a moment, both of them chewed greedily, looks of triumph on their faces.
Then, without the smallest change of expression, they both keeled over backward onto the floor.
By far the hardest part was hiding them in the closet across the hall.
Then, still stunned at what they had just done, they sprinted up to Moaning Myrtle's bathroom.
They could hardly see for the thick black smoke issuing from the stall in which Hermione was stirring the cauldron.
Pulling their robes up over their faces, Harry and Ron knocked softly on the door.
Three glass tumblers stood ready on the toilet seat.
"Did you get them?"
Hermione asked breathlessly.
The three of them stared into the cauldron.
Close up, the potion looked like thick, dark mud, bubbling sluggishly.
"It looks like the book says it should…once we've drunk it, we'll have exactly an hour before we change back into ourselves."
"We separate it into three glasses and add the hairs."
Hermione ladled large dollops of the potion into each of the glasses.
The potion hissed loudly like a boiling kettle and frothed madly.
A second later, it had turned a sick sort of yellow.
"Bet it tastes disgusting."
"Add yours, then," said Hermione.
"Hang on," said Harry as Ron and Hermione reached for their glasses.
"Good thinking," said Ron, unlocking the door.
"We'll take separate stalls."
"Ready," came Ron's and Hermione's voices.
"One—two—three—" Pinching his nose, Harry drank the potion down in two large gulps.
It tasted like overcooked cabbage.
Immediately, his insides started writhing as though he'd just swallowed live snakes—doubled up, he wondered whether he was going to be sick—then a burning sensation spread rapidly from his stomach to the very ends of his fingers and toes—next, bringing him gasping to all fours, came a horrible melting feeling, as the skin all over his body bubbled like hot wax—and before his eyes, his hands began to grow, the fingers thickened, the nails broadened, the knuckles were bulging like bolts—his shoulders stretched painfully and a prickling on his forehead told him that hair was creeping down toward his eyebrows—his robes ripped as his chest expanded like a barrel bursting its hoops—his feet were agony in shoes four sizes too small.
As suddenly as it had started, everything stopped.
With difficulty, he kicked off his shoes and stood up.
He reached up to brush his hair out of his eyes and met only the short growth of wiry bristles, low on his forehead.
Harry scratched his ear.
Ron's door opened.
They stared at each other.
Except that he looked pale and shocked, Ron was indistinguishable from Crabbe, from the pudding-bowl haircut to the long, gorilla arms.
"This is unbelievable," said Ron, approaching the mirror and prodding Crabbe's flat nose.
He banged on Hermione's door.
Harry looked at Ron, bewildered.
"That's how he looks every time a teacher asks him a question."
"Hermione, are you okay?"
"Fine—I'm fine—go on—" Harry looked at his watch.
Five of their precious sixty minutes had already passed.
"We'll meet you back here, all right?"
Harry and Ron opened the door of the bathroom carefully, checked that the coast was clear, and set off.
"Don't swing your arms like that," Harry muttered to Ron.
"Crabbe holds them sort of stiff…" "How's this?"
"Yeah, that's better…" They went down the marble staircase.
All they needed now was a Slytherin that they could follow to the Slytherin common room, but there was nobody around.
The words had barely left his mouth when a girl with long, curly hair emerged from the entrance.
"Excuse me," said Ron, hurrying up to her.
"We've forgotten the way to our common room."
"I beg your pardon?"
She walked away, looking suspiciously back at them.
They walked deeper and deeper under the school, constantly checking their watches to see how much time they had left.
After a quarter of an hour, just when they were getting desperate, they heard a sudden movement ahead.
"There's one of them now!"
The figure was emerging from a side room.
As they hurried nearer, however, their hearts sank.
It wasn't a Slytherin, it was Percy.
"What're you doing down here?"
Percy looked affronted.
It's Crabbe, isn't it?"
"Well, get off to your dormitories," said Percy sternly.
"It's not safe to go wandering around dark corridors these days."
"You are," Ron pointed out.
A voice suddenly echoed behind Harry and Ron.
Draco Malfoy was strolling toward them, and for the first time in his life, Harry was pleased to see him.
"There you are," he drawled, looking at them.
Malfoy glanced witheringly at Percy.
"And what're you doing down here, Weasley?"
Percy looked outraged.
"You want to show a bit more respect to a school prefect!"
"I don't like your attitude!"
Malfoy sneered and motioned for Harry and Ron to follow him.
Harry almost said something apologetic to Percy but caught himself just in time.
He and Ron hurried after Malfoy, who said as they turned into the next passage, "That Peter Weasley—" "Percy," Ron corrected him automatically.
"Whatever," said Malfoy.
And I bet I know what he's up to.
He gave a short, derisive laugh.
Harry and Ron exchanged excited looks.
Malfoy paused by a stretch of bare, damp stone wall.
"What's the new password again?"
"Er—" said Harry.
Malfoy marched through it, and Harry and Ron followed him.
The Slytherin common room was a long, low underground room with rough stone walls and ceiling from which round, greenish lamps were hanging on chains.
"Wait here," said Malfoy to Harry and Ron, motioning them to a pair of empty chairs set back from the fire.
He thrust it under Ron's nose.
"That'll give you a laugh," he said.
Harry saw Ron's eyes widen in shock.
He read the clipping quickly, gave a very forced laugh, and handed it to Harry.
It had been clipped out of the Daily Prophet, and it said: INQUIRY AT THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC Arthur Weasley, Head of the Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office, was today fined fifty Galleons for bewitching a Muggle car.
Mr. Lucius Malfoy, a governor of Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, where the enchanted car crashed earlier this year, called today for Mr. Weasley's resignation.
"Weasley has brought the Ministry into disrepute," Mr. Malfoy told our reporter.
"He is clearly unfit to draw up our laws and his ridiculous Muggle Protection Act should be scrapped immediately."
"Don't you think it's funny?"
"Ha, ha," said Harry bleakly.
"Arthur Weasley loves Muggles so much he should snap his wand in half and go and join them," said Malfoy scornfully.
Ron's—or rather, Crabbe's—face was contorted with fury.
"What's up with you, Crabbe?"
"Stomachache," Ron grunted.
"You know, I'm surprised the Daily Prophet hasn't reported all these attacks yet," he went on thoughtfully.
He'll be sacked if it doesn't stop soon.
Father's always said old Dumbledore's the worst thing that's ever happened to this place.
Can I have your autograph?
Can I lick your shoes, please, Potter?
"What's the matter with you two?"
And people think he's Slytherin's heir!
"I could help them."
Ron's jaw dropped so that Crabbe looked even more clueless than usual.
Ron was clenching Crabbe's gigantic fists.
Feeling that it would be a bit of a giveaway if Ron punched Malfoy, Harry shot him a warning look and said, "D'you know if the person who opened the Chamber last time was caught?"
"Oh, yeah… whoever it was expelled," said Malfoy.
"They're probably still in Azkaban."
"Honestly, if you were any slower, you'd be going backward."
Of course, he's got a lot on his plate at the moment.
You know the Ministry of Magic raided our manor last week?"
"Yeah…" said Malfoy.
Father's got some very valuable Dark Arts stuff.
Malfoy looked at him.
So did Harry.
Even his hair was turning red.
His nose was also slowly lengthening—their hour was up, Ron was turning back into himself, and from the look of horror he was suddenly giving Harry, he must be, too.
They both jumped to their feet.
"Medicine for my stomach," Ron grunted, and without further ado they sprinted the length of the Slytherin common room, hurled themselves at the stone wall, and dashed up the passage, hoping against hope that Malfoy hadn't noticed anything.
Leaving their shoes outside the closet door, they sprinted in their socks up the marble staircase toward Moaning Myrtle's bathroom.
"Well, it wasn't a complete waste of time," Ron panted, closing the bathroom door behind them.
Harry checked his face in the cracked mirror.
He was back to normal.
He put his glasses on as Ron hammered on the door of Hermione's stall.
"Hermione, come out, we've got loads to tell you—" "Go away!"
Harry and Ron looked at each other.
"What's the matter?"
"You must be back to normal by now, we are—" But Moaning Myrtle glided suddenly through the stall door.
Harry had never seen her looking so happy.
"It's awful—" They heard the lock slide back and Hermione emerged, sobbing, her robes pulled up over her head.
"Have you still got Millicent's nose or something?"
Hermione let her robes fall and Ron backed into the sink.
Her face was covered in black fur.
Her eyes had turned yellow and there were long, pointed ears poking through her hair.
"It was a c-cat hair!"
And the p-potion isn't supposed to be used for animal transformations!"
"Uh-oh," said Ron.
"You'll be teased something dreadful," said Myrtle happily.
"It's okay, Hermione," said Harry quickly.
Moaning Myrtle sped them on their way with a hearty guffaw.
"Wait till everyone finds out you've got a tail!"
Chapter XIII The Very Secret Diary.
Hermione remained in the hospital wing for several weeks.
There was a flurry of rumor about her disappearance when the rest of the school arrived back from their Christmas holidays, because of course everyone thought that she had been attacked.
Harry and Ron went to visit her every evening.
When the new term started, they brought her each day's homework.
"If I'd sprouted whiskers, I'd take a break from work," said Ron, tipping a stack of books onto Hermione's bedside table one evening.
"Don't be silly, Ron, I've got to keep up," said Hermione briskly.
"I don't suppose you've got any new leads?"
"Nothing," said Harry gloomily.
"I was so sure it was Malfoy," said Ron, for about the hundredth time.
"Just a get well card," said Hermione hastily, trying to poke it out of sight, but Ron was too quick for her.
Ron looked up at Hermione, disgusted.
"You sleep with this under your pillow?"
"Is Lockhart the smarmiest bloke you've ever met, or what?"
Ron said to Harry as they left the infirmary and started up the stairs toward Gryffindor Tower.
Ron was just saying he wished he had asked Hermione how many rat tails you were supposed to add to a Hair-Raising Potion when an angry outburst from the floor above reached their ears.
"That's Filch," Harry muttered as they hurried up the stairs and paused, out of sight, listening hard.
"You don't think someone else's been attacked?"
They stood still, their heads inclined toward Filch's voice, which sounded quite hysterical.
Mopping all night, like I haven't got enough to do!
They poked their heads around the corner.
Filch had clearly been manning his usual lookout post: They were once again on the spot where Mrs. Norris had been attacked.
They saw at a glance what Filch had been shouting about.
A great flood of water stretched over half the corridor, and it looked as though it was still seeping from under the door of Moaning Myrtle's bathroom.
Now that Filch had stopped shouting, they could hear Myrtle's wails echoing off the bathroom walls.
"Now what's up with her?"
"Let's go and see," said Harry, and holding their robes over their ankles they stepped through the great wash of water to the door bearing its OUT OF ORDER sign, ignored it as always, and entered.
Moaning Myrtle was crying, if possible, louder and harder than ever before.
She seemed to be hiding down her usual toilet.
It was dark in the bathroom because the candles had been extinguished in the great rush of water that had left both walls and floor soaking wet.
"What's up, Myrtle?"
"Come to throw something else at me?"
Harry waded across to her stall and said, "Why would I throw something at you?"
"Don't ask me," Myrtle shouted, emerging with a wave of yet more water, which splashed onto the already sopping floor.
"Here I am, minding my own business, and someone thinks it's funny to throw a book at me…" "But it can't hurt you if someone throws something at you," said Harry, reasonably.
"I mean, it'd just go right through you, wouldn't it?"
He had said the wrong thing.
Ten points if you can get it through her stomach!
Fifty points if it goes through her head!
Well, ha, ha, ha!
What a lovely game, I don't think!"
"Who threw it at you, anyway?"
"I don't know… I was just sitting in the U-bend, thinking about death, and it fell right through the top of my head," said Myrtle, glaring at them.
"It's over there, it got washed out…" Harry and Ron looked under the sink where Myrtle was pointing.
A small, thin book lay there.
It had a shabby black cover and was as wet as everything else in the bathroom.
Harry stepped forward to pick it up, but Ron suddenly flung out an arm to hold him back.
"Are you crazy?"
"It could be dangerous."
"Come off it, how could it be dangerous?"
"You'd be surprised," said Ron, who was looking apprehensively at the book.
And everyone who read Sonnets of a Sorcerer spoke in limericks for the rest of their lives.
And some old witch in Bath had a book that you could never stop reading!
You just had to wander around with your nose in it, trying to do everything one-handed.
The little book lay on the floor, nondescript and soggy.
"Well, we won't find out unless we look at it," he said, and he ducked around Ron and picked it up off the floor.
Harry saw at once that it was a diary, and the faded year on the cover told him it was fifty years old.
He opened it eagerly.
"Hang on," said Ron, who had approached cautiously and was looking over Harry's shoulder.
"I know that name… T. M. Riddle got an award for special services to the school fifty years ago."
"How on earth d'you know that?"
"Because Filch made me polish his shield about fifty times in detention," said Ron resentfully.
Harry peeled the wet pages apart.
They were completely blank.
There wasn't the faintest trace of writing on any of them, not even Auntie Mabel's birthday, or dentist, half-past three.
"He never wrote in it," said Harry, disappointed.
"I wonder why someone wanted to flush it away?"
Harry turned to the back cover of the book and saw the printed name of a variety store on Vauxhall Road, London.
"He must've been Muggle-born," said Harry thoughtfully.
"To have bought a diary from Vauxhall Road…" "Well, it's not much use to you," said Ron.
He dropped his voice.
"Fifty points if you can get it through Myrtle's nose."
Harry, however, pocketed it.
On her first evening back in Gryffindor Tower, Harry showed her T. M. Riddle's diary and told her the story of how they had found it.
"If it has, it's hiding them very well," said Ron.
"I wish I knew why someone did try to chuck it," said Harry.
"I wouldn't mind knowing how Riddle got an award for special services to Hogwarts either."
"Could've been anything," said Ron.
's or saved a teacher from the giant squid.
"Well, the Chamber of Secrets was opened fifty years ago, wasn't it?"
"That's what Malfoy said."
"Yeah…" said Ron slowly.
"And this diary is fifty years old," said Hermione, tapping it excitedly.
"Oh, Ron, wake up," snapped Hermione.
We know T. M. Riddle got an award for special services to the school fifty years ago.
Well, what if Riddle got his special award for catching the Heir of Slytherin?
His diary would probably tell us everything—where the Chamber is, and how to open it, and what sort of creature lives in it— the person who's behind the attacks this time wouldn't want that lying around, would they?"
But Hermione was pulling her wand out of her bag.
"It might be invisible ink!"
Undaunted, Hermione shoved her hand back into her bag and pulled out what appeared to be a bright red eraser.
She rubbed hard on January first.
"I'm telling you, there's nothing to find in there," said Ron.
The fact was that even though he knew the diary was blank, he kept absentmindedly picking it up and turning the pages, as though it were a story he wanted to finish.
And while Harry was sure he had never heard the name T. M. Riddle before, it still seemed to mean something to him, almost as though Riddle was a friend he'd had when he was very small, and had half-forgotten.
But this was absurd.
He'd never had friends before Hogwarts, Dudley had made sure of that.
Nevertheless, Harry was determined to find out more about Riddle, so next day at break, he headed for the trophy room to examine Riddle's special award, accompanied by an interested Hermione and a thoroughly unconvinced Ron, who told them he'd seen enough of the trophy room to last him a lifetime.
Riddle's burnished gold shield was tucked away in a corner cabinet.
However, they did find Riddle's name on an old Medal for Magical Merit, and on a list of old Head Boys.
"He sounds like Percy," said Ron, wrinkling his nose in disgust.
"Prefect, Head Boy… probably top of every class—" "You say that like it's a bad thing," said Hermione in a slightly hurt voice.
The sun had now begun to shine weakly on Hogwarts again.
Inside the castle, the mood had grown more hopeful.
"The moment their acne clears up, they'll be ready for repotting again," Harry heard her telling Filch kindly one afternoon.
Perhaps the Heir of Slytherin had lost his or her nerve, thought Harry.
It must be getting riskier and riskier to open the Chamber of Secrets, with the school so alert and suspicious.
Perhaps the monster, whatever it was, was even now settling itself down to hibernate for another fifty years… Ernie Macmillan of Hufflepuff didn't take this cheerful view.
He was still convinced that Harry was the guilty one, that he had "given himself away" at the Dueling Club.
"I don't think there'll be any more trouble, Minerva," he said, tapping his nose knowingly and winking.
The culprit must have known it was only a matter of time before I caught him.
Rather sensible to stop now, before I came down hard on him.
Wash away the memories of last term!
Harry hadn't had much sleep because of a late-running Quidditch practice the night before, and he hurried down to the Great Hall, slightly late.
He thought, for a moment, that he'd walked through the wrong doors.
The walls were all covered with large, lurid pink flowers.
Harry went over to the Gryffindor table, where Ron was sitting looking sickened, and Hermione seemed to have been overcome with giggles.
"What's going on?"
Harry asked them, sitting down and wiping confetti off his bacon.
Ron pointed to the teachers' table, apparently too disgusted to speak.
Lockhart, wearing lurid pink robes to match the decorations, was waving for silence.
The teachers on either side of him were looking stony-faced.
From where he sat, Harry could see a muscle going in Professor McGonagall's cheek.
"Happy Valentine's Day!"
Yes, I have taken the liberty of arranging this little surprise for you all—and it doesn't end here!"
Lockhart clapped his hands and through the doors to the entrance hall marched a dozen surly-looking dwarfs.
Not just any dwarfs, however.
Lockhart had them all wearing golden wings and carrying harps.
"My friendly, card-carrying cupids!"
And the fun doesn't stop here!
I'm sure my colleagues will want to enter into the spirit of the occasion!
"Please, Hermione, tell me you weren't one of the forty-six," said Ron as they left the Great Hall for their first lesson.
Hermione suddenly became very interested in searching her bag for her schedule and didn't answer.
Hot all over at the thought of being given a valentine in front of a line of first years, which happened to include Ginny Weasley, Harry tried to escape.
The dwarf, however, cut his way through the crowd by kicking people's shins, and reached him before he'd gone two paces.
"Not here," Harry hissed, trying to escape.
"Let me go!"
His books, wand, parchment, and quill spilled onto the floor and his ink bottle smashed over everything.
Harry scrambled around, trying to pick it all up before the dwarf started singing, causing something of a holdup in the corridor.
"What's going on here?"
Harry started stuffing everything feverishly into his ripped bag, desperate to get away before Malfoy could hear his musical valentine.
"What's all this commotion?"
Losing his head, Harry tried to make a run for it, but the dwarf seized him around the knees and brought him crashing to the floor.
"Right," he said, sitting on Harry's ankles.
"Here is your singing valentine: "His eyes are as green as a fresh pickled toad, His hair is as dark as a blackboard.
Trying valiantly to laugh along with everyone else, he got up, his feet numb from the weight of the dwarf, as Percy Weasley did his best to disperse the crowd, some of whom were crying with mirth.
"And you, Malfoy—" Harry, glancing over, saw Malfoy stoop and snatch up something.
"Give that back," said Harry quietly.
"Wonder what Potter's written in this?"
A hush fell over the onlookers.
Ginny was staring from the diary to Harry, looking terrified.
"Hand it over, Malfoy," said Percy sternly.
"When I've had a look," said Malfoy, waving the diary tauntingly at Harry.
Percy said, "As a school prefect—" but Harry had lost his temper.
Ron, grinning broadly, caught it.
I'll have to report this, you know!"
But Harry didn't care, he was one-up on Malfoy, and that was worth five points from Gryffindor any day.
Malfoy was looking furious, and as Ginny passed him to enter her classroom, he yelled spitefully after her, "I don't think Potter liked your valentine much!"
Ginny covered her face with her hands and ran into class.
Snarling, Ron pulled out his wand, too, but Harry pulled him away.
Ron didn't need to spend the whole of Charms belching slugs.
The diary, however, was as clean as it had been before the ink bottle had smashed all over it.
He tried to point this out to Ron, but Ron was having trouble with his wand again; large purple bubbles were blossoming out of the end, and he wasn't much interested in anything else.
Harry went to bed before anyone else in his dormitory that night.
This was partly because he didn't think he could stand Fred and George singing, "His eyes are as green as a fresh pickled toad" one more time, and partly because he wanted to examine Riddle's diary again, and knew that Ron thought he was wasting his time.
Harry sat on his four-poster and flicked through the blank pages, not one of which had a trace of scarlet ink on it.
Then he pulled a new bottle out of his bedside cabinet, dipped his quill into it, and dropped a blot onto the first page of the diary.
The ink shone brightly on the paper for a second and then, as though it was being sucked into the page, vanished.
Excited, Harry loaded up his quill a second time and wrote, "My name is Harry Potter."
The words shone momentarily on the page and they, too, sank without trace.
Then, at last, something happened.
Oozing back out of the page, in his very own ink, came words Harry had never written.
My name is Tom Riddle.
How did you come by my diary?"
These words, too, faded away, but not before Harry had started to scribble back.
"Someone tried to flush it down a toilet."
He waited eagerly for Riddle's reply.
"What do you mean?"
Harry scrawled, blotting the page in his excitement.
Things that were covered up.
"That's where I am now," Harry wrote quickly.
Do you know anything about the Chamber of Secrets?"
His heart was hammering.
Riddle's reply came quickly, his writing becoming untidier, as though he was hurrying to tell all he knew.
In my day, they told us it was a legend, that it did not exist.
But this was a lie.
A story was given out that the girl had died in a freak accident.
They gave me a nice, shiny, engraved trophy for my trouble and warned me to keep my mouth shut.
But I knew it could happen again.
Harry nearly upset his ink bottle in his hurry to write back.
There have been three attacks and no one seems to know who's behind them.
Who was it last time?
Harry hesitated, his quill suspended over the diary.
What did Riddle mean?
How could he be taken inside somebody else's memory?
He glanced nervously at the door to the dormitory, which was growing dark.
When he looked back at the diary, he saw fresh words forming.
"Let me show you."
Harry paused for a fraction of a second and then wrote two letters.
"OK." The pages of the diary began to blow as though caught in a high wind, stopping halfway through the month of June.
Mouth hanging open, Harry saw that the little square for June thirteenth seemed to have turned into a miniscule television screen.
His hands trembling slightly, he raised the book to press his eye against the little window, and before he knew what was happening, he was tilting forward; the window was widening, he felt his body leave his bed, and he was pitched headfirst through the opening in the page, into a whirl of color and shadow.
He felt his feet hit solid ground, and stood, shaking, as the blurred shapes around him came suddenly into focus.
He knew immediately where he was.
This circular room with the sleeping portraits was Dumbledore's office—but it wasn't Dumbledore who was sitting behind the desk.
A wizened, frail-looking wizard, bald except for a few wisps of white hair, was reading a letter by candlelight.
Harry had never seen this man before.
"I'm sorry," he said shakily.
He continued to read, frowning slightly.
Harry drew nearer to his desk and stammered, "Er—I'll just go, shall I?"
Still the wizard ignored him.
He didn't seem even to have heard him.
Thinking that the wizard might be deaf, Harry raised his voice.
The wizard folded up the letter with a sigh, stood up, walked past Harry without glancing at him, and went to draw the curtains at his window.
The sky outside the window was ruby-red; it seemed to be sunset.
The wizard went back to the desk, sat down, and twiddled his thumbs, watching the door.
Harry looked around the office.
No Fawkes the phoenix—no whirring silver contraptions.
This was Hogwarts as Riddle had known it, meaning that this unknown wizard was Headmaster, not Dumbledore, and he, Harry, was little more than a phantom, completely invisible to the people of fifty years ago.
There was a knock on the office door.
"Enter," said the old wizard in a feeble voice.
A boy of about sixteen entered, taking off his pointed hat.
A silver prefect's badge was glinting on his chest.
He was much taller than Harry, but he, too, had jet-black hair.
"Ah, Riddle," said the Headmaster.
He looked nervous.
"I've just been reading the letter you sent me."
"Oh," said Riddle.
He sat down, gripping his hands together very tightly.
Surely you want to go home for the holidays?"
"No," said Riddle at once.
"Yes, sir," said Riddle, reddening slightly.
"You are Muggle-born?"
"Half-blood, sir," said Riddle.
"Muggle father, witch mother."
"And are both your parents—?"
Dipper clucked his tongue sympathetically.
"The thing is, Tom," he sighed, "Special arrangements might have been made for you, but in the current circumstances…" "You mean all these attacks, sir?"
"Precisely," said the headmaster.
Particularly in light of the recent tragedy… the death of that poor little girl… You will be safer by far at your orphanage.
As a matter of fact, the Ministry of Magic is even now talking about closing the school.
"Sir—if the person was caught—if it all stopped—" "What do you mean?"
"Riddle, do you mean you know something about these attacks?"
"No, sir," said Riddle quickly.
But Harry was sure it was the same sort of "no" that he himself had given Dumbledore.
"You may go, Tom…" Riddle slid off his chair and slouched out of the room.
Harry followed him.
Down the moving spiral staircase they went, emerging next to the gargoyle in the darkening corridor.
Riddle stopped, and so did Harry, watching him.
Harry could tell that Riddle was doing some serious thinking.
He was biting his lip, his forehead furrowed.
Then, as though he had suddenly reached a decision, he hurried off, Harry gliding noiselessly behind him.
They didn't see another person until they reached the entrance hall, when a tall wizard with long, sweeping auburn hair and a beard called to Riddle from the marble staircase.
"What are you doing, wandering around this late, Tom?"
Harry gaped at the wizard.
He was none other than a fifty-year-younger Dumbledore.
"I had to see the headmaster, sir," said Riddle.
"Well, hurry off to bed," said Dumbledore, giving Riddle exactly the kind of penetrating stare Harry knew so well.
Riddle watched him walk out of sight and then, moving quickly, headed straight down the stone steps to the dungeons, with Harry in hot pursuit.
The torches hadn't been lit, and when Riddle pushed the door almost closed, Harry could only just see him, standing stock-still by the door, watching the passage outside.
It felt to Harry that they were there for at least an hour.
All he could see was the figure of Riddle at the door, staring through the crack, waiting like a statue.
And just when Harry had stopped feeling expectant and tense and started wishing he could return to the present, he heard something move beyond the door.
Someone was creeping along the passage.
He heard whoever it was pass the dungeon where he and Riddle were hidden.
Riddle, quiet as a shadow, edged through the door and followed, Harry tiptoeing behind him, forgetting that he couldn't be heard.
For perhaps five minutes they followed the footsteps, until Riddle stopped suddenly, his head inclined in the direction of new noises.
Harry heard a door creak open, and then someone speaking in a hoarse whisper.
Riddle suddenly jumped around the corner.
Harry stepped out behind him.
He could see the dark outline of a huge boy who was crouching in front of an open door, a very large box next to it.
The boy slammed the door shut and stood up.
"What yer doin' down here, Tom?"
Riddle stepped closer.
"It's all over," he said.
But monsters don't make good pets.
From behind him, Harry could hear a funny rustling and clicking.
"Stand aside," said Riddle, drawing out his wand.
His spell lit the corridor with a sudden flaming light.
The door behind the large boy flew open with such force it knocked him into the wall opposite.
A vast, low-slung, hairy body and a tangle of black legs; a gleam of many eyes and a pair of razor-sharp pincers—Riddle raised his wand again, but he was too late.
The thing bowled him over as it scuttled away, tearing up the corridor and out of sight.
The scene whirled, the darkness became complete; Harry felt himself falling and, with a crash, he landed spread-eagled on his four-poster in the Gryffindor dormitory, Riddle's diary lying open on his stomach.
Before he had had time to regain his breath, the dormitory door opened and Ron came in.
"There you are," he said.
Harry sat up.
He was sweating and shaking.
Chapter XIV Cornelius Fudge.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione had always known that Hagrid had an unfortunate liking for large and monstrous creatures.
And if, as a boy, Hagrid had heard that a monster was hidden somewhere in the castle, Harry was sure he'd have gone to any lengths for a glimpse of it.
He'd probably thought it was a shame that the monster had been cooped up so long, and thought it deserved the chance to stretch its many legs; Harry could just imagine the thirteen-year-old Hagrid trying to fit a leash and collar on it.
But he was equally certain that Hagrid would never have meant to kill anybody.
Harry half wished he hadn't found out how to work Riddle's diary.
Again and again Ron and Hermione made him recount what he'd seen, until he was heartily sick of telling them and sick of the long, circular conversations that followed.
"Riddle might have got the wrong person," said Hermione.
"Maybe it was some other monster that was attacking people…" "How many monsters d'you think this place can hold?"
Ron asked dully.
"We always knew Hagrid had been expelled," said Harry miserably.
Ron tried a different tack.
"Riddle does sound like Percy—who asked him to squeal on Hagrid, anyway?"
"But the monster had killed someone, Ron," said Hermione.
"And Riddle was going to go back to some Muggle orphanage if they closed Hogwarts," said Harry.
"I don't blame him for wanting to stay here…" "You met Hagrid down Knockturn Alley, didn't you, Harry?"
"He was buying a Flesh-Eating Slug Repellent," said Harry quickly.
The three of them fell silent.
After a long pause, Hermione voiced the knottiest question of all in a hesitant voice.
"Do you think we should go and ask Hagrid about it all?"
"That'd be a cheerful visit," said Ron.
It was now nearly four months since Justin and Nearly Headless Nick had been Petrified, and nearly everybody seemed to think that the attacker, whoever it was, had retired for good.
This made Professor Sprout very happy.
"The moment they start trying to move into each other's pots, we'll know they're fully mature," she told Harry.
"Then we'll be able to revive those poor people in the hospital wing."
The second years were given something new to think about during their Easter holidays.
The time had come to choose their subjects for the third year, a matter that Hermione, at least, took very seriously.
"It could affect our whole future," she told Harry and Ron as they pored over lists of new subjects, marking them with checks.
"I just want to give up Potions," said Harry.
"We can't," said Ron gloomily.
"We keep all our old subjects, or I'd've ditched Defense Against the Dark Arts."
"But that's very important!"
"Not the way Lockhart teaches it," said Ron.
"I haven't learned anything from him except not to set pixies loose."
Dean Thomas, who, like Harry, had grown up with Muggles, ended up closing his eyes and jabbing his wand at the list, then picking the subjects it landed on.
Hermione took nobody's advice but signed up for everything.
Harry smiled grimly to himself at the thought of what Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia would say if he tried to discuss his career in wizardry with them.
Not that he didn't get any guidance: Percy Weasley was eager to share his experience.
My brother Charlie was always more of an outdoor type, so he went for Care of Magical Creatures.
In the end, he chose the same new subjects as Ron, feeling that if he was lousy at them, at least he'd have someone friendly to help him.
Gryffindor's next Quidditch match would be against Hufflepuff.
Wood was insisting on team practices every night after dinner, so that Harry barely had time for anything but Quidditch and homework.
However, the training sessions were getting better, or at least drier, and the evening before Saturday's match he went up to his dormitory to drop off his broomstick feeling Gryffindor's chances for the Quidditch cup had never been better.
But his cheerful mood didn't last long.
"Harry—I don't know who did it—I just found—" Watching Harry fearfully, Neville pushed open the door.
The contents of Harry's trunk had been thrown everywhere.
His cloak lay ripped on the floor.
The bedclothes had been pulled off his four-poster and the drawer had been pulled out of his bedside cabinet, the contents strewn over the mattress.
Harry walked over to the bed, open-mouthed, treading on a few loose pages of Travels with Trolls.
As he and Neville pulled the blankets back onto his bed, Ron, Dean, and Seamus came in.
Dean swore loudly.
"What happened, Harry?"
"No idea," said Harry.
But Ron was examining Harry's robes.
All the pockets were hanging out.
"Someone's been looking for something," said Ron.
"Is there anything missing?"
Harry started to pick up all his things and throw them into his trunk.
It was only as he threw the last of the Lockhart books back into it that he realized what wasn't there.
"Riddle's diary's gone," he said in an undertone to Ron.
Harry jerked his head toward the dormitory door and Ron followed him out.
They hurried down to the Gryffindor common room, which was half-empty, and joined Hermione, who was sitting alone, reading a book called Ancient Runes Made Easy.
Hermione looked aghast at the news.
"But—only a Gryffindor could have stolen—nobody else knows our password—" "Exactly," said Harry.
They woke the next day to brilliant sunshine and a light, refreshing breeze.
"Perfect Quidditch conditions!"
"Harry, buck up there, you need a decent breakfast."
Harry had been staring down the packed Gryffindor table, wondering if the new owner of Riddle's diary was right in front of his eyes.
Hermione had been urging him to report the robbery, but Harry didn't like the idea.
He'd have to tell a teacher all about the diary, and how many people knew why Hagrid had been expelled fifty years ago?
He had just set foot on the marble staircase when he heard it yet again: "Kill this time… let me rip… tear…" He shouted aloud and Ron and Hermione both jumped away from him in alarm.
"I just heard it again—didn't you?"
Ron shook his head, wide-eyed.
Hermione, however, clapped a hand to her forehead.
I've got to go to the library!"
And she sprinted away, up the stairs.
"What does she understand?"
"Loads more than I do," said Ron, shaking his head.
"But why's she got to go to the library?"
"Because that's what Hermione does," said Ron, shrugging.
"When in doubt, go to the library."
Harry stood, irresolute, trying to catch the voice again, but people were now emerging from the Great Hall behind him, talking loudly, exiting through the front doors on their way to the Quidditch pitch.
"You'd better get moving," said Ron.
The teams walked onto the field to tumultuous applause.
Oliver Wood took off for a warm-up flight around the goal posts; Madam Hooch released the balls.
Harry was just mounting his broom when Professor McGonagall came half marching, half running across the pitch, carrying an enormous purple megaphone.
Harry's heart dropped like a stone.
"This match has been cancelled," Professor McGonagall called through the megaphone, addressing the packed stadium.
There were boos and shouts.
Oliver Wood, looking devastated, landed and ran toward Professor McGonagall without getting off his broomstick.
As quickly as you can, please!"
Then she lowered the megaphone and beckoned Harry over to her.
To Harry's surprise, Professor McGonagall didn't object.
Harry and Ron followed Professor McGonagall back into the school and up the marble staircase.
But they weren't taken to anybody's office this time.
"This will be a bit of a shock," said Professor McGonagall in a surprisingly gentle voice as they approached the infirmary.
"There has been another attack… another double attack."
Harry's insides did a horrible somersault.
Professor McGonagall pushed the door open and he and Ron entered.
Harry recognized her as the Ravenclaw they'd accidentally asked for directions to the Slytherin common room.
And on the bed next to her was— "Hermione!"
Hermione lay utterly still, her eyes open and glassy.
"They were found near the library," said Professor McGonagall.
Harry and Ron shook their heads, both staring at Hermione.
"I will escort you back to Gryffindor Tower," said Professor McGonagall heavily.
"I need to address the students in any case."
No student is to leave the dormitories after that time.
You will be escorted to each lesson by a teacher.
No student is to use the bathroom unaccompanied by a teacher.
All further Quidditch training and matches are to be postponed.
It is likely that the school will be closed unless the culprit behind these attacks is caught.
Isn't it obvious all this stuffs coming from Slytherin?
Percy Weasley was sitting in a chair behind Lee, but for once he didn't seem keen to make his views heard.
He was looking pale and stunned.
"Percy's in shock," George told Harry quietly.
But Harry was only half-listening.
He didn't seem to be able to get rid of the picture of Hermione, lying on the hospital bed as though carved out of stone.
Tom Riddle had turned Hagrid in because he was faced with the prospect of a Muggle orphanage if the school closed.
Harry now knew exactly how he had felt.
"What're we going to do?"
"We've got to go and talk to him," said Harry, making up his mind.
"I can't believe it's him this time, but if he set the monster loose last time he'll know how to get inside the Chamber of Secrets, and that's a start."
"But McGonagall said we've got to stay in our tower unless we're in class—" "I think," said Harry, more quietly still, "it's time to get my dad's old cloak out again."
Harry had inherited just one thing from his father: a long and silvery Invisibility Cloak.
It was their only chance of sneaking out of the school to visit Hagrid without anyone knowing about it.
They went to bed at the usual time, waited until Neville, Dean, and Seamus had stopped discussing the Chamber of Secrets and finally fallen asleep, then got up, dressed again, and threw the cloak over themselves.
The journey through the dark and deserted castle corridors wasn't enjoyable.
Harry, who had wandered the castle at night several times before, had never seen it so crowded after sunset.
Teachers, prefects, and ghosts were marching the corridors in pairs, staring around for any unusual activity.
It was with relief that they reached the oak front doors and eased them open.
It was a clear, starry night.
They hurried toward the lit windows of Hagrid's house and pulled off the cloak only when they were right outside his front door.
Seconds after they had knocked, Hagrid flung it open.
They found themselves face-to-face with him aiming a crossbow at them.
"Oh," he said, lowering the weapon and staring at them.
"What're you two doin' here?"
"What's that for?"
"Nothin'—nothin'—" Hagrid muttered.
He nearly extinguished the fire, spilling water from the kettle on it, and then smashed the teapot with a nervous jerk of his massive hand.
"Are you okay, Hagrid?"
"Did you hear about Hermione?"
He poured them both large mugs of boiling water (he had forgotten to add tea bags) and was just putting a slab of fruitcake on a plate when there was a loud knock on the door.
Hagrid dropped the fruitcake.
Harry and Ron exchanged panic-stricken looks, then threw the Invisibility Cloak back over themselves and retreated into a corner.
Hagrid checked that they were hidden, seized his crossbow, and flung open his door once more.
"Good evening, Hagrid."
It was Dumbledore.
He entered, looking deadly serious, and was followed by a second, very odd-looking man.
The stranger had rumpled gray hair and an anxious expression, and was wearing a strange mixture of clothes: a pinstriped suit, a scarlet tie, a long black cloak, and pointed purple boots.
Under his arm he carried a lime-green bowler.
"That's Dad's boss!"
"Cornelius Fudge, the Minister of Magic!"
Harry elbowed Ron hard to make him shut up.
Hagrid had gone pale and sweaty.
He dropped into one of his chairs and looked from Dumbledore to Cornelius Fudge.
"Bad business, Hagrid," said Fudge in rather clipped tones.
Had to come.
Things've gone far enough.
"I never," said Hagrid, looking imploringly at Dumbledore.
"You know I never, Professor Dumbledore, sir—" "I want it understood, Cornelius, that Hagrid has my full confidence," said Dumbledore, frowning at Fudge.
"Look, Albus," said Fudge, uncomfortably.
His blue eyes were full of a fire Harry had never seen before.
"Look at it from my point of view," said Fudge, fidgeting with his bowler.
Got to be seen to be doing something.
If it turns out it wasn't Hagrid, he'll be back and no more said.
But I've got to take him.
"Take me where?"
"For a short stretch only," said Fudge, not meeting Hagrid's eyes.
Before Fudge could answer, there was another loud rap on the door.
Dumbledore answered it.
It was Harry's turn for an elbow in the ribs; he'd let out an audible gasp.
Mr. Lucius Malfoy strode into Hagrid's hut, swathed in a long black traveling cloak, smiling a cold and satisfied smile.
Fang started to growl.
"Already here, Fudge," he said approvingly.
"Good, good…" "What're you doin' here?"
"I simply called at the school and was told that the headmaster was here."
"And what exactly did you want with me, Lucius?"
He spoke politely, but the fire was still blazing in his blue eyes.
This is an Order of Suspension—you'll find all twelve signatures on it.
I'm afraid we feel you're losing your touch.
How many attacks have there been now?
Two more this afternoon, wasn't it?
"Oh, now, see here, Lucius," said Fudge, looking alarmed, "Dumbledore suspended—no, no—last thing we want just now…" "The appointment—or suspension—of the headmaster is a matter for the governors, Fudge," said Mr. Malfoy smoothly.
"And as Dumbledore has failed to stop these attacks—" "See here, Malfoy, if Dumbledore can't stop them," said Fudge, whose upper lip was sweating now, "I mean to say, who can?"
"That remains to be seen," said Mr. Malfoy with a nasty smile.
"But as all twelve of us have voted—" Hagrid leapt to his feet, his shaggy black head grazing the ceiling.
"Dear, dear, you know, that temper of yours will lead you into trouble one of these days, Hagrid," said Mr. Malfoy.
There'll be killin' next!"
"Calm yourself, Hagrid," said Dumbledore sharply.
He looked at Lucius Malfoy.
"If the governors want my removal, Lucius, I shall of course step aside—" "But—" stuttered Fudge.
Dumbledore had not taken his bright blue eyes off Lucius Malfoy's cold gray ones.
For a second, Harry was almost sure Dumbledore's eyes flickered towards the corner where he and Ron stood hidden.
"Admirable sentiments," said Malfoy, bowing.
He strode to the cabin door, opened it and bowed Dumbledore out.
That'd lead 'em right!
Fudge stared at him in amazement.
"All right, I'm comin'," said Hagrid, pulling on his moleskin overcoat.
The door banged shut and Ron pulled the Invisibility Cloak off.
"We're in trouble now," he said hoarsely.
They might as well close the school tonight.
Fang started howling, scratching at the closed door.
Summer was creeping over the grounds around the castle; sky and lake alike turned periwinkle blue and flowers large as cabbages burst into bloom in the greenhouses.
But with no Hagrid visible from the castle windows, striding the grounds with Fang at his heels, the scene didn't look right to Harry; no better, in fact, than the inside of the castle, where things were so horribly wrong.
Harry and Ron had tried to visit Hermione, but visitors were now barred from the hospital wing.
"No, I'm sorry, there's every chance the attacker might come back to finish these people off…" With Dumbledore gone, fear had spread as never before, so that the sun warming the castle walls outside seemed to stop at the mullioned windows.
There was barely a face to be seen in the school that didn't look worried and tense, and any laughter that rang through the corridors sounded shrill and unnatural and was quickly stifled.
Harry constantly repeated Dumbledore's final words to himself, "I will only truly have left this school when none here are loyal to me… Help will always be given at Hogwarts to those who ask for it."
But what good were these words?
Who exactly were they supposed to ask for help, when everyone was just as confused and scared as they were?
Hagrid's hint about the spiders was far easier to understand the trouble was, there didn't seem to be a single spider left in the castle to follow.
Harry looked everywhere he went, helped (rather reluctantly) by Ron.
Most of their fellow students seemed glad that they were being shepherded from class to class by teachers, but Harry found it very irksome.
One person, however, seemed to be thoroughly enjoying the atmosphere of terror and suspicion.
"I always thought Father might be the one who got rid of Dumbledore," he said, not troubling to keep his voice down.
Maybe we'll get a decent headmaster now.
Someone who won't want the Chamber of Secrets closed.
"Sir," said Malfoy loudly.
"Sir, why don't you apply for the headmaster's job?"
"Yeah, right," said Malfoy, smirking.
"Let me at him," Ron growled as Harry and Dean hung onto his arms.
The Herbology class was very subdued; there were now two missing from their number, Justin and Hermione.
Harry went to tip an armful of withered stalks onto the compost heap and found himself face-to-face with Ernie Macmillan.
I know you'd never attack Hermione Granger, and I apologize for all the stuff I said.
We're all in the same boat now, and, well—" "He held out a pudgy hand, and Harry shook it.
"That's clever of you," said Ron, who didn't seem to have forgiven Ernie as readily as Harry.
"Do you think it's Malfoy, Harry?"
"No," said Harry, so firmly that Ernie and Hannah stared.
A second later, Harry spotted something.
Several large spiders were scuttling over the ground on the other side of the glass, moving in an unnaturally straight line as though taking the shortest route to a prearranged meeting.
Harry hit Ron over the hand with his pruning shears.
"Oh, yeah," said Ron, trying, and failing, to look pleased.
"But we can't follow them now—" Ernie and Hannah were listening curiously.
Harry's eyes narrowed as he focused on the spiders.
If they pursued their fixed course, there could be no doubt about where they would end up.
"Looks like they're heading for the Forbidden Forest…" And Ron looked even unhappier about that.
At the end of the lesson Professor Sprout escorted the class to their Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson.
"We'll have to use the Invisibility Cloak again," Harry told Ron.
"Right," said Ron, who was twirling his wand nervously in his fingers.
"Er— aren't there—aren't there supposed to be werewolves in the forest?"
Harry had entered it only once and had hoped never to do so again.
Lockhart bounded into the room and the class stared at him.
Every other teacher in the place was looking grimmer than usual, but Lockhart appeared nothing short of buoyant.
"Come now," he cried, beaming around him.
"Why all these long faces?"
People swapped exasperated looks, but nobody answered.
"My dear young man, the Minister of Magic wouldn't have taken Hagrid if he hadn't been one hundred percent sure that he was guilty," said Lockhart, in the tone of someone explaining that one and one made two.
"Oh, yes he would," said Ron, even more loudly than Dean.
"I flatter myself I know a touch more about Hagrid's arrest than you do, Mr. Weasley," said Lockhart in a self-satisfied tone.
"We weren't there, remember?"
Ron read the message, swallowed hard, and looked sideways at the empty seat usually filled by Hermione.
The sight seemed to stiffen his resolve, and he nodded.
They also had plenty to talk about, with the result that the common room often didn't empty until past midnight.
Harry went to get the Invisibility Cloak out of his trunk right after dinner, and spent the evening sitting on it, waiting for the room to clear.
Fred and George challenged Harry and Ron to a few games of Exploding Snap, and Ginny sat watching them, very subdued in Hermione's usual chair.
Harry and Ron kept losing on purpose, trying to finish the games quickly, but even so, it was well past midnight when Fred, George, and Ginny finally went to bed.
Harry and Ron waited for the distant sounds of two dormitory doors closing before seizing the cloak, throwing it over themselves, and climbing through the portrait hole.
It was another difficult journey through the castle, dodging all the teachers.
Those spiders might not've been going there at all.
They reached Hagrid's house, sad and sorry-looking with its blank windows.
When Harry pushed the door open, Fang went mad with joy at the sight of them.
Worried he might wake everyone at the castle with his deep, booming barks, they hastily fed him treacle fudge from a tin on the mantelpiece, which glued his teeth together.
Harry left the Invisibility Cloak on Hagrid's table.
There would be no need for it in the pitch-dark forest.
"C'mon, Fang, we're going for a walk," said Harry, patting his leg, and Fang bounded happily out of the house behind them, dashed to the edge of the forest, and lifted his leg against a large sycamore tree.
"Good thinking," said Ron.
"I'd light mine, too, but you know—it'd probably blow up or something…" Harry tapped Ron on the shoulder, pointing at the grass.
By the glow of Harry's wand, they followed the steady trickle of spiders moving along the path.
They walked behind them for about twenty minutes, not speaking, listening hard for noises other than breaking twigs and rustling leaves.
Then, when the trees had become thicker than ever, so that the stars overhead were no longer visible, and Harry's wand shone alone in the sea of dark, they saw their spider guides leaving the path.
Harry paused, trying to see where the spiders were going, but everything outside his little sphere of light was pitch-black.
He had never been this deep into the forest before.
He could vividly remember Hagrid advising him not to leave the forest path last time he'd been in here.
But Hagrid was miles away now, probably sitting in a cell in Azkaban, and he had also said to follow the spiders.
"What d'you reckon?"
Harry said to Ron, whose eyes he could just make out, reflecting the light from his wand.
"We've come this far," said Ron.
So they followed the darting shadows of the spiders into the trees.
They couldn't move very quickly now; there were tree roots and stumps in their way, barely visible in the near blackness.
Harry could feel Fang's hot breath on his hand.
They walked for what seemed like at least half an hour, their robes snagging on low-slung branches and brambles.
After a while, they noticed that the ground seemed to be sloping downward, though the trees were as thick as ever.
Then Fang suddenly let loose a great, echoing bark, making both Harry and Ron jump out of their skins.
"There's something moving over there," Harry breathed.
"Listen… sounds like something big…" They listened.
Some distance to their right, the something big was snapping branches as it carved a path through the trees.
"Oh, no," said Ron.
"Oh, no, oh, no, oh—" "Shut up," said Harry frantically.
"It'll hear you."
"It's already heard Fang!"
The darkness seemed to be pressing on their eyeballs as they stood, terrified, waiting.
There was a strange rumbling noise and then silence.
"What d'you think it's doing?"
"Probably getting ready to pounce," said Ron.
They waited, shivering, hardly daring to move.
"Dunno—" Then, to their right, came a sudden blaze of light, so bright in the darkness that both of them flung up their hands to shield their eyes.
Fang yelped and tried to run, but got lodged in a tangle of thorns and yelped even louder.
Harry blundered after Ron toward the light, stumbling and tripping, and a moment later they had emerged into a clearing.
Mr. Weasley's car was standing, empty, in the middle of a circle of thick trees under a roof of dense branches, its headlights ablaze.
"It's been here all the time!"
Apparently it had taken to trundling around the forest on its own.
Fang didn't seem at all keen on it; he kept close to Harry, who could feel him quivering.
His breathing slowing down again, Harry stuffed his wand back into his robes.
"And we thought it was going to attack us!"
"I wondered where it had gone!"
Harry squinted around on the floodlit ground for signs of more spiders, but they had all scuttled away from the glare of the headlights.
"We've lost the trail," he said.
"C'mon, let's go and find them."
Ron didn't speak.
He didn't move.
His eyes were fixed on a point some ten feet above the forest floor, right behind Harry.
His face was livid with terror.
Harry didn't even have time to turn around.
Struggling, terrified, he heard more clicking, and saw Ron's legs leave the ground, too, heard Fang whimpering and howling—next moment, he was being swept away into the dark trees.
Head hanging, Harry saw that what had hold of him was marching on six immensely long, hairy legs, the front two clutching him tightly below a pair of shining black pincers.
Behind him, he could hear another of the creatures, no doubt carrying Ron.
They were moving into the very heart of the forest.
Harry could hear Fang fighting to free himself from a third monster, whining loudly, but Harry couldn't have yelled even if he had wanted to; he seemed to have left his voice back with the car in the clearing.
He never knew how long he was in the creature's clutches; he only knew that the darkness suddenly lifted enough for him to see that the leaf-strewn ground was now swarming with spiders.
Craning his neck sideways, he realized that they had reached the ridge of a vast hollow, a hollow that had been cleared of trees, so that the stars shone brightly onto the worst scene he had ever laid eyes on.
Not tiny spiders like those surging over the leaves below.
Spiders the size of carthorses, eight-eyed, eight-legged, black, hairy, gigantic.
The massive specimen that was carrying Harry made its way down the steep slope toward a misty, domed web in the very center of the hollow, while its fellows closed in all around it, clicking their pincers excitedly at the sight of its load.
Harry fell to the ground on all fours as the spider released him.
Ron and Fang thudded down next to him.
Ron looked exactly like Harry felt.
His mouth was stretched wide in a kind of silent scream and his eyes were popping.
Harry suddenly realized that the spider that had dropped him was saying something.
It had been hard to tell, because he clicked his pincers with every word he spoke.
And from the middle of the misty, domed web, a spider the size of a small elephant emerged, very slowly.
He was blind.
"What is it?"
"Men," clicked the spider who had caught Harry.
"Is it Hagrid?"
"Strangers," clicked the spider who had brought Ron.
"I was sleeping."
"We're friends of Hagrid's," Harry shouted.
His heart seemed to have left his chest to pound in his throat.
Click, click, click went the pincers of the spiders all around the hollow.
"Hagrid has never sent men into our hollow before," he said slowly.
"Hagrid's in trouble," said Harry, breathing very fast.
"That's why we've come."
"But why has he sent you?"
Harry thought of getting to his feet but decided against it; he didn't think his legs would support him.
So he spoke from the ground, as calmly as he could.
I remember it well.
That's why they made him leave the school.
They believed that I was the monster that dwells in what they call the Chamber of Secrets.
"And you… you didn't come from the Chamber of Secrets?"
I come from a distant land.
A traveler gave me to Hagrid when I was an egg.
Hagrid was only a boy, but he cared for me, hidden in a cupboard in the castle, feeding me on scraps from the table.
Hagrid is my good friend, and a good man.
When I was discovered, and blamed for the death of a girl, he protected me.
I have lived here in the forest ever since, where Hagrid still visits me.
"So you never—never attacked anyone?"
"Never," croaked the old spider.
I never saw any part of the castle but the cupboard in which I grew up.
"Because whatever it is, it's back and attacking people again—" His words were drowned by a loud outbreak of clicking and the rustling of many long legs shifting angrily; large black shapes shifted all around him.
"What is it?"
More loud clicking, more rustling; the spiders seemed to be closing in.
"We do not speak of it!"
Harry didn't want to press the subject, not with the spiders pressing closer on all sides.
He was backing slowly into his domed web, but his fellow spiders continued to inch slowly toward Harry and Ron.
But I cannot deny them fresh meat, when it wanders so willingly into our midst.
Harry spun around.
Feet away, towering above him, was a solid wall of spiders, clicking, their many eyes gleaming in their ugly black heads.
Even as he reached for his wand, Harry knew it was no good, there were too many of them, but as he tried to stand, ready to die fighting, a loud, long note sounded, and a blaze of light flamed through the hollow.
Mr. Weasley's car was thundering down the slope, headlights glaring, its horn screeching, knocking spiders aside; several were thrown onto their backs, their endless legs waving in the air.
The car screeched to a halt in front of Harry and Ron and the doors flew open.
They sped up the slope, out of the hollow, and they were soon crashing through the forest, branches whipping the windows as the car wound its way cleverly through the widest gaps, following a path it obviously knew.
Harry looked sideways at Ron.
His mouth was still open in the silent scream, but his eyes weren't popping anymore.
"Are you okay?"
Ron stared straight ahead, unable to speak.
They smashed their way through the undergrowth, Fang howling loudly in the back seat, and Harry saw the side mirror snap off as they squeezed past a large oak.
They had reached the edge of the forest.
Fang flung himself at the window in his anxiety to get out, and when Harry opened the door, he shot off through the trees to Hagrid's house, tail between his legs.
Harry got out too, and after a minute or so, Ron seemed to regain the feeling in his limbs and followed, still stiff-necked and staring.
Harry gave the car a grateful pat as it reversed back into the forest and disappeared from view.
Harry went back into Hagrid's cabin to get the Invisibility Cloak.
Fang was trembling under a blanket in his basket.
When Harry got outside again, he found Ron being violently sick in the pumpkin patch.
"Follow the spiders," said Ron weakly, wiping his mouth on his sleeve.
"That's exactly Hagrid's problem!"
A cell in Azkaban!"
He was shivering uncontrollably now.
What have we found out, I'd like to know?"
"That Hagrid never opened the Chamber of Secrets," said Harry, throwing the cloak over Ron and prodding him in the arm to make him walk.
"He was innocent."
Ron gave a loud snort.
As the castle loomed nearer Harry twitched the cloak to make sure their feet were hidden, then pushed the creaking front doors ajar.
They walked carefully back across the entrance hall and up the marble staircase, holding their breath as they passed corridors where watchful sentries were walking.
They took off the cloak and climbed the winding stair to their dormitory.
Ron fell onto his bed without bothering to get undressed.
Harry, however, didn't feel very sleepy.
The creature that was lurking somewhere in the castle, he thought, sounded like a sort of monster Voldemort—even other monsters didn't want to name it.
But he and Ron were no closer to finding out what it was, or how it Petrified its victims.
Even Hagrid had never known what was in the Chamber of Secrets.
Harry swung his legs up onto his bed and leaned back against his pillows, watching the moon glinting at him through the tower window.
He couldn't see what else they could do.
They had hit dead ends everywhere.
Riddle had caught the wrong person, the Heir of Slytherin had got off, and no one could tell whether it was the same person, or a different one, who had opened the Chamber this time.
There was nobody else to ask.
He was becoming drowsy when what seemed like their very last hope occurred to him, and he suddenly sat bolt upright.
"Ron," he hissed through the dark, "Ron—" Ron woke with a yelp like Fang's, stared wildly around, and saw Harry.
What if she's still there?"
Ron rubbed his eyes, frowning through the moonlight.
And then he understood, too.
"You don't think—not Moaning Myrtle?"
Chapter XVI The Chamber of Secrets.
"All those times we were in that bathroom, and she was just three toilets away," said Ron bitterly at breakfast next day, "and we could've asked her, and now…" It had been hard enough trying to look for spiders.
Escaping their teachers long enough to sneak into a girls' bathroom, the girls' bathroom, moreover, right next to the scene of the first attack, was going to be almost impossible.
But something happened in their first lesson, Transfiguration, that drove the Chamber of Secrets out of their minds for the first time in weeks.
Ten minutes into the class, Professor McGonagall told them that their exams would start on the first of June, one week from today.
"We're still getting exams?"
Professor McGonagall restored it with a wave of her own wand, and turned, frowning, to Seamus.
"The whole point of keeping the school open at this time is for you to receive your education," she said sternly.
"The exams will therefore take place as usual, and I trust you are all studying hard."
It had never occurred to Harry that there would be exams with the castle in this state.
There was a great deal of mutinous muttering around the room, which made Professor McGonagall scowl even more darkly.
"Professor Dumbledore's instructions were to keep the school running as normally as possible," she said.
"And that, I need hardly point out, means finding out how much you have learned this year."
Harry looked down at the pair of white rabbits he was supposed to be turning into slippers.
What had he learned so far this year?
He couldn't seem to think of anything that would be useful in an exam.
Ron looked as though he'd just been told he had to go and live in the Forbidden Forest.
"Can you imagine me taking exams with this?"
Three days before their first exam, Professor McGonagall made another announcement at breakfast.
"I have good news," she said, and the Great Hall, instead of falling silent, erupted.
"Dumbledore's coming back!"
"You've caught the Heir of Slytherin!"
"Quidditch matches are back on!"
Tonight, we will be able to revive those people who have been Petrified.
I need hardly remind you all that one of them may well be able to tell us who, or what, attacked them.
There was an explosion of cheering.
Harry looked over at the Slytherin table and wasn't at all surprised to see that Draco Malfoy hadn't joined in.
Ron, however, was looking happier than he'd looked in days.
"It won't matter that we never asked Myrtle, then!"
She hasn't studied.
Just then, Ginny Weasley came over and sat down next to Ron.
She looked tense and nervous, and Harry noticed that her hands were twisting in her lap.
Ginny didn't say anything, but glanced up and down the Gryffindor table with a scared look on her face that reminded Harry of someone, though he couldn't think who.
"Spit it out," said Ron, watching her.
Harry suddenly realized who Ginny looked like.
"I've got to tell you something," Ginny mumbled, carefully not looking at Harry.
"What is it?"
Ginny looked as though she couldn't find the right words.
Ginny opened her mouth, but no sound came out.
Harry leaned forward and spoke quietly, so that only Ginny and Ron could hear him.
Have you seen something?
Someone acting oddly?"
Ginny drew a deep breath and, at that precise moment, Percy Weasley appeared, looking tired and wan.
Ginny jumped up as though her chair had just been electrified, gave Percy a fleeting, frightened look, and scampered away.
Percy sat down and grabbed a mug from the center of the table.
"She was just about to tell us something important!"
Halfway through a gulp of tea, Percy choked.
"What sort of thing?"
"I just asked her if she'd seen anything odd, and she started to say…" "Oh—that—that's nothing to do with the Chamber of Secrets," said Percy at once.
"How do you know?"
I must say, I did think she'd keep her word.
"What were you doing, Percy?"
"Go on, tell us, we won't laugh."
Percy didn't smile back.
"Pass me those rolls, Harry, I'm starving."
Lockhart, who had so often assured them that all danger had passed, only to be proved wrong right away, was now wholeheartedly convinced that it was hardly worth the trouble to see them safely down the corridors.
His hair wasn't as sleek as usual; it seemed he had been up most of the night, patrolling the fourth floor.
"Mark my words," he said, ushering them around a corner.
"The first words out of those poor Petrified people's mouths will be It was Hagrid."
"I agree, sir," said Harry, making Ron drop his books in surprise.
"I mean, we teachers have quite enough to be getting on with, without walking students to classes and standing guard all night…" "That's right," said Ron, catching on.
"Why don't you leave us here, sir, we've only got one more corridor to go—" "You know, Weasley, I think I will," said Lockhart.
"I really should go and prepare my next class—" And he hurried off.
"Prepare his class," Ron sneered after him.
"Gone to curl his hair, more like."
What are you doing?"
It was Professor McGonagall, and her mouth was the thinnest of thin lines.
"We were—we were—" Ron stammered.
"We were going to—to go and see—" "Hermione," said Harry.
Ron and Professor McGonagall both looked at him.
"We haven't seen her for ages, Professor," Harry went on hurriedly, treading on Ron's foot, "and we thought we'd sneak into the hospital wing, you know, and tell her the Mandrakes are nearly ready and, er, not to worry—" Professor McGonagall was still staring at him, and for a moment, Harry thought she was going to explode, but when she spoke, it was in a strangely croaky voice.
"Of course," she said, and Harry, amazed, saw a tear glistening in her beady eye.
Yes, Potter, of course you may visit Miss Granger.
Harry and Ron walked away, hardly daring to believe that they'd avoided detention.
As they turned the corner, they distinctly heard Professor McGonagall blow her nose.
"That," said Ron fervently, "was the best story you've ever come up with."
"There's just no point talking to a Petrified, person," she said, and they had to admit she had a point when they'd taken their seats next to Hermione.
"Wonder if she did see the attacker, though?"
"Because if he sneaked up on them all, no one'll ever know…" But Harry wasn't looking at Hermione's face.
He was more interested in her right hand.
It lay clenched on top of her blankets, and bending closer, he saw that a piece of paper was scrunched inside her fist.
It was no easy task.
Hermione's hand was clamped so tightly around the paper that Harry was sure he was going to tear it.
While Ron kept watch he tugged and twisted, and at last, after several tense minutes, the paper came free.
It was a page torn from a very old library book.
Harry smoothed it out eagerly and Ron leaned close to read it, too.
Of the many fearsome beasts and monsters that roam our land, there is none more curious or more deadly than the Basilisk, known also as the King of Serpents.
This snake, which may reach gigantic size and live many hundreds of years, is born from a chicken's egg, hatched beneath a toad.
Its methods of killing are most wondrous, for aside from its deadly and venomous fangs, the Basilisk has a murderous stare, and all who are fixed with the beam of its eye shall suffer instant death.
Spiders flee before the Basilisk, for it is their mortal enemy, and the Basilisk flees only from the crowing of the rooster, which is fatal to it.
And beneath this, a single word had been written, in a hand Harry recognized as Hermione's.
It was as though somebody had just flicked a light on in his brain.
"Ron," he breathed.
This is the answer.
The monster in the Chamber's a basilisk—a giant serpent!
That why I've been hearing that voice all over the place, and nobody else has heard it.
But no one's died—because no one looked it straight in the eye.
Colin saw it through his camera.
The basilisk burned up all the film inside it, but Colin just got Petrified.
Justin… Justin must've seen the basilisk through Nearly Headless Nick!
Nick got the full blast of it, but he couldn't die again… and Hermione and that Ravenclaw prefect were found with a mirror next to them.
Hermione had just realized the monster was a basilisk.
I bet you anything she warned the first person she met to look around corners with a mirror first!
Harry thought hard, picturing the scene on the night of Halloween.
"The water…" he said slowly.
The more he looked at it, the more it made sense.
The Heir of Slytherin didn't want one anywhere near the castle once the Chamber was opened!
Spiders flee before it!
It all fits!"
"But how's the basilisk been getting around the place?"
"A giant snake… Someone would've seen…" Harry, however, pointed at the word Hermione had scribbled at the foot of the page.
"Pipes," he said.
"The entrance to the Chamber of Secrets!"
They sat there, excitement coursing through them, hardly able to believe it.
The Heir of Slytherin's one, too.
"What're we going to do?"
"Should we go straight to McGonagall?"
"Let's go to the staff room," said Harry, jumping up.
They ran downstairs.
Not wanting to be discovered hanging around in another corridor, they went straight into the deserted staff room.
It was a large, paneled room full of dark, wooden chairs.
Harry and Ron paced around it, too excited to sit down.
But the bell to signal break never came.
Instead, echoing through the corridors came Professor McGonagall's voice, magically magnified.
All teachers return to the staff room.
Harry wheeled around to stare at Ron.
There was an ugly sort of wardrobe to his left, full of the teachers' cloaks.
Let's hear what it's all about.
They hid themselves inside it, listening to the rumbling of hundreds of people moving overhead, and the staff room door banging open.
From between the musty folds of the cloaks, they watched the teachers filtering into the room.
Some of them were looking puzzled, others downright scared.
Then Professor McGonagall arrived.
"It has happened," she told the silent staff room.
Professor Sprout clapped her hands over her mouth.
Right underneath the first one.
"Who is it?"
"Ginny Weasley," said Professor McGonagall.
Harry felt Ron slide silently down onto the wardrobe floor beside him.
"We shall have to send all the students home tomorrow," said Professor McGonagall.
For one wild moment, Harry was sure it would be Dumbledore.
But it was Lockhart, and he was beaming.
"So sorry—dozed off—what have I missed?"
He didn't seem to notice that the other teachers were looking at him with something remarkably like hatred.
"Just the man," he said.
A girl has been snatched by the monster, Lockhart.
Taken into the Chamber of Secrets itself.
"Weren't you saying just last night that you've known all along where the entrance to the Chamber of Secrets is?"
"I—well, I—" sputtered Lockhart.
"Yes, didn't you tell me you were sure you knew what was inside it?"
"Didn't you say that the whole affair had been bungled, and that you should have been given a free rein from the first?"
Lockhart stared around at his stony-faced colleagues.
We'll make sure everyone's out of your way.
You'll be able to tackle the monster all by yourself.
Lockhart gazed desperately around him, but nobody came to the rescue.
He didn't look remotely handsome anymore.
His lip was trembling, and in the absence of his usually toothy grin, he looked weak-chinned and feeble.
"V—very well," he said.
"I'll—I'll be in my office, getting—getting ready."
And he left the room.
The Heads of Houses should go and inform their students what has happened.
Tell them the Hogwarts Express will take them home first thing tomorrow.
The teachers rose and left, one by one.
It was probably the worst day of Harry's entire life.
He, Ron, Fred, and George sat together in a comer of the Gryffindor common room, unable to say anything to each other.
Percy wasn't there.
He had gone to send an owl to Mr. and Mrs. Weasley, then shut himself up in his dormitory.
No afternoon ever lasted as long as that one, nor had Gryffindor Tower ever been so crowded, yet so quiet.
Near sunset, Fred and George went up to bed, unable to sit there any longer.
"She knew something, Harry," said Ron, speaking for the first time since they had entered the wardrobe in the staff room.
It wasn't some stupid thing about Percy at all.
She'd found out something about the Chamber of Secrets.
Harry could see the sun sinking, blood-red, below the skyline.
This was the worst he had ever felt.
If only there was something they could do.
"Harry," said Ron.
He couldn't see how Ginny could still be alive.
Tell him what we know.
He's going to try and get into the Chamber.
Because Harry couldn't think of anything else to do, and because he wanted to be doing something, he agreed.
Darkness was falling as they walked down to Lockhart's office.
There seemed to be a lot of activity going on inside it.
They could hear scraping, thumps, and hurried footsteps.
Harry knocked and there was a sudden silence from inside.
"I'm rather busy at the moment—if you would be quick—" "Professor, we've got some information for you," said Harry.
His office had been almost completely stripped.
Two large trunks stood open on the floor.
Robes, jade-green, lilac, midnight blue, had been hastily folded into one of them; books were jumbled untidily into the other.
The photographs that had covered the walls were now crammed into boxes on the desk.
"Are you going somewhere?"
"Er, well, yes," said Lockhart, ripping a life-size poster of himself from the back of the door as he spoke and starting to roll it up.
"Urgent call—unavoidable—got to go—" "What about my sister?"
"Well, as to that—most unfortunate—" said Lockhart, avoiding their eyes as he wrenched open a drawer and started emptying the contents into a bag.
"No one regrets more than I—" "You're the Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher!"
Not with all the Dark stuff going on here!"
"Well—I must say—when I took the job—" Lockhart muttered, now piling socks on top of his robes, "nothing in the job description—didn't expect—" "You mean you're running away?"
"After all that stuff you did in your books—" "Books can be misleading," said Lockhart delicately.
"You wrote them!"
"My dear boy," said Lockhart, straightening up and frowning at Harry.
My books wouldn't have sold half as well if people didn't think I'd done all those things.
No one wants to read about some ugly old Armenian warlock, even if he did save a village from werewolves.
He'd look dreadful on the front cover.
No dress sense at all.
There was work involved.
I had to track these people down.
Ask them exactly how they managed to do what they did.
If there's one thing I pride myself on, it's my Memory Charms.
No, it's been a lot of work, Harry.
It's not all book signings and publicity photos, you know.
He banged the lids of his trunks shut and locked them.
"Let's see," he said.
He pulled out his wand and turned to them.
Can't have you blabbing my secrets all over the place.
Lockhart was blasted backward, falling over his trunk; his wand flew high into the air; Ron caught it, and flung it out of the open window.
Lockhart was looking up at him, feeble once more.
Harry was still pointing his wand at him.
"What d'you want me to do?"
And what's inside it.
They marched Lockhart out of his office and down the nearest stairs, along the dark corridor where the messages shone on the wall, to the door of Moaning Myrtle's bathroom.
They sent Lockhart in first.
Harry was pleased to see that he was shaking.
Moaning Myrtle was sitting on the tank of the end toilet.
"Oh, it's you," she said when she saw Harry.
"What do you want this time?"
"To ask you how you died," said Harry.
Myrtle's whole aspect changed at once.
She looked as though she had never been asked such a flattering question.
I died in this very stall.
I remember it so well.
The door was locked, and I was crying, and then I heard somebody come in.
They said something funny.
A different language, I think it must have been.
Anyway, what really got me was that it was a boy speaking.
"No idea," said Myrtle in hushed tones.
"Where exactly did you see the eyes?"
"Somewhere there," said Myrtle, pointing vaguely toward the sink in front of her toilet.
Harry and Ron hurried over to it.
Lockhart was standing well back, a look of utter terror on his face.
It looked like an ordinary sink.
They examined every inch of it, inside and out, including the pipes below.
And then Harry saw it: Scratched on the side of one of the copper taps was a tiny snake.
"That tap's never worked," said Myrtle brightly as he tried to turn it.
"Harry," said Ron.
"But—" Harry thought hard.
He stared hard at the tiny engraving, trying to imagine it was real.
"Open up," he said.
He looked at Ron, who shook his head.
"English," he said.
Harry looked back at the snake, willing himself to believe it was alive.
If he moved his head, the candlelight made it look as though it were moving.
Next second, the sink began to move; the sink, in fact, sank, right out of sight, leaving a large pipe exposed, a pipe wide enough for a man to slide into.
Harry heard Ron gasp and looked up again.
He had made up his mind what he was going to do.
"I'm going down there," he said.
"Me too," said Ron.
There was a pause.
"Well, you hardly seem to need me," said Lockhart, with a shadow of his old smile.
"I'll just—" He put his hand on the door knob, but Ron and Harry both pointed their wands at him.
"You can go first," Ron snarled.
White-faced and wandless, Lockhart approached the opening.
"Boys," he said, his voice feeble.
"Boys, what good will it do?"
Harry jabbed him in the back with his wand.
Lockhart slid his legs into the pipe.
"I really don't think—" he started to say, but Ron gave him a push, and he slid out of sight.
Harry followed quickly.
He lowered himself slowly into the pipe, then let go.
It was like rushing down an endless, slimy, dark slide.
He could see more pipes branching off in all directions, but none as large as theirs, which twisted and turned, sloping steeply downward, and he knew that he was falling deeper below the school than even the dungeons.
And then, just as he had begun to worry about what would happen when he hit the ground, the pipe leveled out, and he shot out of the end with a wet thud, landing on the damp floor of a dark stone tunnel large enough to stand in.
Lockhart was getting to his feet a little ways away, covered in slime and white as a ghost.
Harry stood aside as Ron came whizzing out of the pipe, too.
"We must be miles under the school," said Harry, his voice echoing in the black tunnel.
"Under the lake, probably," said Ron, squinting around at the dark, slimy walls.
All three of them turned to stare into the darkness ahead.
Harry muttered to his wand and it lit again.
"C'mon," he said to Ron and Lockhart, and off they went, their footsteps slapping loudly on the wet floor.
The tunnel was so dark that they could only see a little distance ahead.
"Remember," Harry said quietly as they walked cautiously forward, "any sign of movement, close your eyes right away…" But the tunnel was quiet as the grave, and the first unexpected sound they heard was a loud crunch as Ron stepped on what turned out to be a rat's skull.
Trying very hard not to imagine what Ginny might look like if they found her, Harry led the way forward, around a dark bend in the tunnel.
"Harry—there's something up there—" said Ron hoarsely, grabbing Harry's shoulder.
They froze, watching.
Harry could just see the outline of something huge and curved, lying right across the tunnel.
It wasn't moving.
"Maybe it's asleep," he breathed, glancing back at the other two.
Lockhart's hands were pressed over his eyes.
Harry turned back to look at the thing, his heart beating so fast it hurt.
Very slowly, his eyes as narrow as he could make them and still see, Harry edged forward, his wand held high.
The light slid over a gigantic snake skin, of a vivid, poisonous green, lying curled and empty across the tunnel floor.
The creature that had shed it must have been twenty feet long at least.
"Blimey," said Ron weakly.
There was a sudden movement behind them.
"Get up," said Ron sharply, pointing his wand at Lockhart.
Lockhart got to his feet—then he dived at Ron, knocking him to the ground.
Harry jumped forward, but too late—Lockhart was straightening up, panting, Ron's wand in his hand and a gleaming smile back on his face.
"The adventure ends here, boys!"
The wand exploded with the force of a small bomb.
Harry flung his arms over his head and ran, slipping over the coils of snake skin, out of the way of great chunks of tunnel ceiling that were thundering to the floor.
Next moment, he was standing alone, gazing at a solid wall of broken rock.
"I'm okay—this git's not, though—he got blasted by the wand—" There was a dull thud and a loud "ow!"
It sounded as though Ron had just kicked Lockhart in the shins.
Ron's voice said, sounding desperate.
"We can't get through—it'll take ages…" Harry looked up at the tunnel ceiling.
Huge cracks had appeared in it.
He had never tried to break apart anything as large as these rocks by magic, and now didn't seem a good moment to try—what if the whole tunnel caved in?
There was another thud and another "ow!"
They were wasting time.
Ginny had already been in the Chamber of Secrets for hours… Harry knew there was only one thing to do.
"Wait there," he called to Ron.
"I'll try and shift some of this rock," said Ron, who seemed to be trying to keep his voice steady.
And he set off alone past the giant snake skin.
Soon the distant noise of Ron straining to shift the rocks was gone.
The tunnel turned and turned again.
Every nerve in Harry's body was tingling unpleasantly.
He wanted the tunnel to end, yet dreaded what he'd find when it did.
And then, at last, as he crept around yet another bend, he saw a solid wall ahead on which two entwined serpents were carved, their eyes set with great, glinting emeralds.
Harry approached, his throat very dry.
There was no need to pretend these stone snakes were real; their eyes looked strangely alive.
He could guess what he had to do.
He cleared his throat, and the emerald eyes seemed to flicker.
"Open," said Harry, in a low, faint hiss.
The serpents parted as the wall cracked open, the halves slid smoothly out of sight, and Harry, shaking from head to foot, walked inside.
Chapter XVII The Heir of Slytherin.
He was standing at the end of a very long, dimly lit chamber.
Towering stone pillars entwined with more carved serpents rose to support a ceiling lost in darkness, casting long, black shadows through the odd, greenish gloom that filled the place.
His heart beating very fast, Harry stood listening to the chill silence.
Could the basilisk be lurking in a shadowy corner, behind a pillar?
And where was Ginny?
He pulled out his wand and moved forward between the serpentine columns.
Every careful footstep echoed loudly off the shadowy walls.
He kept his eyes narrowed, ready to clamp them shut at the smallest sign of movement.
The hollow eye sockets of the stone snakes seemed to be following him.
More than once, with a jolt of the stomach, he thought he saw one stir.
Then, as he drew level with the last pair of pillars, a statue high as the Chamber itself loomed into view, standing against the back wall.
Harry had to crane his neck to look up into the giant face above: It was ancient and monkey-like, with a long, thin beard that fell almost to the bottom of the wizard's sweeping stone robes, where two enormous gray feet stood on the smooth Chamber floor.
Harry muttered, sprinting to her and dropping to his knees.
"Ginny— don't be dead—please don't be dead—" He flung his wand aside, grabbed Ginny's shoulders, and turned her over.
Her face was white as marble, and as cold, yet her eyes were closed, so she wasn't Petrified.
But then she must be—"Ginny, please wake up," Harry muttered desperately, shaking her.
Ginny's head lolled hopelessly from side to side.
"She won't wake," said a soft voice.
Harry jumped and spun around on his knees.
A tall, black-haired boy was leaning against the nearest pillar, watching.
He was strangely blurred around the edges, as though Harry were looking at him through a misted window.
But there was no mistaking him.
Riddle nodded, not taking his eyes off Harry's face.
"What d'you mean, she won't wake?"
Harry said desperately.
"She's not—she's not—?"
"She's still alive," said Riddle.
"But only just."
Harry stared at him.
Tom Riddle had been at Hogwarts fifty years ago, yet here he stood, a weird, misty light shining about him, not a day older than sixteen.
"Are you a ghost?"
Harry said uncertainly.
"A memory," said Riddle quietly.
"Preserved in a diary for fifty years."
He pointed toward the floor near the statue's giant toes.
Lying open there was the little black diary Harry had found in Moaning Myrtle's bathroom.
For a second, Harry wondered how it had got there—but there were more pressing matters to deal with.
"You've got to help me, Tom," Harry said, raising Ginny's head again.
Riddle didn't move.
Harry, sweating, managed to hoist Ginny half off the floor, and bent to pick up his wand again.
But his wand had gone.
"Did you see—?"
He looked up.
Riddle was still watching him—twirling Harry's wand between his long fingers.
"Thanks," said Harry, stretching out his hand for it.
A smile curled the corners of Riddle's mouth.
He continued to stare at Harry, twirling the wand idly.
"Listen," said Harry urgently, his knees sagging with Ginny's dead weight.
Harry lowered Ginny back onto the floor, unable to hold her up any longer.
"What d'you mean?"
"Look, give me my wand, I might need it—" Riddle's smile broadened.
"You won't be needing it," he said.
Harry stared at him.
"What d'you mean, I won't be—?"
"I've waited a long time for this, Harry Potter," said Riddle.
We're in the Chamber of Secrets.
There was something very funny going on here.
"How did Ginny get like this?"
"Well, that's an interesting question," said Riddle pleasantly.
"What are you talking about?"
"The diary," said Riddle.
There was an almost hungry look in them.
"It's very boring, having to listen to the silly little troubles of an eleven-year-old girl," he went on.
I wrote back.
I was sympathetic, I was kind.
Ginny simply loved me.
It made the hairs stand up on the back of Harry's neck.
So Ginny poured out her soul to me, and her soul happened to be exactly what I wanted… I grew stronger and stronger on a diet of her deepest fears, her darkest secrets.
I grew powerful, far more powerful than little Miss Weasley.
"Haven't you guessed yet, Harry Potter?"
She strangled the school roosters and daubed threatening messages on the walls.
"No," Harry whispered.
"Yes," said Riddle, calmly.
It was very amusing.
I wish you could have seen her new diary entries… far more interesting, they became… Dear Tom," he recited, watching Harry's horrified face, "I think I'm losing my memory.
There are rooster feathers all over my robes and 1 don't know how they got there.
I think he suspects me… There was another attack today and I don't know where I was.
Tom, what am I going to do?
I think I'm going mad… I think I'm the one attacking everyone, Tom!"
Harry's fists were clenched, the nails digging deep into his Palms.
"It took a very long time for stupid little Ginny to stop trusting her diary," said Riddle.
And that's where you came in, Harry.
Anger was coursing through him, and it was an effort to keep his voice steady.
"Well, you see, Ginny told me all about you, Harry," said Riddle.
"Your whole fascinating history."
His eyes roved over the lightning scar on Harry's forehead, and their expression grew hungrier.
On the one hand, Tom Riddle, poor but brilliant, parentless but so brave, school prefect, model student… on the other hand, big, blundering Hagrid, in trouble every other week, trying to raise werewolf cubs under his bed, sneaking off to the Forbidden Forest to wrestle trolls… but I admit, even I was surprised how well the plan worked.
I thought someone must realize that Hagrid couldn't possibly be the Heir of Slytherin.
It had taken me five whole years to find out everything I could about the Chamber of Secrets and discover the secret entrance… as though Hagrid had the brains, or the power!
He persuaded Dipper to keep Hagrid and train him as gamekeeper.
"Well, he certainly kept an annoyingly close watch on me after Hagrid was expelled," said Riddle carelessly.
But I wasn't going to waste those long years I'd spent searching for it.
"Well, you haven't finished it," said Harry triumphantly.
Harry stared at him.
She saw you with the diary, you see, and panicked.
What if, even worse, I told you who'd been strangling roosters?
So the foolish little brat waited until your dormitory was deserted and stole it back.
But I knew what I must do.
It was clear to me that you were on the trail of Slytherin's heir.
From everything Ginny had told me about you, I knew you would go to any lengths to solve the mystery—particularly if one of your best friends was attacked.
She struggled and cried and became very boring.
But there isn't much life left in her… She put too much into the diary, into me.
Enough to let me leave its pages at last… I have been waiting for you to appear since we arrived here.
I knew you'd come.
Harry spat, fists still clenched.
How did you escape with nothing but a scar, while Lord Voldemort's powers were destroyed?"
There was an odd red gleam in his hungry eyes now.
"Why do you care how I escaped?"
You think I was going to use my filthy Muggle father's name forever?
I, keep the name of a foul, common Muggle, who abandoned me even before I was born, just because he found out his wife was a witch?
No, Harry—I fashioned myself a new name, a name I knew wizards everywhere would one day fear to speak, when I had become the greatest sorcerer in the world!"
Harry's brain seemed to have jammed.
"You're not," he said, his quiet voice full of hatred.
"Not the greatest sorcerer in the world," said Harry, breathing fast.
Everyone says so.
Even when you were strong, you didn't dare try and take over at Hogwarts.
"Dumbledore's been driven out of this castle by the mere memory of me!"
"He's not as gone as you might think!"
He was speaking at random, wanting to scare Riddle, wishing rather than believing it to be true.
Riddle opened his mouth, but froze.
Music was coming from somewhere.
Riddle whirled around to stare down the empty Chamber.
The music was growing louder.
It was eerie, spine-tingling, unearthly; it lifted the hair on Harry's scalp and made his heart feel as though it was swelling to twice its normal size.
Then, as the music reached such a pitch that Harry felt it vibrating inside his own ribs, flames erupted at the top of the nearest pillar.
A crimson bird the size of a swan had appeared, piping its weird music to the vaulted ceiling.
It had a glittering golden tail as long as a peacock's and gleaming golden talons, which were gripping a ragged bundle.
A second later, the bird was flying straight at Harry.
It dropped the ragged thing it was carrying at his feet, then landed heavily on his shoulder.
As it folded its great wings, Harry looked up and saw it had a long, sharp golden beak and a beady black eye.
The bird stopped singing.
It sat still and warm next to Harry's cheek, gazing steadily at Riddle.
"That's a phoenix," said Riddle, staring shrewdly back at it.
Harry breathed, and he felt the bird's golden claws squeeze his shoulder gently.
"And that—" said Riddle, now eyeing the ragged thing that Fawkes had dropped, "that's the old school Sorting Hat—" So it was.
Patched, frayed, and dirty, the hat lay motionless at Harry's feet.
Riddle began to laugh again.
He laughed so hard that the dark chamber rang with it, as though ten Riddles were laughing at once.
A songbird and an old hat!
Do you feel brave, Harry Potter?
Do you feel safe now?"
Harry didn't answer.
He might not see what use Fawkes or the Sorting Hat were, but he was no longer alone, and he waited for Riddle to stop laughing with his courage mounting.
"To business, Harry," said Riddle, still smiling broadly.
And twice I failed to kill you.
How did you survive?
Tell me everything.
The longer you talk," he added softly, "the longer you stay alive."
Harry was thinking fast, weighing his chances.
Riddle had the wand.
It looked bad, all right… but the longer Riddle stood there, the more life was dwindling out of Ginny… and in the meantime, Harry noticed suddenly, Riddle's outline was becoming clearer, more solid… If it had to be a fight between him and Riddle, better sooner than later.
"No one knows why you lost your powers when you attacked me," said Harry abruptly.
But I know why you couldn't kill me.
Because my mother died to save me.
And I've seen the real you, I saw you last year.
You're a wreck.
You're barely alive.
That's where all your power got you.
You're in hiding.
Then he forced it into an awful smile.
Your mother died to save you.
Yes, that's a powerful counter-charm.
I can see now… there is nothing special about you, after all.
I wondered, you see.
There are strange likenesses between us, after all.
Even you must have noticed.
Both half-bloods, orphans, raised by Muggles.
We even look something alike… But after all, it was merely a lucky chance that saved you from me.
Harry stood, tense, waiting for Riddle to raise his wand.
But Riddle's twisted smile was widening again.
Riddle opened his mouth wide and hissed—but Harry understood what he was saying… "Speak to me, Slytherin, greatest of the Hogwarts Four."
Harry wheeled around to look up at the statue, Fawkes swaying on his shoulder.
Slytherin's gigantic stone face was moving.
And something was stirring inside the statue's mouth.
Something was slithering up from its depths.
Harry backed away until he hit the dark Chamber wall, and as he shut his eyes tight he felt Fawkes' wing sweep his cheek as he took flight.
Harry wanted to shout, "Don't leave me!"
Something huge hit the stone floor of the Chamber.
Harry felt it shudder—he knew what was happening, he could sense it, could almost see the giant serpent uncoiling itself from Slytherin's mouth.
Then he heard Riddle's hissing voice: "Kill him."
The basilisk was moving toward Harry; he could hear its heavy body slithering heavily across the dusty floor.
Eyes still tightly shut, Harry began to run blindly sideways, his hands outstretched, feeling his way—Voldemort was laughing… Harry tripped.
He fell hard onto the stone and tasted blood the serpent was barely feet from him, he could hear it coming.
There was a loud, explosive spitting sound right above him, and then something heavy hit Harry so hard that he was smashed into the wall.
Waiting for fangs to sink through his body he heard more mad hissing, something thrashing wildly off the pillars.
He couldn't help it—he opened his eyes wide enough to squint at what was going on.
As Harry trembled, ready to close his eyes if it turned, he saw what had distracted the snake.
Fawkes was soaring around its head, and the basilisk was snapping furiously at him with fangs long and thin as sabers.
His long golden beak sank out of sight and a sudden shower of dark blood spattered the floor.
The snake's tail thrashed, narrowly missing Harry, and before Harry could shut his eyes, it turned—Harry looked straight into its face and saw that its eyes, both its great, bulbous yellow eyes, had been punctured by the phoenix; blood was streaming to the floor, and the snake was spitting in agony.
Harry heard Riddle screaming.
LEAVE THE BIRD!
THE BOY IS BEHIND YOU.
YOU CAN STILL SMELL HIM.
The blinded serpent swayed, confused, still deadly.
Fawkes was circling its head, piping his eerie song, jabbing here and there at its scaly nose as the blood poured from its ruined eyes.
"Help me, help me," Harry muttered wildly, "someone—anyone!"
The snake's tail whipped across the floor again.
Something soft hit his face.
The basilisk had swept the Sorting Hat into Harry's arms.
Harry seized it.
It was all he had left, his only chance—he rammed it onto his head and threw himself flat onto the floor as the basilisk's tail swung over him again.
"Help me—help me—" Harry thought, his eyes screwed tight under the hat.
"Please help me!"
There was no answering voice.
Instead, the hat contracted, as though an invisible hand was squeezing it very tightly.
Something very hard and heavy thudded onto the top of Harry's head, almost knocking him out.
Stars winking in front of his eyes, he grabbed the top of the hat to pull it off and felt something long and hard beneath it.
A gleaming silver sword had appeared inside the hat, its handle glittering with rubies the size of eggs.
LEAVE THE BIRD!
THE BOY IS BEHIND YOU.
Harry was on his feet, ready.
The basilisk's head was falling, its body coiling around, hitting pillars as it twisted to face him.
He could see the vast, bloody eye sockets, see the mouth stretching wide, wide enough to swallow him whole, lined with fangs long as his sword, thin, glittering, venomous… It lunged blindly.
Harry dodged and it hit the Chamber wall.
It lunged again, and its forked tongue lashed Harry's side.
He raised the sword in both his hands.
The basilisk lunged again, and this time its aim was true—Harry threw his whole weight behind the sword and drove it to the hilt into the roof of the serpent's mouth.
But as warm blood drenched Harry's arms, he felt a searing pain just above his elbow.
Harry slid down the wall.
He gripped the fang that was spreading poison through his body and wrenched it out of his arm.
But he knew it was too late.
White-hot pain was spreading slowly and steadily from the wound.
The Chamber was dissolving in a whirl of dull color.
A patch of scarlet swam past, and Harry heard a soft clatter of claws beside him.
"Fawkes," said Harry thickly.
"You were fantastic, Fawkes…" He felt the bird lay its beautiful head on the spot where the serpent's fang had pierced him.
He could hear echoing footsteps and then a dark shadow moved in front of him.
"You're dead, Harry Potter," said Riddle's voice above him.
Even Dumbledore's bird knows it.
Do you see what he's doing, Potter?
Fawkes's head slid in and out of focus.
Thick, pearly tears were trickling down the glossy feathers.
Take your time.
Harry felt drowsy.
Everything around him seemed to be spinning.
"So ends the famous Harry Potter," said Riddle's distant voice.
Even the pain was leaving him… But was this dying?
Instead of going black, the Chamber seemed to be coming back into focus.
Harry gave his head a little shake and there was Fawkes, still resting his head on Harry's arm.
A pearly patch of tears was shining all around the wound—except that there was no wound.
"Get away, bird," said Riddle's voice suddenly.
"Get away from him—I said, get away!"
Harry raised his head.
Riddle was pointing Harry's wand at Fawkes; there was a bang like a gun, and Fawkes took flight again in a whirl of gold and scarlet.
"Phoenix tears…" said Riddle quietly, staring at Harry's arm.
"Of course… healing powers… I forgot…" He looked into Harry's face.
In fact, I prefer it this way.
Then, in a rush of wings, Fawkes had soared back overhead and something fell into Harry's lap—the diary.
For a split second, both Harry and Riddle, wand still raised, stared at it.
Then, without thinking, without considering, as though he had meant to do it all along, Harry seized the basilisk fang on the floor next to him and plunged it straight into the heart of the book.
There was a long, dreadful, piercing scream.
Ink spurted out of the diary in torrents, streaming over Harry's hands, flooding the floor.
Riddle was writhing and twisting, screaming and flailing and then… He had gone.
Harry's wand fell to the floor with a clatter and there was silence.
The basilisk venom had burned a sizzling hole right through it.
Shaking all over, Harry pulled himself up.
Then came a faint moan from the end of the Chamber.
Ginny was stirring.
As Harry hurried toward her, she sat up.
Her bemused eyes traveled from the huge form of the dead basilisk, over Harry, in his blood-soaked robes, then to the diary in his hand.
She drew a great, shuddering gasp and tears began to pour down her face.
The last thing I r-remember is him coming out of the diary—" "It's all right," said Harry, holding up the diary, and showing Ginny the fang hole, "Riddle's finished.
Him and the basilisk.
Ginny wept as Harry helped her awkwardly to her feet.
"I've looked forward to coming to Hogwarts ever since B-Bill came and n-now I'll have to leave and—w-what'll Mum and Dad say?"
Fawkes was waiting for them, hovering in the Chamber entrance.
Harry urged Ginny forward; they stepped over the motionless coils of the dead basilisk, through the echoing gloom, and back into the tunnel.
Harry heard the stone doors close behind them with a soft hiss.
After a few minutes' progress up the dark tunnel, a distant sound of slowly shifting rock reached Harry's ears.
Harry yelled, speeding up.
I've got her!"
He heard Ron give a strangled cheer, and they turned the next bend to see his eager face staring through the sizable gap he had managed to make in the rock fall.
Ron thrust an arm through the gap in the rock to pull her through first.
I don't believe it!
How—what—where did that bird come from?"
Fawkes had swooped through the gap after Ginny.
"He's Dumbledore's," said Harry, squeezing through himself.
"How come you've got a sword?"
"I'll explain when we get out of here," said Harry with a sideways glance at Ginny, who was crying harder than ever.
"But—" "Later," Harry said shortly.
He didn't think it was a good idea to tell Ron yet who'd been opening the Chamber, not in front of Ginny, anyway.
"Back there," said Ron, still looking puzzled but jerking his head up the tunnel toward the pipe.
Led by Fawkes, whose wide scarlet wings emitted a soft golden glow in the darkness, they walked all the way back to the mouth of the pipe.
"His memory's gone," said Ron.
Hit him instead of us.
Hasn't got a clue who he is, or where he is, or who we are.
I told him to come and wait here.
He's a danger to himself.
"Hello," he said.
Do you live here?"
"No," said Ron, raising his eyebrows at Harry.
Harry bent down and looked up the long, dark pipe.
"Have you thought how we're going to get back up this?"
Ron shook his head, but Fawkes the phoenix had swooped past Harry and was now fluttering in front of him, his beady eyes bright in the dark.
He was waving his long golden tail feathers.
Harry looked uncertainly at him.
"He looks like he wants you to grab hold…" said Ron, looking perplexed.
"But you're much too heavy for a bird to pull up there—" "Fawkes," said Harry, "isn't an ordinary bird."
He turned quickly to the others.
Ginny, grab Ron's hand.
"You hold Ginny's other hand—" Harry tucked the sword and the Sorting Hat into his belt, Ron took hold of the back of Harry's robes, and Harry reached out and took hold of Fawkes's strangely hot tail feathers.
An extraordinary lightness seemed to spread through his whole body and the next second, in a rush of wings, they were flying upward through the pipe.
This is just like magic!"
The chill air was whipping through Harry's hair, and before he'd stopped enjoying the ride, it was over—all four of them were hitting the wet floor of Moaning Myrtle's bathroom, and as Lockhart straightened his hat, the sink that hid the pipe was sliding back into place.
Myrtle goggled at them.
"You're alive," she said blankly to Harry.
"There's no need to sound so disappointed," he said grimly, wiping flecks of blood and slime off his glasses.
"Oh, well… I'd just been thinking… if you had died, you'd have been welcome to share my toilet," said Myrtle, blushing silver.
I think Myrtle's grown fond of you!
You've got competition, Ginny!"
But tears were still flooding silently down Ginny's face.
Fawkes was leading the way, glowing gold along the corridor.
They strode after him, and moments later, found themselves outside Professor McGonagall's office.
Harry knocked and pushed the door open.
Then there was a scream.
It was Mrs. Weasley, who had been sitting crying in front of the fire.
She leapt to her feet, closely followed by Mr. Weasley, and both of them flung themselves on their daughter.
Harry, however, was looking past them.
Professor Dumbledore was standing by the mantelpiece, beaming, next to Professor McGonagall, who was taking great, steadying gasps, clutching her chest.
Fawkes went whooshing past Harry's ear and settled on Dumbledore's shoulder, just as Harry found himself and Ron being swept into Mrs. Weasley's tight embrace.
You saved her!
How did you do it?"
"I think we'd all like to know that," said Professor McGonagall weakly.
Mrs. Weasley let go of Harry, who hesitated for a moment, then walked over to the desk and laid upon it the Sorting Hat, the ruby-encrusted sword, and what remained of Riddle's diary.
Then he started telling them everything.
So Harry, his voice now growing hoarse from all this talking, told them about Fawkes's timely arrival and about the Sorting Hat giving him the sword.
But then he faltered.
He had so far avoided mentioning Riddle's diary—or Ginny.
She was standing with her head against Mrs. Weasley's shoulder, and tears were still coursing silently down her cheeks.
What if they expelled her?
Harry thought in panic.
Riddle's diary didn't work anymore… How could they prove it had been he who'd made her do it all?
Instinctively, Harry looked at Dumbledore, who smiled faintly, the firelight glancing off his half-moon spectacles.
"What interests me most," said Dumbledore gently, "is how Lord Voldemort managed to enchant Ginny, when my sources tell me he is currently in hiding in the forests of Albania."
Relief—warm, sweeping, glorious relief—swept over Harry.
But Ginny's not… Ginny hasn't been… has she?"
"It was this diary," said Harry quickly, picking it up and showing it to Dumbledore.
"Riddle wrote it when he was sixteen…" Dumbledore took the diary from Harry and peered keenly down his long, crooked nose at its burnt and soggy pages.
"Brilliant," he said softly.
"Of course, he was probably the most brilliant student Hogwarts has ever seen."
I taught him myself, fifty years ago, at Hogwarts.
He disappeared after leaving the school… traveled far and wide… sank so deeply into the Dark Arts, consorted with the very worst of our kind, underwent so many dangerous, magical transformations, that when he resurfaced as Lord Voldemort, he was barely recognizable.
"But, Ginny," said Mrs. Weasley.
"What's our Ginny got to do with—with—him?"
"I've b-been writing in it, and he's been w-writing back all year—" "Ginny!"
What have I always told you?
Never trust anything that can think for itself if you can't see where it keeps its brain?
Why didn't you show the diary to me, or your mother?
A suspicious object like that, it was clearly full of Dark Magic!"
"I d-didn't know," sobbed Ginny.
There will be no punishment.
He strode over to the door and opened it.
"So Hermione's okay!"
"There has been no lasting harm done, Ginny," said Dumbledore.
Mrs. Weasley led Ginny out, and Mr. Weasley followed, still looking deeply shaken.
Might I ask you to go and alert the kitchens?"
"Right," said Professor McGonagall crisply, also moving to the door.
"I'll leave you to deal with Potter and Weasley, shall I?"
"Certainly," said Dumbledore.
She left, and Harry and Ron gazed uncertainly at Dumbledore.
What exactly had Professor McGonagall meant, deal with them?
Surely—surely—they weren't about to be punished?
"I seem to remember telling you both that I would have to expel you if you broke any more school rules," said Dumbledore.
Ron opened his mouth in horror.
"Which goes to show that the best of us must sometimes eat our words," Dumbledore went on, smiling.
"But one of us seems to be keeping mightily quiet about his part in this dangerous adventure," Dumbledore added.
Harry gave a start.
He had completely forgotten about Lockhart.
He turned and saw that Lockhart was standing in a corner of the room, still wearing his vague smile.
When Dumbledore addressed him, Lockhart looked over his shoulder to see who he was talking to.
I expect I was hopeless, was I?"
"He tried to do a Memory Charm and the wand backfired," Ron explained quietly to Dumbledore.
"Dear me," said Dumbledore, shaking his head, his long silver mustache quivering.
He pointed at Harry.
"He'll lend you one."
"Would you mind taking Professor Lockhart up to the infirmary, too?"
Dumbledore said to Ron.
"I'd like a few more words with Harry…" Lockhart ambled out.
Ron cast a curious look back at Dumbledore and Harry as he closed the door.
Dumbledore crossed to one of the chairs by the fire.
"Sit down, Harry," he said, and Harry sat, feeling unaccountably nervous.
He stroked the phoenix, which had fluttered down onto his knee.
Harry grinned awkwardly as Dumbledore watched him.
"And so you met Tom Riddle," said Dumbledore thoughtfully.
"I imagine he was most interested in you…" Suddenly, something that was nagging at Harry came tumbling out of his mouth.
"And what do you think, Harry?"
"I don't think I'm like him!"
"I mean, I'm—I'm in Gryffindor, I'm…" But he fell silent, a lurking doubt resurfacing in his mind.
"Professor," he started again after a moment.
Unless I'm much mistaken, he transferred some of his own powers to you the night he gave you that scar.
Harry said, thunderstruck.
"It certainly seems so."
"So I should be in Slytherin," Harry said, looking desperately into Dumbledore's face.
"The Sorting Hat could see Slytherin's power in me, and it—" "Put you in Gryffindor," said Dumbledore calmly.
You happen to have many qualities Salazar Slytherin prized in his handpicked students.
You know why that was.
"It only put me in Gryffindor," said Harry in a defeated voice, "because I asked not to go in Slytherin…" "Exactly," said Dumbledore, beaming once more.
Harry sat motionless in his chair, stunned.
"If you want proof, Harry, that you belong in Gryffindor, I suggest you look more closely at this."
Dumbledore reached across to Professor McGonagall's desk, picked up the blood-stained silver sword, and handed it to Harry.
Dully, Harry turned it over, the rubies blazing in the firelight.
And then he saw the name engraved just below the hilt.
For a minute, neither of them spoke.
Then Dumbledore pulled open one of the drawers in Professor McGonagall's desk and took out a quill and a bottle of ink.
I suggest you go down to the feast, while I write to Azkaban—we need our gamekeeper back.
"We'll be needing a new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher… Dear me, we do seem to run through them, don't we?"
Harry got up and crossed to the door.
He had just reached for the handle, however, when the door burst open so violently that it bounced back off the wall.
Lucius Malfoy stood there, fury in his face.
"Good evening, Lucius," said Dumbledore pleasantly.
Mr. Malfoy almost knocked Harry over as he swept into the room.
Apparently Mr. Malfoy had set out in a great hurry, for not only were his shoes half-polished, but his usually sleek hair was disheveled.
Ignoring the elf bobbing apologetically around his ankles, he fixed his cold eyes upon Dumbledore.
The governors suspended you, but you still saw fit to return to Hogwarts.
""Well, you see, Lucius," said Dumbledore, smiling serenely, "the other eleven governors contacted me today.
It was something like being caught in a hailstorm of owls, to tell the truth.
They seemed to think I was the best man for the job after all.
Mr. Malfoy went even paler than usual, but his eyes were still slits of fury.
"So—have you stopped the attacks yet?"
"Have you caught the culprit?"
"We have," said Dumbledore, with a smile.
"Who is it?"
"The same person as last time, Lucius," said Dumbledore.
He held up the small black book with the large hole through the center, watching Mr. Malfoy closely.
The elf was doing something very odd.
His great eyes fixed meaningfully on Harry, he kept pointing at the diary, then at Mr. Malfoy, and then hitting himself hard on the head with his fist.
"I see…" said Mr. Malfoy slowly to Dumbledore.
"A clever plan," said Dumbledore in a level voice, still staring Mr. Malfoy straight in the eye.
"Because if Harry here"—Mr.
His face was suddenly mask-like.
"Very fortunate," he said stiffly.
And Harry suddenly understood.
Lucius Malfoy rounded on him.
"How should I know how the stupid little girl got hold of it?"
"Because you gave it to her," said Harry.
You picked up her old Transfiguration book and slipped the diary inside it, didn't you?"
He saw Mr. Malfoy's white hands clench and unclench.
"Prove it," he hissed.
"Oh, no one will be able to do that," said Dumbledore, smiling at Harry.
On the other hand, I would advise you, Lucius, not to go giving out any more of Lord Voldemort's old school things.
Instead, he turned to his house-elf.
He wrenched open the door and as the elf came hurrying up to him, he kicked him right through it.
Harry stood for a moment, thinking hard.
Then it came to him— "Professor Dumbledore," he said hurriedly.
"Can I give that diary back to Mr. Malfoy, please?"
"Certainly, Harry," said Dumbledore calmly.
Quickly, wondering if this plan could possibly work, Harry took off one of his shoes, pulled off his slimy, filthy sock, and stuffed the diary into it.
Then he ran down the dark corridor.
He caught up with them at the top of the stairs.
Mr. Malfoy ripped the sock off the diary, threw it aside, then looked furiously from the ruined book to Harry.
"You'll meet the same sticky end as your parents one of these days, Harry Potter," he said softly.
"They were meddlesome fools, too."
He turned to go.
He was holding up Harry's disgusting, slimy sock, and looking at it as though it were a priceless treasure.
"Master has given a sock," said the elf in wonderment.
"What did you say?"
Lucius Malfoy stood frozen, staring at the elf.
Then he lunged at Harry.
"You've lost me my servant, boy!"
There was a loud bang, and Mr. Malfoy was thrown backward.
He crashed down the stairs, three at a time, landing in a crumpled heap on the landing below.
"You shall go now," he said fiercely, pointing down at Mr. Malfoy.
Lucius Malfoy had no choice.
With a last, incensed stare at the pair of them, he swung his cloak around him and hurried out of sight.
"Just promise never to try and save my life again."
The elf's ugly brown face split suddenly into a wide, toothy smile.
The Dark Lord, before he changed his name, could be freely named, you see?"
"Right," said Harry weakly.
"Farewell, Harry Potter!"
Harry had been to several Hogwarts feasts, but never one quite like this.
Everybody was in their pajamas, and the celebration lasted all night.
You solved it!"
Quite a few of the teachers joined in the cheering that greeted this news.
"Shame," said Ron, helping himself to a jam doughnut.
"He was starting to grow on me."
The rest of the final term passed in a haze of blazing sunshine.
Hogwarts was back to normal with only a few, small differences—Defense Against the Dark Arts classes were canceled ("but we've had plenty of practice at that anyway," Ron told a disgruntled Hermione) and Lucius Malfoy had been sacked as a school governor.
Draco was no longer strutting around the school as though he owned the place.
On the contrary, he looked resentful and sulky.
On the other hand, Ginny Weasley was perfectly happy again.
Too soon, it was time for the journey home on the Hogwarts Express.
Harry, Ron, Hermione, Fred, George, and Ginny got a compartment to themselves.
They made the most of the last few hours in which they were allowed to do magic before the holidays.
They played Exploding Snap, set off the very last of Fred and George's Filibuster fireworks, and practiced disarming each other by magic.
Harry was getting very good at it.
They were almost at King's Cross when Harry remembered something.
"Ginny—what did you see Percy doing, that he didn't want you to tell anyone?"
"Oh, that," said Ginny, giggling.
"Well—Percy's got a girlfriend."
Fred dropped a stack of books on George's head.
"It's that Ravenclaw prefect, Penelope Clearwater," said Ginny.
He's been meeting her all over the school in secret.
I walked in on them kissing in an empty classroom one day.
He was so upset when she was—you know—attacked.
You won't tease him, will you?"
"Wouldn't dream of it," said Fred, who was looking like his birthday had come early.
The Hogwarts Express slowed and finally stopped.
Harry pulled out his quill and a bit of parchment and turned to Ron and Hermione.
"This is called a telephone number," he told Ron, scribbling it twice, tearing the parchment in two, and handing it to them.
"When they hear what you did this year?"
All those times I could've died, and I didn't manage it?
