21/10/2023, 16:20 Forerunners and rivals of Christianity, vol.
Title: Forerunners and rivals of Christianity : being studies in religious history from 330 B.C.
(This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive.)
TO 330 A.D., VOL.
IN TWO VOLUMES VOL.
II Cambridge: at the University Press 1915 Cambridge: iv PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A.
They believed with the unquestioning faith of children that their dead Master would presently return to the earth, and that it would then be destroyed to make way for a new state of things in which, while the majority of mankind would be condemned to everlasting fire, His followers should taste all the joys of Paradise.
With this before their eyes, they turned, as has been said, their possessions into a common fund[8], they bound themselves together in a strict association for mutual help and comfort, and they set to work to sweep their fellows into the Christian fold with an earnestness and an energy that was the fiercer because the time for its exercise was thought to be so short.
“The Lord is at hand and His reward,” a saying which seems to have been a password among them[9], was an idea never absent from their minds, and the result was an outburst of proselytism such as the world till then had never seen.
They felt as we should feel were we to see a blind man walking towards a river bank.... Who that could hope to save a soul by tears and supplications would remain quiescent as men do now?....
In that age every Christian 3 was a missionary.
Nor were all the converts to the faith which His immediate disciples had left behind them possessed with the same simple faith and mental equipment as themselves[13].
Another cause that profoundly altered the views of the early Christian communities must have been the catastrophe and final dispersion of the Jewish nation.
Up to the time of the destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem under Titus, the Christians not only regarded themselves as Jews[15], but were looked upon by such of the other subjects of Rome as had happened to have heard of them, as merely one sect the more of a race always factious and given to internal dissensions.
Moreover, the hatred and scorn felt by these last for all other members of the human race had now been recognized by the Gentiles[19], and the repeated insurrections attempted by the Jews between the time of Titus and the final war of extermination under Hadrian showed that these feelings were shared by the Jewish communities outside Palestine[20].
It was therefore not at all the time which worldly-wise and prudent men, as many of the later Christian converts were, would choose for identifying themselves with a race which not only repudiated the relationship in the most practical way, but had lately exposed themselves on other grounds to the deserved execration of the civilized world.
They 6 found, too, both in the Orphic poems and in the mixed religions like that of the Alexandrian divinities which had sprung from the doctrines taught by these poems, the legend of a god dying and rising again for the salvation of mankind told in a way which had many analogies with the Gospel narratives of the Passion and Resurrection of Jesus[22].
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg writings which had begun to circulate among the scattered Christian communities as containing the authentic teaching of Jesus and His immediate disciples[23].
The prize which awaited success was, moreover, no mean one.
It is sometimes said that the only distinction that awaited a leader of the Church at this time was the distinction of being burned alive[25].
On the other hand, a Christian bishop, even at this early date, occupied a position which was really superior to that of most functionaries of the secular State.
Gifted with almost complete power over his flock in temporal as well as in spiritual matters, he was at once their judge and their adviser; and, so long as there were Pagan emperors on the throne, the faithful were forbidden to come to any tribunal but his[26].
His judgments, too, had a greater sanction than those of any temporal judge; for while he could not indeed lawfully condemn any of his hearers to death, he had in the sentence of excommunication which he alone could pronounce, the power of cutting them off from eternal life.
The adoration with which he was regarded by them also surpassed the respect paid to proconsul or legate[27]; and the literature of the time is full of allusions to the way in which, when brought before the temporal rulers, he was attended by weeping 8 multitudes who crowded round him even in prison, imploring his blessing and kissing his fetters[28].
Without taking this accusation as literally correct, it is plain that the chance of irresponsible power over those whom they could convince must have proved a most alluring bait to religious-minded persons who were also ambitious and intellectual men of the world[31].
The work thus recovered bore the title of the Refutation of all Heresies, and did succeed in giving us a fairly clear and coherent account of some twenty Gnostic sects, the very existence of many of which was previously unknown to us.
Moreover, it went a good way beyond its predecessors in pointing out that the real origin of all the heretical sects then existing was to be found, not so much in the diabolic inspiration which other writers thought sufficient to account for it, as in the Pythagorean, Platonic, and other philosophies then in vogue, together with the practice of astrology and magic rites which had come to form an important part of all the Pagan religions then popular.
It also showed a very extensive and apparently first-hand acquaintance with the works of the Gnostic leaders, and the lengthy quotations which it gives from their writings enable us to form a better idea than we had before been able to do both of what the Gnostic tenets really were and of the arguments by which they were propagated.
The reason for this paucity of documents is also plain enough.
“The antidote to the scorpion’s bite,” to use a patristic figure of speech[41], was felt by the early Church to be the actual cautery, and its leaders spared no pains to rout out and burn the writings of the heretics pending the time when they could apply the same treatment to their authors.
Even before their alliance with Constantine had put the resources of the State at their disposal, they had contrived to use the secular arm for this purpose.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg that of Diocletian, which was probably the most severe of them all, the Christian scriptures were particularly sought for by the Inquisitors of the State, and many of the orthodox boasted that they had arranged that the police should find the writings of the heretics in their stead[42].
Later, when it came to the turn of the Christians to dictate imperial edicts, the possession of heretical writings was made punishable with severe penalties[43].
Between 13 orthodox Christian and Pagan it is a wonder that any have survived to us.
Although these several documents were evidently not all written at one time and place, and cannot be assigned to a single author, the notes and emendations appearing on the MSS.
All of them seem to have held that there was one Supreme Being, the source of all good, and that matter was inherently malignant and opposed to him.
All of them, too, seem to have taught the perfectibility of man’s nature, the salvation of at any rate the majority of mankind, and the possibility of their rising in the scale of being; and all of them held that this was to be effected mainly by means of certain mysteries or sacramental rites which were assumed to have a magical efficacy.
All these fundamental characteristics find their origin in the beliefs of the pre-Christian religions and religious associations described above, and doubtless owed much to their influence.
But with these, there was now combined for the first time the recognition of the divinity of One who, while appearing upon earth as a man among men, was yet thought by all to be endowed with a 15 greater share of the Divine nature than they.
Orpheus, Moses, Homer, and the Jewish prophets had in turn been claimed as religious teachers who were divinely inspired; but Jesus was asserted by every later Gnostic school of whose teachings we have any evidence to have been Himself of higher essence and substance than the rest of mankind[48].
How far this assertion was dictated by the necessity for finding a superhuman authority for the revelation which each Gnostic leader professed to make to his disciples may be open to question; but in view of some contemporary controversies it is well to draw attention to the fact that the Divinity in some shape or other of Jesus, as well as what is now called His “historicity,” was never for a moment called in question during the first three centuries by Gnostic or Catholic.
This belief, however, led to consequences which do not at first sight seem to follow from it.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg or fear or vanity or any other of the weaknesses which afflict us[51].
But the one feature besides their beauty that distinguished the Greek gods from humanity was their immortality 16 or freedom from death; and if demigods like Heracles were said to have gone through the common experience of mortals, this was held as proof that their apotheosis or deification did not take place until they had left the earth[52].
The same difficulty was, perhaps, less felt by the other Mediterranean peoples, among whom, as we have seen, the idea of a god who died and rose again was familiar enough[55]; but the Gnostic leaders must always have had before their eyes the necessity of making Christianity acceptable to persons in possession of that Hellenistic culture which then dominated the world, and which still forms the root of all modern civilization.
Another point in which the chief post-Christian Gnostic sects seem to have resembled one another is the secrecy with which their teachings were surrounded.
By doing so, they laid themselves open to the accusation hurled at them with great virulence by the Church, that their secret rites and doctrines were so filthy as to shock human nature if made public—an accusation which at the first appearance of Christianity had been brought against the Catholics, and which the Church has ever since made use of against any sect which has differed from her, repeating it even at the present day against the Jews and the Freemasons[64].
The secret words and formulas delivered, and the secret rites which the initiate alone knows, are all that is necessary to assure him a distinguished place in the next world; and, armed with these, he can contemplate with perfect indifference all outward forms of worship.
19 These and other points which the post-Christian Gnostic sects seem to have had in common[67] can therefore be accounted for by their common origin, without accepting the theory of the textual critics that the Fathers had been deceived by an impostor who had made one document do duty several times over.
The post-Christian Gnostic sects have been compared with great aptness to the Protestant bodies which have sprung up outside the Catholic Church since the German Reformation[68], and the analogy in most respects seems to be perfect.
The difficulty would arise from want of first-hand knowledge, in spite of the invention of printing having made the dissemination of information on such subjects a thousand times more general than in sub-Apostolic times, and of the fact that the modern sects, unlike their predecessors, do not seek to keep their doctrines secret.
But the analogy shows us another cause of error.
But in spite of this, there seems to have been always a sort of fluidity of doctrine among them, and hardly any of the Nonconformist sects now profess the 20 dogmas with which they first came into existence.
Thus, for example, for many centuries after the Reformation the majority of the dissident sects which rejected all connection with the Catholic Church were among the stoutest defenders of the Divinity of Jesus, and the Socinians who held the contrary opinion were in an entirely negligible minority.
This forms the chief difficulty in dealing with the history of the Gnostic teaching, and although the discovery of fresh documents contemporary with those we now possess would undoubtedly throw additional light upon the subject, it is probable that it will never be entirely overcome.
Generally speaking, however, Gnosticism played a most important part in the history of 21 Christianity.
In religion, sentiment often plays a larger part than reason; and any faith which would enable men of weight and influence to continue the religious practices in which they had been brought up, with at the outset but slight modification, was sure of wide acceptance.
They offered in fact an easy road by which the wealthy, the learned, and the highly-placed could pass from Paganism to Christianity without suffering the inconvenience imposed upon the first followers of the Apostles.
On the other hand, it may be argued that the Church in receiving such recruits lost much of 22 that simplicity of doctrine and practice to which it had hitherto owed her rapid and unvarying success.
Baptism which, among the Jewish community in which Christianity was born, was an extremely simple rite, to be performed by anybody and entirely symbolical in its character[75], became an elaborate ceremony which borrowed the name as well as many of the adjuncts of initiation into the Mysteries.
Both these sacraments, as they now came to be called, were thought to be invested with a magical efficacy, and to demand for their proper celebration a priesthood as exclusive as, and a great deal more ambitious than, that of Eleusis or Alexandria.
To do so was possibly to choose the smaller of two evils, yet it can hardly be denied that the result of the differences of opinion thus aroused was to deluge the world with blood and to stay the progress of human knowledge for more than a 23 thousand years[77].
It may be so; but it is at least as possible that, if left unmolested, many of the wilder sects would soon have withered away from their own absurdity, and that none of the others would have been able to endure for long.
In this respect also, the history of the post-Reformation sects offers an interesting parallel.
Be that as it may, it is plain that the Catholic Church, in devoting her energies to the suppression of the Gnostic heresies, lost much of the missionary power which till then had seemed all-conquering.
Yet the 24 triumph was a costly one, and was in its turn followed by a schism which rent the Church in twain more effectually than the Gnostic speculations could ever have done.
In the West, indeed, the Latin Church was able to convert the barbarians who extinguished the Western half of the Roman Empire; but in the East, Christianity had to give way to a younger and more ardent faith.
How far this was due to the means taken by the Church to suppress Gnosticism must still be a matter of speculation, but it is certain that after her first triumph over heresy she gained no more great victories.
Phrygia, by which is meant the entire central part of Asia Minor or, to use its modern name, Anatolia, must from its situation have formed a great meeting-place for different creeds, among which that of the Jews occupied in the first centuries of our era a prominent place.
These Jews of the Eastern Diaspora or Dispersion had, however, by no means kept whole the faith of their forefathers, and there seems in consequence to have been less racial hatred between them and the earlier inhabitants of the country here than elsewhere[96].
These deities, whose alternate appearance as male and female, infant and adult, could only be explained to Western ears as the result of incestuous unions, could all on final analysis be reduced to one great divinity in whom all Nature was contained.
This perpetual self-identity under varying forms, this annihilation of death through the power of self- reproduction, was the object of an enthusiastic worship, characterized by remarkable self-abandonment and immersion in the divine, by a mixture of obscene symbolism and sublime truths, by negation of the moral distinctions and family ties that exist in a more developed society, but do not exist in the free life of Nature.
The worship of this pair, who were in the last resort considered as one bisexual being, was celebrated in the form of festivals and mystery-plays like those of the Middle Ages, in which the birth, nuptials, death, and resurrection of the divinities were acted in dramatic form.
At the same time, their fame and their worship had spread far beyond Phrygia.
As with the Alexandrian divinities, the respect paid to these stranger deities by the legions carried their worship into every part of the Roman world[108].
The element which the Jews of Asia contributed to Anatolian religion at this period was probably more important than has been generally supposed.
But the Babylonian or Oriental Jews, called in the Talmud and elsewhere the Ten Tribes, probably had some inborn sympathy with the more or less exalted divinities of the West.
Even in the temple of Jerusalem, Ezekiel sees in his vision “women weeping for Tammuz[110],” while Jeremiah complains of the Jews making cakes to the Queen of Heaven, which seems to be another name for the Mother of the Gods[111].
The feminine side of the Anatolian worship can therefore have come to them as no new thing.
They seem, too, to have intermarried freely with the Greek citizens, while the sons of these mixed marriages did not undergo the circumcision which the Jews of the Western Dispersion demanded not only from native Jews but also from proselytes of alien blood[114].
The Jews also brought with them into Phrygia superstitions or side-beliefs to which they were probably much more firmly attached than to their national religion.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg well-known rule in magic, to be of greater efficiency as the memory of their meaning and actual significance died out among them[116].
The names of the angels Gabriel, Michael, and Raphael given in the Old Testament and the Apocrypha are also common in all this literature[121].
Did the Babylonian Jews bring with them into Phrygia any theory of the universe other than the direct and unfettered rule of Jehovah and the creation of the world from nothing, which they gathered from their sacred books?
This system, on its theoretical or speculative side, attempts to explain the existence of the physical universe by postulating a whole series of intermediate powers emanating from the Supreme Being of whom they are the attributes or names; while, on the other or “practical,” it professes to perform wonders and to reveal mysteries by a childish juggling with letters in the shape of anagrams and acrostics or with their numerical values[125].
But there are other channels besides the Anatolian religion through which these ideas might have come into the West[127], and it will be better not to lay any stress upon this.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg immemorial in Western Asia with the worship of the Hellenized gods of Asia Minor, and the teachings of the already powerful Christian Church.
With this view they went back to what is probably the earliest philosophical theory of the origin of the universe, and declared that before anything was, there existed God, but God conceived as an infinite ocean of divinity, too great and too remote to be apprehended by man’s intelligence, of whom and of whose attributes nothing could be known or said, and who could only be likened to a boundless sea.
Something like this was the view of the earliest inhabitants of Babylonia, who declared that before heaven or earth or the gods came into being there was nothing but a vast waste of waters[129].
Here they may have been inspired, not by the Babylonian, but by its derivative, the Jewish tradition given in the Book of Genesis[134].
But this Light was in effect, though not in name, the chief god of their system, and in Asia Minor the gods had never perhaps been imagined as existing in any but human form.
They also called them, as will be seen later, the Father-and-Son.
In this, perhaps, they did not go outside the conception of the Anatolian religion, which always represented the Divine Son as the spouse of the goddess who gave him birth, and in this way eternally begetting himself.
But it was still necessary to make manifest the feminine aspect of the 40 deity which was always very prominent in Asia Minor.
But Hippolytus says without circumlocution that “this Man,” i.e.
First, however, another Power had to be produced which should serve as an intermediary or ambassador from the Supreme Triad to the worlds below it.
These angels purposely fashioned it from existing matter, the substance most removed from and hostile to God, in order that they might rule over it and thus possess a dominion of their own.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg herself, and some of it therefore, as it were, boiled over and fell down[158], when it was received by that matter which they, like Simon, looked upon as existing independently[159].
They described this last as separated into four elements, water, darkness, the abyss, and chaos, which we may suppose to be different strata of the same substance, the uppermost layer being apparently the waste of waters mentioned in Genesis.
Falling upon these waters, the superfluity of light of the Holy Spirit stirred them, although before immovable, to their lowest depths, and took from them a body formed apparently from the envelope of waters surrounding it.
Then, rising again by a supreme effort from this contact, it made out of this envelope the visible heaven which has ever since been stretched over the earth like a canopy[160].
Another and perhaps a later modification of their doctrine fabled that it sprang from the left side of the First Woman 46 while Christos emerged from her right.
Each of them fashioned from matter a habitation, and these are represented as heavens or hemispheres stretched out one under the other, every one becoming less perfect as it gets further from the Primordial Light[163].
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury and the Moon in probably that order[169].
How now did the earth on which we live come into being?
The primitive Babylonians, whose ideas and culture were at a very early date spread over the whole of Asia Minor, conceived the earth not as a globe but as a circular boat like the ancient coracle, over which the heavens stretched like a canopy or hemisphere[170].
The earth stretched below these, but was at the stage of creation at which we have arrived really without form and void, being the formless waste of waters which covered the denser darkness and chaos.
This so enraged him that he glared in his wrath upon the underlying 49 dregs of matter, and his thought (ἔννοια) implanted there took birth and shape[172].
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg earth-goddess’ consort[174].
All this was done by the secret contrivance of Sophia, whose object throughout was to win back the light and return it to the highest world whence it had originally come.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg proceeding which gave them to understand that they had become clothed with material bodies in which their stay would be only temporary[187].
In this, as in everything, he was opposed by his mother Sophia, who saved Noah, made the Prophets prophesy of Christ, and even arranged that John the Baptist and Jesus should be born, the one from Elizabeth and the other from the Virgin Mary[189].
But they still had to account in detail for the existence of the soul or incorporeal part of man.
They divided it, as Hippolytus tells us, into three parts which were nevertheless one, no doubt corresponding to the threefold division that we have before seen running through all nature into angelic, psychic, and earthly[192].
The angelic part is brought by Christos, who is, 54 as we have seen, the angel or messenger of the triune Deity, into “the form of clay[193],” the psychic we may suppose to be fashioned with the body by the planetary powers, and the earthly is possibly thought to be the work of the earthly demons hostile to man[194].
All this is illustrated by many quotations not only from the heathen poets and philosophers, but also from the Pentateuch, the Psalms, the Jewish Prophets, and from the Canonical Gospels and St Paul’s Epistles.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg Jesus, and held that only through Him could they attain salvation.
The difference between them and the orthodox in respect to this was that salvation was not, according to them, offered freely to all, but was on the contrary a magical result following automatically upon complete initiation and participation in the Mysteries[200].
It is plain, however, that the whole scheme of nature as set forth in the opinions summarized above is represented as contrived for the winning-back of the light— for which we may, if we like, read life—from matter, and this is represented as the work of Sophia herself.
For they have no complete advantage from the things there performed except that they are not castrated.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg the scheme, and thus bringing about the near approach of the kingdom of heaven.
This power, having pity on her repentance, implored the First Man to send Christos to her assistance.
Jesus was crucified; but Christos did not forget Him and sent a certain power to Him, who raised Him in both a spiritual and psychic body, sending the worldly parts back into the world.
After His Resurrection, Jesus remained upon earth eighteen months, and perception descending into Him taught what was clear.
These things He imparted to a few of his disciples whom He knew to be capable of receiving such great mysteries, and He was then received into heaven.
The return to Deity will then be complete, and matter will probably be destroyed.
In any case, it will have lost the light which alone gives it life[214].
In this case the serpent most likely represented the external ocean which the ancients thought surrounded the habitable world like a girdle.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg The generic law of the Whole was the first Intelligence of all The second [creation?]
But Jesus said: Father, behold!
In whatever way we may construe the first three lines, which were probably misunderstood by the scribe of the text before us, there can hardly be a doubt that they disclose a triad of three powers engaged in the work of salvation[217].
The fall of Sophia seems also to be alluded to in unmistakable terms, while the Mission of Jesus concludes the 63 poem.
Jesus, not here distinguished from the Christos or Heavenly Messenger of the Trinity, is described as sent to the earth for the purpose of bringing hither certain “mysteries” which will put man on the sacred path of Gnosis and thus bring about the redemption of his heavenly part from the bonds of matter.
These “mysteries” were, as appears in Hippolytus and elsewhere, sacraments comprising baptism, unction, and a ceremony at least outwardly resembling the Christian Eucharist or Lord’s Supper[218].
The division of the universe into three parts, i.e.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg independent existence, but was essentially malignant and opposed to God.
But this world was the worst example of the “discord” (ὰσυμφωνία), or as it was called later, the “confusion” (κέρασμος), caused by the mingling of light with matter, and as such was doomed to extinction and to eternal separation from the Divine.
[222] In like manner, the soul of man consisted of three parts 65 corresponding to the three worlds, that is to say, the pneumatic, psychic, and earthly; and of these three, the last was doomed to extinction.
Only by laying aside his earthly part as Jesus had done and becoming entirely pneumatic, could man attain to the light and become united with the Godhead.
How difficult then must it have been thought for the disembodied soul to find its way through the celestial places, and to confront the “guardians of the gate” of each with proof of his exalted rank in the scale of being?
In his attack on Christianity called The True Discourse, he charges the Christians generally with possessing a “diagram” in which the passage of the soul after death through the seven heavens is portrayed.
Although they differ somewhat in the arrangement of the circles, both are agreed that the blue and yellow circles signify the Holy Spirit and Christos.
Both Matter and Father Giraud also arrange four other circles labelled respectively Knowledge, Nature, Wisdom, and Comprehension (Γνῶσις, Φύσις, Σοφία, and Σύνεσις) within one large one with a border of intertwined lines which they call the Forethought of Sophia (Πρόνοια Σοφίας).
In any event, however, it is fairly clear that this part of the diagram represents 69 the Sophia who fell from the Holy Spirit into matter, and that her natural or first place should be the heaven stretched out above the seven planetary worlds.
This is, perhaps, the view taken by the framers of the diagram.
The remaining sphere, containing within itself ten circles in Matter’s reconstruction and seven in Father Giraud’s, is however fully described.
Some of them, at any rate, we meet again later.
I bear my own beard as a symbol and am ready to pass through thy rule, having been strengthened by that which was born from thee by the living word.
But their form and general purport are mostly intelligible and show undoubted signs of Egyptian origin.
The diagram itself seems to be fairly expressive of the more ancient teaching and in particular the division of all things below the Godhead into three 75 parts.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg with them the legends of the local cults among which they found themselves.
The sects derived from them seem to have made use of a great number of others, among which we find a Book of Baruch otherwise unknown to us, The Paraphrase of Seth, the Gospels of Nicodemus, Philip, and Thomas, together with a Gospel according to the Hebrews, which may or may not have been identical with the one which Hippolytus calls that according to the Egyptians[271].
Of these, the first two are entirely lost, and the documents which we possess bearing the name of the Gospel of Nicodemus relate the events of the Crucifixion in much the same way as the Canonical Gospels, but add thereto the visit of Jesus to Hades.
But it would be going too far to say that they “accepted” these or attributed to them a Divine origin, or thought them inspired in the sense in which the word was used by the Catholic Church.
The full effect of this method of interpretation we shall see later.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg otherwise have lacked and the absence of which must always have proved a bar to its propagation among other than Semitic peoples.
At the same time they greatly exalted the figure of Christ, who in their system became much less the personal teacher and master of the Jewish-Christian communities[281] than the angel or messenger of the Supreme Being sent from above in pursuance of a vast scheme for the redemption of the human race.
Such a use of writings venerable for their antiquity would never enter into the head of anyone endowed with any literary sense, but seems natural enough to persons of limited reading, to whom they form their sole material for study.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg which enabled them to reconcile the Jewish traditions, long familiar to them through spells and charms, with the legends of the Greek Mysteries, and at the same time protected them against the social and moral obloquy attaching to open adherence to the Jewish rites.
The Gnostic speculations were, however, destined to pass out of the hands of unlearned 86 men.
But in the provinces these things had little effect on the working of the system set up under the Empire; and the civilized world was for the first time, perhaps, in its history, beginning to feel the full benefits of good government and freedom from foreign invasion.
In these circumstances, new ethical ideals had arisen which affected all classes in the State.
It had, indeed, always been so in the Hellenic world, and while we find it exciting no surprise that a priest of the most sacred mysteries should be worse instead of better than other men[293], it was the philosophers to whom was committed what was later called the care of souls.
This shows an attitude of mind very different from the merely magical or, as we should say, superstitious belief in the efficacy of spells and ceremonies; and the example of Epictetus bears witness that it was that of slaves as well as of senators.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg with any degree of certainty; but all probability points to Alexandria as one of the places where the post-Christian Gnosticism first made alliance with philosophic learning.
It was into this atmosphere that Gnosticism entered at least as early as the reign of Hadrian.
Who was answerable for its first introduction there we have no means of knowing, nor do we even know with any certainty what form Egyptian Gnosticism first took[302].
One would imagine that the Hellenizing tendency of the Samaritans might have brought to Alexandria the doctrines of Simon Magus, but there is no direct evidence to that effect.
This act of volition, exercised in Hippolytus’ words “without will or mind or consciousness[310],” produced the Seed of the World which contained within itself all the future universe, as the grain of mustard-seed contains the roots, stem, branches, leaves, and innumerable other seeds of the future 91 plant[311].
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg other.
The same scenes were no doubt enacted in other parts of the Empire; and we may, perhaps, see in the fury of the persecutors the measure of their fear.
As to the mode of his action, however, a schism—or rather, a difference of opinion—early manifested itself among his followers.
So it did to the Fathers, who are never tired of pouring contempt upon it.
When, they said, God thought of producing offspring, He thereby acquired the name of Father; and because his offspring was true, that of Truth; and because He wished to appear in human form, he was called Man; and because He 100 assembled His attributes in His mind and selected from them those most proper for His purpose, they were called the Church; and as His only (or unique) Son was, as it were, uttered or sent forth to mankind, He was called the Word; and from His powers of salvation, Life; and so on[349].
Clement of Alexandria shows similar comprehensiveness when he said that in the Christian faith there are some mysteries more excellent than others—or, in other words, degrees in knowledge and grace[350]—, that the Hellenic philosophy fits him who studies it for the reception of the truth[351], and that the Christian should rejoice in the name of Gnostic, so long as he understands that the true Gnostic is he who imitates God as far as possible[352].
He even goes further, and himself uses the Gnostic method of personification of abstract qualities, as when he says that Reverence is the daughter of Law[353], and Simplicity, Innocence, Decorum, and Love, the daughters of Faith[354].
Yet although it was through this lieutenant of the Unknown Father that all things were made, he also was too great to act directly upon matter.
Children of Logos and Zoe.
This he did, but the four passions of Sophia, namely, fear, grief, perplexity, 107 and supplication, having once been created could not be destroyed, but became separate and independent beings.
His sevenfold realm is, it would seem, the seven astronomical heavens, of which perhaps the Paradise of Adam is the fourth[381].
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 3.
Our own ordered world or Cosmos created by the Demiurge but ruled by the Devil.
Much of this may be due to the desire apparently inborn in natives of Egypt to define with excessive minuteness the topography of the invisible world; but the disposition of these different Rulers was by no means a matter of indifference to mankind.
Yet it is he who sends forth the souls of men which reach them at their birth and leave them at their death.
But this soul of man is little else than what we call the life, and here as in all else the Demiurge is controlled without knowing it by his mother Sophia, who from her place in the Heavenly Jerusalem directs his operations.
[386] After leaving the body of matter, the soul will even be united with its especial angel in a still more perfect manner, as is a bridegroom with his bride[387], a state which is sometimes spoken of as “the Banquet,” and 111 seems connected with what has been said above about the meeting of Jesus the Joint Fruit with the Sophia Without[388].
Men have not a threefold soul, but belong to one of three classes, according to the source of their souls.
Either they are pneumatic, i.e.
There remain the psychic—the “natural men” of the New Testament[394]—who are not so to speak “saved”; but are yet capable of salvation.
How was this salvation to be brought about?
Jesus was accordingly born of the Virgin Mary; He was entirely pneumatic, that is His body was endowed with a spiritual soul, for Sophia Without herself descended into Mary and the germ thus sown by her was formed into a visible shape by the operation of the Demiurge[399].
As for His Mission, it seems to have consisted in revealing to man the constitution of the worlds above him, the course to be pursued by him to attain immortality, and to sum up the whole matter in one word, the Gnosis or knowledge that was necessary to salvation[400].
Jesus, the historical Jesus born of the Virgin Mary, though purely pneumatic or spiritual at the outset, received according to one account some tincture of the nature of all the worlds through which He had descended, and must therefore, probably, have had to abandon successive parts of His nature, as He reascended[401].
If this be so, it is plain that it was only that part of the soul of Jesus which He had received from Sophia which returned to her, and was doubtless re-absorbed in her being.
One is therefore led to examine with some closeness the alleged differences between his teaching and that of the orthodox Christianity of his time; and these, although they may have been vitally important, seem to have been very few.
We can hardly suppose so, when we consider the attitude of his immediate followers with regard to them.
The only inference to be drawn from this is either that the account of their teaching has been grossly corrupted or that they considered such questions as matters of opinion merely, on which all might freely debate, but which were not to be taken as touchstones of the faith.
He also considered the Son as a simple creature of the Father, and, therefore, necessarily, of lower rank[429].
So far as can now be seen, he, like all Egyptians, never lost sight of allegory in dealing with matters transcending sense.
And when he became fruitful, it seemed to him good at a certain time to engender and bring forth the most beautiful and perfect thing which he had within him: for he did not love solitude.
But he went far beyond them in applying the same method of interpretation to all the acts of Jesus recorded in the Gospels.
If He is said to go up to Jerusalem, it means that He went up from the world of matter to the Heaven of Sophia which is called Jerusalem[434].
But beyond this, he seems to have paid great attention to what is called the “pastoral” duty of a religious teacher or the care of souls, and to have busied himself to show how religion could be used to console and sustain the heart.
All the fragments that we have left of the writings of himself and his followers are directed towards this end; and 125 would, from this point of view, do credit to any doctor of the Church.
For the multitude of spirits dwelling in it do not suffer it to be pure; but each of them performs his own deeds, insulting it often with unseemly lusts.
And the heart seems to be treated somewhat like the courtyard of an inn.
For the latter has holes and ruts in it, and is often filled with dung; men living filthily in it, and taking no care for the place because it belongs to others.
But when the one good Father visits it, it is sanctified and gleams with light.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg followers continued to worship with the orthodox, and to resort to the priests of the Church at large for the administration of the Church’s sacraments.
One can only say that there is no proof that they did so.
The reward most constantly before the eyes of those about to obtain what was called “the crown” of martyrdom was that by thus giving their lives for the faith they would immediately after death become united with the Deity, instead of waiting 127 like other Christians for the Last Judgment[443].
Hence, intending martyrs were regarded even while yet alive with extraordinary reverence by the rest of the faithful, who, as we know from heathen as well as Christian writers, were in the habit of flocking into the prisons after them, weeping over them and kissing their fetters, and deeming it a privilege to minister in every way to the necessities of those who might by a sort of anticipation be regarded as already Divine[444].
As the spiritual or pneumatics were saved in any event, and were, already even in this life, as was expressly said, a kind of “gods,” it was manifestly not for them to trouble themselves about obedience to the moral law.
There remained the psychics or animal men, for whom indeed a certain course of life was prescribed before they could attain salvation.
For it was an age when religious impostors of all kinds found an easy market in the credulity of their fellows, and charlatans everywhere abounded who were ready to support their claims to exclusive knowledge of holy things by false miracles and juggling tricks.
He seems, too, to have himself administered baptism accompanied by exorcisms in the Hebrew language, and to have profaned the Eucharist with juggling tricks which made the cup to overflow and turned the water it contained into wine having the semblance of blood[450].
Scandals of the kind here hinted at were not unknown in the Catholic Church itself, and Christian ministers have been found in all ages, sects, and countries who have been willing to abuse for their own purposes the power which religion gives them over the opposite sex.
Probably, however, it here propagated itself sporadically, its opinions appearing now and then among isolated writers and teachers, who probably drew their disciples carefully from among the Christian community, and only disclosed their system to those who showed some aptitude for it.
As the quotations in it presuppose an acquaintance on her part with Old Testament history as well as with the Canonical Gospels and the Pauline Epistles, there can be little doubt that she was already a Christian convert.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg however, the Gnostic teachers found a soil ready prepared for them.
Egyptian Christianity, whether founded, according to tradition, by St Mark or not, never seems to have gone through the intermediate stage of observing the prescriptions of the Jewish Law while preaching its abrogation, and, in Alexandria especially, so far appealed to those learned in the Hellenistic and other philosophies as to necessitate the founding of a Christian school there for their study.
Moreover, from the time of Hadrian onwards, the Egyptians were animated by a bitter and restless hatred against their Roman masters, and this feeling, which 132 was by no means without justification, disposed them to embrace eagerly any ideas condemned by the bishops and clergy of Rome and of Constantinople.
Further East, the same causes produced similar effects, though in this case they were probably modified by the necessity of combating the remains of heathen religions which there lingered.
The accession of Julian brought them a temporary respite[456]; but on his death in the Persian campaign, the retreat of the Roman eagles probably gave them their quietus.
One of its later developments we shall see in the next chapter.
An introduction in narrative form informs us that Jesus, after rising from the dead, spent eleven years in teaching His disciples the arrangement of the heavenly places “only so far as the places” of a power whom He calls “the First Mystery,” and declares to be “before all mysteries,” and to be “within the veil,” being “the father of the likeness of a dove[465].” The result of this limitation was, we are told, that the disciples 136 were ignorant not only that any power existed higher than the First Mystery, but also of the origin of the “places” or worlds of those material and quasi-material powers who, here as in the earlier systems, are responsible for the governance of the world and the fate of mankind.
While the disciples are sitting with Jesus on the Mount of Olives, however, He is carried away from them into Heaven by a great “power” or shape of light which descends upon Him.
Jesus then proceeds to describe His own Incarnation.
And it is through him that all the mysteries exist and all their places.
Come unto us, for we are thy fellows and thy members[473]!
This also is part of us.
And now that the time is fulfilled, clothe thyself in it!
Come unto us, for we all stand near to thee that we may clothe thee with all the glory of the First Mystery by His command.
In the first is the glory of all the names of all the mysteries and of all the emanations which are in the ranks of the receptacles of the Ineffable One.
And there is also within it the glory of the name which is on the right, and of all those who are in the middle.
Now, then, the time is fulfilled.
Come unto us quickly, that we may clothe thee with them until thou hast accomplished the entire ministry of the completion of the First Mystery, the ministry which has been laid upon thee by the Ineffable One.
Come then unto us quickly in order that we may clothe thee with them according to the command of the First Mystery.
For yet a little while, a very little while, and thou wilt cease to be in the world.
Although something is said here and elsewhere in the book of his “receptacles” and “places[485],” no particulars of them are given, they being apparently reserved for a future revelation[486].
Later in the book, Jesus reveals to His disciples that He Himself is the First Mystery “looking outward[488],” and this seems to show that the author’s conception of the relations between Him and the First Person of the Trinity did not differ much from that of the Catholic Church[489].
The world of this First Mystery extends downwards as far as what is here, as in the Epistle to the Hebrews[490], called “the veil,” which is perhaps the veil of sense separating all things contaminated by mixture with matter from the Divine.
This First Mystery is said to consist of twenty-four “mysteries”; but these do not seem to be, as in the older systems, places or worlds, but rather attributes or aspects of the Deity which together go to make up His whole being, as a number of letters are required to make up a word or name[491].
Their names and relative positions are not easy to identify; but, thanks to some hints given in other parts of the book, the universe below “the veil” may be reconstructed thus[495]:—Its upper part contains the Treasure-house of light where, as its name implies, the light as it is redeemed from matter is stored up.
The highest spirit in the Treasure- 147 house is called the First Precept or the Recorder, and with him is associated the Great Light, who is said to be the “legate” of the Ineffable One[497].
It is divided in the first instance into three parts, the Right-hand, the Middle, and the Left-hand[500].
Of these, the Right-hand contains the spirits who emanated from the Five Trees of the Treasure-house.
In the Middle come the powers who are set over the reincarnation of souls and the consequent redemption of mankind.
He also has twelve deacons or ministers under him[510].
The other great Leader 150 of the Middle is the Virgin of Light[511].
She has among her assistants seven other virgins of light[512], after whose likeness Mary the Mother of Jesus and Mary Magdalene are said to have been made, and we also read of “receivers” who are under her orders[513].
It is doubtless for this reason that it is from her that the body of Jesus is said to have come—i.e.
She is also spoken of throughout as the origin of all the matter within the world of sense[520].
We now pass from the unseen world, which can nevertheless be comprehended as being in part at least material, to the starry world above us which is plainly within the reach of our 152 organs of sense.
As they are called in one passage the 12 hours of the day, it may be concluded that they are the 12 zodiacal signs or, in other words, the Zodiac or 12 constellations of fixed stars through which the sun appears to pass in his yearly course[523].
Although nowhere expressly stated, it may be concluded that they emanated from the last member of the triad of the Left, i.e.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg each soul is determined on its downward passage through it, and below that again the Sphere simply so called, which is the visible firmament apparently stretched above us.
We can now resume the narrative of the book which has been interrupted in order that a description of the universe through which Jesus passes on His ascension might be given.
This He does, as He tells His disciples, for a double reason.
But one day happening to look forth from her place and beholding the light of the Treasure-house, she longed to ascend towards it and began to sing praises to it.
But this is not the end.
Jesus tells her that when “three times” are fulfilled[538], she will be tormented again.
The general hostility of this starry world and its rulers towards mankind is a leading feature in both systems.
This would only leave Beelzebub, prince of the demons, unaccounted for; but the author does not here give any detailed description of Chaos which may be supposed to be his seat.
What need then to elaborate the description of its most malignant ministers?
The joys of the elect in the world to come, on the contrary, receive the fullest treatment.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg and here Jesus will reign with the disciples for 1000 “years of light” which are equal to 365,000 of our years[558].
Here the thrones of the twelve “disciples” (μαθηταί) will depend on His[559], “but Mary Magdalene and John the Virgin shall be higher than all the disciples[560].” In the midst of these beatitudes they will apparently receive further instruction or further mysteries, the effect of which will be that they will at the conclusion of the Millennium be united with Jesus in so close a union that, as it is expressly said, they will become one with Him, and finally they will become members of the Godhead and, as it were, “the last limb of the Ineffable One[561].” In the meantime they will be at liberty to visit any of the worlds below them.
No such requirements, He says, will be made from those who have received the higher mysteries, whose souls on leaving the body will become great streams of light, which will pass through all the lower places “during the time that a man can shoot an arrow,” the powers therein falling back terror-stricken from its light until the soul arrives at its appointed place.
The Greek word μυστήριον, which is that used in the Coptic MS., does not seem to mean etymologically more than a secret, in which sense it was applied to the ceremonies or secret dramas exhibited, as has been said, at Eleusis and elsewhere, and later, to the Christian Eucharist[564].
But in the part of the book with which we are now 166 dealing it seems to refer not to hidden persons, but to secret things.
These things seem to fall into two categories, one of which is spoken of as the Mystery of the Ineffable One, and the other as the Mysteries of the First Mystery.
The Mystery of the Ineffable One is said to be one, but, with the provoking arithmetic peculiar to the book, it is immediately added that it “makes” three mysteries and also another five, while it is still one[565].
It is also fairly clear that each of these Twelve Mysteries of the First Mystery must be some kind of ceremony, and a ceremony which can be performed without much preparation or many 167 participants.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg One which is in him; and all shall make haste to pass him from one hand to the other, and to guide him into every Place and every order, until they shall lead him before the Virgin of Light, all the Places being filled with fear before the sign of the mystery of the kingdom of that Ineffable One which shall be with him.
But the Virgin of Light shall seal that soul with the excellent 168 seal which is this XXXX[569], and she shall have it cast in the same month in which it went forth from the body of matter into a righteous body which will find the God of Truth and the excellent mysteries in order that it may receive them by inheritance and also the light for eternity.
In any event, the rite was looked upon by Catholic and heretic alike as an initiation or commencement of the process by which man was united with Christ.
Its position shortly before the close of the book[584], the rhapsodic and almost rhythmical phrases with which the approach to it is obscured rather than guarded, and the way in which directly the revelation is made, the author falls off into merely pastoral matters relating to the lesser mysteries, all show that the author has here reached his climax.
But does this revelation mean anything else than that Jesus is Himself the victim which is to be received in the Sacrament or μυστήριον of the Altar?
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg above as to the wonder-working celebration of the Eucharist by Marcus, when the wine was made to change visibly into blood before the eyes of the recipient[587].
Those who were worthy of admission to the mysteries of the 173 Ineffable One and of the First Mystery were the pneumatics or spiritual men predestined to them from before their birth.
For the others, the psychic or animal men, there were the mysteries “of the light,” which are, so to speak, the first step on the ladder of salvation[589].
If the recipient of these lesser mysteries dies before complete initiation, he has 174 to undergo a long and painful series of reincarnations, his soul being sent back into the Sphere of Destiny and eventually into this world by the Virgin of Light, who will, however, take care that it is placed in a “righteous” body which shall strive after the mysteries until it finds them.
But the way to these lower mysteries is the complete renunciation of this world.
It may be said at the outset that the conception of the universe which appears throughout is so thoroughly Egyptian that it must have been written for Egyptian readers, who alone could have been expected to understand it without instruction.
The idea of the Supreme Being as an unfathomable abyss was, as has been said in Chapter II, a very old one in Egypt, where one of the oldest cosmogonies current made Nu or the sea of waters the origin of both gods and men[596].
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg the lesser gods were the limbs or members of the Supreme[597].
Not less Egyptian—perhaps in its origin exclusively Egyptian—is the view that the knowledge of the places of the world after death and their rulers was indispensable to the happiness of the dead.
All the scholars who have studied it are agreed that the Coptic version has been made from a Greek original by a scribe who had no very profound acquaintance with the first-named tongue[606].
Now the first direct and acknowledged quotation from St John’s Gospel that we have is that made by 178 Theophilus, who was made bishop of Antioch in A.D. 170, and the generally received opinion is that this Gospel, whenever written, was not widely known long before this date[608].
The first and second books of it, as they are called by the annotator, come to an end, rather abrupt but evidently intentional, on the 252nd page of the MS.
Jesus “standing on the shore of the sea Ocean,” then makes invocation to the “Father of every Fatherhood, boundless light,” in a prayer composed of Egyptian and Hebrew words jumbled together after the fashion of the spells in the Magic Papyri[622].
The two steering oars of this last are depicted as a male 182 and a female dragon who take away the light from the rulers of the stars among whom they move.
The remaining document of the British Museum MS., being the third in order of place, was probably taken from the same book as that last described, and was placed out of its natural order to satisfy the pedantry of the scribes, the rule in such cases being that the longer document should always come first.
There is also given here a very curious account of man’s invisible part, which 184 is said to be made up of the “Power” infused into it by the Virgin of Light which returns to its giver after death[630], and the Moira or Fate which it derives from the Sphere of Destiny and has as its sole function to lead the man it inhabits to the death he is predestined to die[631].
This not only incites the soul to sin, but follows it about after death, denouncing to the powers set over the punishments the sins it has induced the soul to commit[632].
The author’s intention is evidently to frighten his readers with the fate reserved for those who do not accept the teaching of the sect.
And thereafter they lead it unto the Virgin of Light who judges the righteous and the sinners, and she shall judge it.
And the servants of the Sphere lead it into the water which is below the Sphere, that the boiling steam may eat into it, until it cleanse it thoroughly.
The same remarks apply with but little modification to some other fragments of Gnostic writings which have come down to us.
The Bruce Papyrus, like the British Museum parchment MS., contains more than one document.
Unfortunately the arrangement of the leaves is by no means certain, and the two scholars who have studied it most thoroughly differ almost as widely as possible as to the order of its contents.
He sent them powers capable of discernment, and knowing the arrangement of the hidden Eons.
He sent them according to the arrangement of those who are hidden[650].
He established their Orders according to the orders of the Height, and according to the hidden arrangement they began from below upward in order that the building might unite them.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg amplification of it.
As to their absolute date, it seems impossible to arrive at any useful conclusion.
In the documents of the Bruce Papyrus this is also to be found in more sporadic fashion, nearly the whole of the book being occupied by the means by which men are to escape the punishment of their sins.
Utter this once only.
Take in your two hands this number, 1119.
The ancient Egyptian had always an intense fear of the world after death, and from the first conceived a most gloomy view of it.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg on their father and their mother, their heart leaves hold of their wives and children.
196 The living water which earth has for every one there, is foul here where I am; though it runs for every one who is on earth, foul is for me the water which is with me.
I do not know any spot where I would like to be, since I reached this valley!
Give me water which runs towards me, saying to me, ‘Let thy jug never be without water’; bring to me the north wind, on the brink of water, that it may fan me, that my heart may cool from its pain.
In these we see the dead wandering from one chamber to another, breathing a heavy and smoke-laden air[667], and confronted at every step by frightful fiends compounded from the human and bestial forms, whose office is to mutilate, to burn, and to torture the soul.
Every chamber had a guardian who demanded of the dead his own name, without repeating which the soul was not allowed to enter[669].
Only thus could he hope to win through to the Land of Osiris, where he might enjoy a relative beatitude and be free to go about and visit the other heavenly places[672].
For this purpose, the map, so to speak, of the route was engraved on the walls of the tombs of those who could afford it, and the necessary words to be said written down.
Gnosticism then, in Egypt soon relapsed into the magic from which it was originally derived; and we can no longer wonder that the Fathers of the Church strove as fiercely against it as they did.
The compromise that had served for some time to reconcile the great mass of the unthinking people to the religion of Christ thus broke down[679]; and Egypt again showed her power of resisting and transforming all ideas other than those which thousands of years 200 had made sacred to her people.
Meanwhile, the bridge between Paganism and Christianity which Gnosticism afforded had been crossed by many.
In this way, doubtless, many thousands were converted to Christianity who would otherwise have kept aloof from it, and thus hastened its triumph over the State.
The history of Egyptian Christianity has yet to be written; but it seems from the first to have been distinguished in many important particulars from that which conquered the West, and it is impossible to attribute these differences to any other source than Gnosticism.
The Pharaonic Egyptian had always been fanatical, submissive like all Africans to priestly influence, and easily absorbed in concern for his own spiritual welfare.
Given the passion for defining the undefinable and the love of useless detail which marked everything in the old faith, and in systems like those of the Coptic texts which form the subject of this chapter he had the religion to his mind.
Nor were other and less abstract considerations wanting.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg Asia, had come to be looked upon by the mass of the people as that which was most 201 desirable on earth[680]; and here was a faith which called upon the Egyptian to withdraw from the world and devote himself to the care of his own soul.
For these monks and hermits the Hellenistic civilization might as well not have existed; but they preserved their native superstitions without much modification, and the practices of magic, alchemy, and divination were rife among them[681].
The fear of hell came to occupy a larger and larger part in her exhortations, and apocalypse after apocalypse was put forth in which its terrors were set out with abundant detail.
Apart from these external matters, on the other hand, the outbreak of Gnosticism possibly rendered a real service to Christianity.
Gnosticism, so long as it was unchecked, was a real danger to the Church, but without it Christendom would probably have broken up into hundreds of small independent communities, and would thus have dissipated the strength which she eventually found in unity.
Yet these measures could not come into operation without producing a reaction, the end of which we have yet to see.
In such of these as have come down to us, the desire of their authors to 204 dissociate themselves from the Jews, then at the nadir of their unpopularity, is plainly manifest, and no doubt gave the note to the innovators[688].
Of the circumstances which led to this event we have no knowledge, and it was even said in later times that he was born a Christian, and that his father had been a bishop of the Church.
A better founded story is that, on his conversion, he brought into the common fund of the Church a considerable sum of money, which is said to have been paid out to him on his expulsion[692].
When at the mature age of forty he went to Rome, it seems reasonable to 205 suppose that he accepted the orthodox teaching, as it is said that there was some talk of his being made bishop of what was even then the richest and highest in rank of all the Christian Churches.
It is said that before his death he wished to be reconciled to the Church, but was told that he could only be readmitted when he had restored to the fold the flock that he had led away from it.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg was able to make the restitution required[695].
This story also can only be accepted with a great deal of reserve[696].
They are, however, unanimous as to the more than Puritanical attitude adopted by its founders.
For this primitive faith, he appealed, like the makers of the German Reformation, to the words of Scripture, but he differed from them most widely in the limitations that he placed upon them.
It was, he declared, impossible to find any attributes in common between the God of 208 the Old Testament and the Supreme (and benevolent) Being of whom Jesus announced Himself the Son, and he therefore rejected the Old Testament entirely.
In the same way, he said that the Canonical Gospels then received among Christians had become overlaid with Jewish elements introduced by the Asiatic converts among whom they were first circulated; and that the narrative in the Gospel according to Luke was alone trustworthy[709].
He further removed from it every passage which represents Jesus as drinking wine or taking part in any festivity, and in the Lord’s Prayer he struck out the petition for delivery from evil, while modifying the “Hallowed be thy name!” It has been suggested that in this last case he may have given us an older version than that of the Canon[711].
He rejected entirely the Acts of the Apostles, The Apocalypse of St John, the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the Epistles generally called “Pastoral,” as well as all those passing under the names of St John, St James, St Peter and St Jude.
Below Him was the Creator, or rather the Demiurge or Fashioner of the World, in constant conflict with matter, which he is always trying unsuccessfully to conquer and subdue in accordance with his own limited and imperfect ideas.
Yet the Demiurge was the creator of evil on his own showing[717], and as such is entitled to no adoration from man, whom he has brought into a world full of evil.
Man’s rescue from this is due to the Supreme God, who sent His Son Jesus Christ on earth that He might reveal to mankind His Heavenly Father, and thus put an end to the sway of the Demiurge.
According to this, the body of Jesus was not real flesh and blood, and had indeed no actual existence, but was a phantasm which only appeared to 211 mankind in the likeness of a man[718].
Man was sure to give way to the evil desires inherent in matter, and on doing so became with all his race subject to the power of matter and the evil spirits inhabiting it.
It is true that the Demiurge had devised a plan of salvation in the shape of the Law of the Jews delivered to them on Sinai.
But this concerned one small people only, and it was but a fraction of that community which could hope to observe it in all its forms and ceremonies.
For those Gentiles, and even for those Jews who from weakness or obstinacy did not obey the Law, he had prepared punishment and, apparently, eternal tortures.
The others, he said, had overlaid the faith that they had received with Jewish traditions; but Paul, chosen by Jesus after His Ascension[722], had resisted their attempt to reintroduce the Law of the Jews, and was, in his own words, an apostle sent not 212 from men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father who raised Him from the dead.
Everywhere, it would seem, he took the Biblical texts that he quotes at their literal meaning and never seems to have attempted to translate any of them by trope or figure.
In like manner, we find him, so far as his adversaries’ account goes, entirely free from that preoccupation concerning the divisions and order of the spiritual world which plays so large a part in the speculations of the systems hitherto described.
Nor does he show any tendency to the deification of abstract ideas which is really at the root of all Gnostic systems whether before 214 or after Christ.
Hence, he in no way contributes to the growth, so luxuriant in his time, of mythology and allegory[736].
In everything he exhibits the hard and unimaginative quality of the practical man.
These considerations have great bearing on the question of the source of his heresy.
In this, as in the emphasis which he laid on faith rather than knowledge as the source of man’s happiness in this world and the next, he again anticipated in a most striking manner the views of the German Reformers some fourteen centuries later[739].
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg death[743].
The reason of all this 216 austerity was apparently their contempt for the kingdom of the Demiurge and their resolve to do nothing to prolong his rule.
This was the more to their credit that they were by no means at one in matters of belief.
But in that case, how did it come into existence?
It surely could not be the creation of the Supreme and benevolent Being whose name was Love; and if not, how did it come to exist independently of Him?
But his followers apparently refused to do so; and hence there arose considerable diversity of opinion.
This, however, is extremely unlikely in 218 view of the unanimous assertion of the Fathers nearer to him in point of time that he taught the existence of two principles only; and it is probable that the theory of three principles, if seriously advanced, must have been the work of one of his followers.
With their synagogues and meeting-places taken away from them and handed over to the Catholics, many of them must have looked about for some tolerated community which they could join, and of all that thus offered themselves, the Catholic Church offered the greatest inducements to them.
In spite of the efforts of recent writers to maintain the contrary[766], it is difficult to see that this first attempt, honest and sincere as it undoubtedly was, at the reformation of Christianity ever bore fruit of lasting value.
But this is a case of revival rather than of descent, and a reformer who has to wait some eighteen centuries before his ideas meet with acceptance, may well be held to have failed to influence after ages.
The heathen religions which for some time disputed the ground with the Church have also left few traces partly for the same reason, and partly because the secrecy to which they pledged their votaries made it unlikely that many written documents of these faiths would survive.
Alexander had conquered but had not destroyed the Persians; and, although the magic of the hero’s personality held them faithful to him during his too brief life, he was no sooner dead than they hastened to prove that they had no intention of tamely giving up their nationality.
Thanks probably to the knowledge of this support in reserve, when Western Asia found the military power of the Greek kings becoming exhausted by internecine wars, she began to throw off the alien civilization that she had in part acquired, 225 and to return more and more to Persian ways[771].
In this struggle the advantage was not always, as we should like to think, on the side of the Europeans.
In 603 A.D., it looked as if Persia were at length in the position to deliver the final blow in a war which had lasted for more than five centuries.
After six brilliant campaigns he dictated to the Persians a triumphant peace in the very heart of their empire[782].
The effect of this long rivalry might have been expected to produce in the Romans during its continuance a hearty dislike of the customs and institutions of the nation opposed to them; but almost the exact contrary was the result.
It may be argued that Rome’s proved skill in government was in no small measure due to her ready adoption of all that seemed to her admirable in the nations that she overcame.
Or it may be that the influence which the memory of Alexander exercised over all those who succeeded to his empire led them to imitate him in his assumption of Persian manners.
The fact remains that, long before the division of the Roman Empire into East and West, the Romans displayed a taste for Oriental luxury and magnificence which seems entirely at variance with the simplicity and austerity of the republican conquerors of Carthage.
It may of course be said that this was in external matters only, and that the “Persian furniture” which excited Horace’s wrath[783] might if it stood alone be looked upon as merely a passing fashion; but the Court ceremonial introduced by Diocletian argues a steady tendency towards Persian customs and forms of government that must have been in operation for centuries.
But Diocletian was in all respects but language a Persian emperor or Shah, and his style of “Lord and God,” his diadem, his silken state dress, the elaborate ritual of his court, and the long hierarchy of its officials, were all designed to compel his subjects to recognize the fact[784].
As usual, the official form of religion in the Roman Empire had for some time given indications of the coming change in the form of government.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg who were put down by Pompey[786].
230 When the Roman troops marched back to Europe, as was constantly the case during the civil wars which broke out on the downfall of the Julian house, they took back with them the worship of the new god whom they had adopted, and he thus became known through almost the whole of the Roman Empire[789].
In our own barbarous country we have found them not only in London and York, but as far west as Gloucester and Chester and as far north as Carlisle and Newcastle[791].
The Balkan countries, like Italy, Germany, Southern France, and Spain, are full of them; but there was one part of the Roman Empire into which they did not penetrate freely.
This was Greece, where the memories of the Persian Wars long survived the independence of the country, and where the descendants of those who fought at Salamis, Marathon, and Thermopylae would have nothing to do with a god coming from the invaders’ fatherland.
If length of ancestry went for anything in such matters, he might indeed claim a greater antiquity than any deity of the later Roman Pantheon, with the single exception of the Alexandrian gods.
His appearance in a similar connection in the sacred books of the Persians led the founders of the comparative study of religion to think that he must have been one of the primitive gods of their hypothetical Aryan race, and that his worship must go back to the imaginary time when Persians and Hindus dwelt side by side in the plains of Cashmere.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg literature collected by the Sassanian kings.
It follows therefore that, like the religions of many uncivilized people of the present day, it would draw no very sharp distinction between good and evil gods, and would be as ready to propitiate or make use of the evil, that is those hostile to man, as the good or benevolent.
235 It is easy to see how such a cult, without the control of public ceremonies and with its unabashed traffic with the powers of evil, would be likely to degenerate into compulsion or magic.
This was the idea that the positions and changes of the heavenly bodies exercise an influence over the affairs of the world and the lot both of kingdoms and individual men.
With regard to the first-named, both Greeks and Romans knew him well and identified him unhesitatingly with Zeus and Jupiter[820].
Yet this does not necessarily mean that he was actually the day-star visible to mankind, and the Greeks knew well enough how to distinguish between Apollo the god of light who was once at any rate a sun-god, and Helios the Sun itself[838].
As we shall see, the two theories are by no means irreconcilable, although absolute proof of neither can yet be offered.
It is comprised in eleven or twelve scenes or tableaux which we will take in their order[842].
The god is represented in this scene as struggling from the rock in which he is embedded below the waist, and always uplifts in one hand a broad knife of which we shall afterwards see him make use, and in the other a lighted torch[843].
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg The next two scenes are more difficult to interpret with anything approaching certainty.
He is here naked, save for the distinctive cap; but immediately after, he is seen emerging from the leafage fully clothed in Oriental dress.
Several variants of this scene exist, in one of which a suppliant is kneeling before the archer-god and raising his hands towards him as if in prayer; while in another, the rock may well be a cloud.
It seems therefore useless to discuss them further here.
Passing on, we come to a series of scenes, the meaning of which is more easily intelligible.
In all of these a bull plays a principal part.
Then he is depicted grazing peaceably or raising his head now and then as if alarmed by some sudden noise[852].
If so, it would afford some proof that the initiate here, as in the mysteries of Isis, was made to impersonate the sun, which is on other grounds likely enough.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg We return to the scenes with the Bull, which here reach their climax.
It shows the god grasping with his left hand the nostrils of the beast, and kneeling with his left knee in the middle of the Bull’s back, while with his right hand he plunges the broad-bladed dagger with which he was armed at his birth into the Bull’s shoulder[866].
A dog leaps forward to lap the blood flowing from the wound, while at the same time a scorpion seizes the Bull by the genitals.
A serpent also forms part of the group, but his position varies in the different monuments, while that of the other animals does not.
Sometimes, he lifts his head towards the blood, as if to share it with the dog, sometimes he is extended along the ground beneath the Bull’s belly in apparent indifference to the tragedy enacted above him[867].
These two human figures are alike in every particular save that one of them bears a torch upright with the flame pointing upwards, while the other holds a 246 similar torch reversed so that the flame juts towards the earth.
The meaning of the group as a whole can, however, be explained by the documents of the later Persian religion.
That the dog plays the part of the guardian of the Bull’s soul is probable from what we know of later Persian beliefs[871], while the scorpion as the creature of Ahriman may be here represented as poisoning the seed of future life at its source[872].
This cave, according to Porphyry, represents the universe.
The Legend, however, does not end with the death of the Bull.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg driven off by the ray-crowned Helios himself to the abode of light above the firmament[878].
This monster had the body of a man[890] with the head of a lion, while round his body is twined a huge serpent, whose head either appears on the top of the lion’s or rests on the human breast.
On his body, between the folds of the serpent, there sometimes appear the signs of the four quarters of the year, i.e.
Aries and Libra, Cancer and Capricorn[891], and in other examples a thunderbolt on the breast or on the right knee[892].
The figure is often mounted on a globe which bears in one instance the two crossed bands which show that it is intended for our earth, and in one curious instance he appears to bear a flaming torch in each hand, while his breath is kindling a flame which is seen rising from an altar beside him[893].
Even if we do not accept the later myth which reconciles Zeus to his adversaries[907], the story does not go further than to say that the Titans attempted to gain heaven and were thrust back to their own proper dwelling-place, the earth.
In all this, his functions do not go beyond those of the 255 Greek Hades, with whom Plutarch equates him.
That they did so in a related matter can be shown by direct evidence.
The seven heavens are also found in many Oriental documents of the time, including the Book of the Secrets of Enoch[919] and the Apocalypse of Baruch[920].
The other two signs, viz.
258 Five of these, that is to say, Jupiter himself, Saturn, Mars, Venus, and Mercury may be intended as symbols of the planets which, then as now, bore these names.
But there are others such as Juno, Neptune and Amphitrite, Pluto and Proserpine, Apollo, Vulcan, and Hercules who cannot by any possibility be considered as planetary signs[925].
This does not seem very probable, because the Persians did not figure their gods in human form[927].
As appears from the authors last quoted, the whole of the worship was conducted in “mysteries” or secret ceremonies like the Eleusinian and the rites of the Alexandrian divinities, although on a more extended scale.
It seems therefore that somebody was supposed to suffer death during the ceremony, perhaps under the same circumstances as already suggested in the kindred case of the Alexandrian Mysteries[950].
We are a little better informed as to the degrees of initiation, which numbered seven.
It would seem that either he, or the initiating priests, or perhaps the other assistants, had to assume disguises consisting of masks corresponding to the animals named in the first and fourth of these degrees, and to make noises like the croaking of birds and the roaring of lions[952].
Porphyry, too, tells us that in the degree of Lion, the initiate’s hands and lips were purified with honey.
Whether they were thought to go further still, we can only guess.
Then, 266 after certain spells have been recited, the initiate sees the disk of the Sun, which opens, disclosing “doors of fire and the world of the gods within them.” Then follow more invocations to the gods of the seven planetary worlds who appear in due course, and presumably give him admission to their realms.
They are followed by seven male gods also dressed in linen robes and with golden crowns, but equipped with the heads of black bulls, who are called “the rulers of the Pole.” These are they, we are told, who send upon the impious thunders and lightnings and earthquakes.
With regard to the priests who acted as celebrants in these strange mysteries, there are instances to be found in the inscriptions which make it plain that the priestly office was not confined or attached to any particular degree of initiation.
Evidently, the cares of the priesthood did not occupy the priest’s whole time, and he never seems to have lived in the temple as did the clergy of the Alexandrian divinities.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg regular congregational worship, or that the faithful assembled there except for initiations or meetings for conferring the different degrees.
God, he says, requires no agreement on this subject among men, and their rivalries in matters of faith are really beneficial in leading their minds to the contemplation of other than worldly things.
Its strictly monarchical doctrine, using the adjective in its ancient rather than in its modern connotation, must have always endeared it to the emperors, who were beginning to see clearly that in a quasi-Oriental despotism lay the only chance of salvation for the Roman Empire.
From its geographical position, Dacia formed an effective counterpoise to the growing influence upon Roman policy of the Eastern provinces, and it might have proved a valuable outpost for a religion which was always looked upon with hostility by the Greek-speaking subjects of Rome.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg more to Constantinople than to Rome, and who were before long to be converted to Christianity en masse[978].
The invasions of Alaric and Attila probably completed what the Christian mob had begun.
It is, as we have seen, most probable that they never visited their chapels except in company with the other devotees when an initiation into one or other of the seven degrees of the cult was to be performed, and, judging from the scanty numbers of the congregation, this can only have been at fairly long intervals.
In neither case would they have much need for the assistance of women in their propaganda, who would, moreover, have probably felt little interest in a worship from the most solemn and distinctive parts of which they were excluded.
Exceptional causes such as the perpetual shifting of the legions from one end of the Empire to the other at a time when communications between them were many times more difficult than now, may have prevented such considerations for some time from having their full weight.
When once they did so, the issue could not long be in doubt.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg the theories of the Stoics, always dear to the nobler spirits in the Roman Empire, and 274 coupled with the high Stoic ideal of duty, forms one of the best working philosophies for the soldier ever devised.
But the soldier, removed as he is from care for his daily necessities, and with instant and ready obedience to another will than his own constantly required of him, has always held different views on such subjects to the civilian; and such ideas were rather above the heads of the crowd, sunk for the most part in abject poverty, utterly absorbed in the struggle for daily bread, and only anxious to snatch some passing enjoyment from a life of toil.
Yet for good or ill, few religions have lived in vain; and some of the ideas which it made popular in Europe have hardly yet died out.
From this period the notion of the “divinity that doth hedge a king” descended to comparatively modern times, and “Sacred Majesty” was an epithet of our own kings down to the reign of the last Stuart.
Probably, too, it was the custom of releasing an eagle at a royal funeral which so impressed the popular imagination that the metaphor became transferred, as such things generally are sooner or later, to the lower ranks of the community, and the figure of the soul being borne aloft on wings took the place that it still occupies in popular Christian literature.
This is one of those statements which are copied by one author from another until they acquire by mere repetition the force of an axiom; but its truth is not obvious, nor does it appear to rest upon any sound foundation.
In this respect, it drew near to Judaism, which it may have aimed at incorporating with itself, and was not ashamed to place on its monuments scenes which can be referred to the Old Testament[989].
But the discrepancy of doctrine is as nothing compared to the wide difference in those external matters which in a new religion most strike the imagination of the crowd, and have therefore much to do with its success or failure.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg round the birth of all founders of religions, and we should believe them the less in this case that they have been handed down to us by the professors of religions bitterly opposed to that of Manes.
He is said to have acquired great skill in painting 281 which he used to illustrate his teaching[1002], and to have been a learned mathematician and astronomer.
The most likely account of his death narrates that he was decapitated, and that his skin stuffed with straw was suspended at the gate of the town where the execution took place[1008].
The date of his death is fixed with some accuracy at 275 A.D., so that he would then have reached the age of sixty years[1010].
The causes underlying this sudden appearance of a new religion are doubtless to be looked for in the political and religious history of Persia at the time.
Consider the altar and the throne as inseparable and that they must always sustain each other.
A sovereign without religion is a tyrant, and a people which have no religion may be deemed the most monstrous of all societies.
Nor can we doubt that Buddhism, already perhaps struck with decay in its native country of India[1016], but flourishing exceedingly further East, was trying to obtain a foothold in that very Bactria which was afterwards said to have been the historic scene of Zoroaster’s activity.
The Persians of Herodotus’ time, who did not believe in deities who had the same nature as men, would have blushed at such a profanation.
It was afterwards said that the MSS.
Were now the doctrines that Manes preached to his own undoing his invention, or did he draw them from some pre-existent source?
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg married an Egyptian slave and learned from her all the wisdom of the Egyptians[1023].
These books he entrusted to an aged widow with whom he lived, and he was afterwards struck dead while performing a magical ceremony.
This history has evidently been much corrupted and by no means agrees with the account before quoted from Oriental sources which bears greater marks of authenticity; but it is thought by some to be, like the 14th chapter of Genesis, a sort of allegory in which the names of peoples and systems are given as those of individual men[1027].
Yet there is nothing specifically Buddhist or Egyptian about the doctrines of Manes as we know them[1029], and if there were any likeness between the mythology and observances of the cult and those of 287 its predecessors, it was probably introduced by Manes’ followers rather than by himself[1030].
One of these is the God of Light and the other the God of Darkness; but he does not seem to have given any specific or proper name to either[1033].
It is possible that this last-named being may have been identified by him with Matter[1034], although this would seem to be a remnant of the 288 Platonic philosophy of which there is no other trace in his teaching.
But it is certain that he regarded the God of Darkness as entirely evil, that is to say, malevolent, and as a power to propitiate whom man should make no attempt.
But do not thou, O my son, like most men, unreasonably and foolishly join the two together nor ascribe them both to the God of Goodness.
This uncompromisingly dualistic theory gives an origin to evil independent of that of good, and can only lead logically to the assertion of its eternity.
Whether Manes gave utterance to it for the first time, or derived it from a theology then current in Persia, there is little evidence to show[1039].
No other country with which he can have become acquainted has yet been shown to possess it[1041].
Exclusively Oriental, too, in its origin must be the history of the conflict between these two Principles which follows.
Each of them apparently dwelt in his own domain for countless ages untroubled by the existence of the other.
The Darkness lies below it, and is in like manner boundless in depth and in lateral extent[1042].
If we may read into the tradition something which is not expressed there, but which seems to follow logically from it, this atmosphere and this earth were the heavier parts of the Divine substance, which sinking down formed a kind of sediment or deposit[1043].
These parts, however, seem to have sunk down and produced another Earth called the Darker Earth, from which in course of time came forth Satan.
Satan, on his emergence on 292 the Darker Earth, perceived the rays of light from the upper world, piercing as we may suppose through the gloomy atmosphere of his own world, and conceived a hatred for them.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg members[1047].
The fight lasted long, 294 but in the end Satan triumphed, and dragged the First Man down into the Realm of Darkness, where he took from him his light[1052].
During the fight, too, the elements had become mingled, so that the Ether henceforth was mixed with the Smoke, the Fire with the Flame, the Light with the Darkness, the Wind with the Hot Wind, and the Cloud with the Water.
After the fight, the King of the Paradise of Light descended with another Power called the Friend of the Lights, who overthrew Satan, and the Spirit of the Right Hand or Mother of Life recalled, either by her voice or by another power called the Living Spirit, the First Man from his prison in the lowest Darkness.
The First Man, on his deliverance, in this account mounts again to the Realms of Light, but before doing so “cuts the roots” of the Five Infernal Elements so that they can no more increase[1054].
This is done, and a Universe having six heavens and eight earths is formed, each heaven having twelve gates, together with terraces, corridors, and places in such profusion as to point to some confusion in the translation into the Syriac which has come down to us.
The only thing that concerns us in this, perhaps, is that the visible world, presumably the lowest of the eight, has a ditch dug round it in which is thrown the Matter of Darkness as it is separated from the Light, and outside this a wall so that it cannot escape.
This is in view of the End of the World[1055].
The machinery set up for the process of the redemption of the light, however, differs somewhat conspicuously in the two traditions.
Both luminaries bear these elements into the Column of Praises or Glory which is perpetually mounting from the Sun to the World of Light, bearing with it the praises of men, their hymns of gratitude, and their pure words and good works[1056].
This will continue until none but a feeble fragment of the Light remains in this world, when the angels charged 297 with its maintenance will abandon their task, and return to the World of Light.
A fire will then break out, which will burn for 1468 years and will set free the remainder of the Light imprisoned in matter by consuming its envelope.
She appears to the male fiends as a beautiful woman and to the female as a desirable young man; and when they covet and pursue her, she flies from them and disappears.
299 On the origin of terrestrial man, there is also considerable discrepancy between the two streams of tradition.
Nothing is said to tell us what is meant by “these” princes, but as the phrase is used in other passages by the same writer to denote the Satanic hierarchy one can but suppose that it is one of the rulers of darkness who is here indicated[1062].
The same writer goes on to say that the conjunction was “beheld” [or aided?]
Jesus then addressed Adam and revealed to him the whole secret of the cosmogony, enlightening him upon the origin and functions of the different heavenly worlds or paradises, of the gods, of hell, of the devils, of the earth and sky, and of the sun and moon.
Adam, it is said, listened to these commands obediently.
From the further intercourse of Cain and Eve were born two daughters, one called “the Wisdom of the World,” and the other “the Daughter of Pleasure.” Cain took the last-named to wife and gave the other in marriage to Abel; but he did not know that the Wisdom of the World was filled with Light and divine wisdom, while the 304 Daughter of Pleasure possessed nothing of the kind.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg whereupon Cain killed him and took the “Wisdom of the World” as his own second wife.
Adam arranged to have the child fed exclusively on milk and fruits, and drew three magic circles round him bearing the names of the King of the Paradise of Light, the First Man, and the Spirit of Life respectively, to protect him against the devils.
At their death all these entered into Paradise, while Eve, Cain, and the daughters of Desire went to hell[1069].
They created Eve also after the like fashion, imparting to her of their own lust, with a view to the deceiving of Adam.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg other than the historical Jesus, “came and transformed himself into the semblance of a man and showed himself to men as a man, although he was not a man, and men imagined that he had been begotten[1074].” It is also to Him that is attributed the construction of the wonderful wheel before alluded to as equipped with twelve vases which the sphere causes to revolve, and which thus scoops up, as it were, the souls of the dying[1075].
But the tree in Paradise, whereby they know the good, is Jesus and the knowledge of Him which is in the Cosmos.
And whoso receives it, distinguishes between good and evil.
The Christian, here perhaps the fuller of the two, describes him as teaching that the soul of man, as also that of beasts, birds, other animals, and plants, is part of the light which was won by the demons from the First Man, while all bodies are of that matter which is the same as darkness.
Man’s body, we are told, is called a cosmos by parallelism with the great Cosmos, and all men have roots here below bound to things which are above[1079].
It is 308 the cutting of these roots by the demons which causes death.
On the death of a man who has attained the knowledge of the truth during this life, his soul is taken up in the wheel to the Sun, by whom after it has been purified it is passed over to the Moon, the two luminaries being represented as ships or ferry-boats sailing to-and-fro in the upper air.
She then returns for a fresh supply greatly reduced in circumference, whereby her waxing and waning is explained[1080].
In the case of a man who has not attained the knowledge of the truth, a small portion of the soul only is purified and is then reincarnated in the body of a dog, a camel, or some other animal, according to the sins which it has committed.
The soul of the homicide will, it is said, go to inhabit the body of a leper[1081].
This, like its transference into other bodies, is for the sake of teaching it better; but if it still remains without knowledge, it is cast into the great fire until 309 the Consummation of the World[1083].
There also appear to him the devil of greed, that of pleasure, and others with them.
Directly the just one who is dying sees them, he calls to his help the goddess[1085] who has taken the form of the Wise Guide and the three gods her companions.
They draw near to him, and at the sight of them the devils turn and flee.
His body remains stretched (upon the 310 earth) in order that the Sun, the Moon, and the Gods of Light may take from it its powers, i.e.
The rest of the body, which is all darkness, is cast into hell[1087].
This description of the lot of the blessed after death is certainly taken from no other source than that from which the Zoroastrian books put forth by the Sassanian kings are drawn.
Towards it a wind seems to blow from the region of the South perfumed, more perfumed than any other wind.
Then the soul of the faithful thinks that he breathes this wind with his nostrils.
When the dawn of the third night shines forth and the day begins to lighten, the well-armed Mithra arrives at the mountains giving forth holy radiance and the Sun rises.
When the faithful is purified, the wicked and malevolent demons tremble by reason of the perfume after his departure as a sheep pursued by a wolf trembles at the [scent of the?]
This last by no means confined his survey of the state of man’s soul after death to the single case of the justified dead.
Then he calls the gods to his help and seeks to win them by showing to them his works of piety, and that which he has done to protect the religion and the Just.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg his dreams, and who is plunged in dirt and mud[1091].
He remains in this state until his Light and his Spirit are freed [evidently by transmigration] when he arrives at the meeting-place of the Just.
But when death appears to the sinful man, to him who has been ruled by greed and 312 desire, the devils draw near to him, they seize him, torment him, and put fearful shapes before his eyes.
But they have only appeared to him to reproach him, to remind him of his actions, and to convince him of his guilt in having neglected the support of the Just.
He wanders unceasingly throughout the world, and is tortured until the coming of the End of the World, when he will be thrown into hell.
One leads to Paradise, which is the path of the Just.
Another leads back to the world and its terrors, which is the path of the protectors of the faith and the helpers of the Just.
Rather does it appear that his freedom from sin depends on the admixture of light which enters into his composition at his birth.
Of all this the Christian tradition says nothing.
Both traditions are agreed that those who listen to the teaching of Manes are to be divided into five classes, viz.
These are they whom the Christian tradition speaks of as the Elect, and for whom, as we have seen, there is reserved after death a glorious ascension and an immediate return to the Paradise of Light.
The Catholics, indeed, had already adopted the view that the celibate member of the Church possessed “a higher calling” than his married brethren; but there is no reason to suppose that they therefore assigned to them a higher place in the next world, or thought that those who had not the gift of continence were to be permitted any relaxation of the moral law imposed upon celibate and married alike.
It is therefore probable that it was from Buddhism, with which Manes must have made himself well acquainted during his journeys into India, that he borrowed the scheme by which those who believed in the truth of his teaching could delay subjecting themselves to the austerities necessary for salvation until their next incarnation.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg him renounce the attempt.
A three days’ fast was also obligatory on the first appearance of the Moon after the entry of the Sun into the signs of Capricorn and of Libra.
The attitude of Manes to other religions was also without precedent or parallel.
Of the Jews 315 and of their religion he seems to have had a detestation so strong and so deeply rooted that it is difficult not to see in it some connection with political events of which we have lost the record.
In doing so, they doubtless contrived, after their manner, to offend the national prejudices of their hosts, while showing themselves greedy, as ever, of political power[1099].
But whatever its cause, there can be no doubt about the hatred felt by Manes for the Jewish religion, which is prominent in every tradition of his teaching.
For he led them astray in the lusts that he taught them, since he was not the God of Truth.
Whence those who put 316 their hope in that God who spoke with Moses and the Prophets will be bound with him, because they have not put their trust in the God of Truth.
He acknowledged the Divine origin of the teachings of Zoroaster, of Buddha, and of Jesus alike, with the reservation that he should himself be regarded as the Paraclete, which here seems to mean nothing more than the Legate or Ambassador, sent by the Good God to complete their teaching.
He aimed, in short, at establishing a universal religion which should include within its scope the three faiths that between them commanded the allegiance of the whole civilized world, and should acknowledge him as its founder and chief.
Had his plans come to fruition in his lifetime, he would have attained an empire over the minds of men far greater and wider than any ever claimed or dreamed of by the most ambitious of the Roman pontiffs.
This is certainly borne out by their proceedings when they found themselves among Christians.
I should rather ask you if you believe it, since you give no proof of your belief.
I have left my father, brother, wife and children and all else that the gospel requires; and you ask me if I believe the gospel.
Perhaps you do not know what is called the gospel.
The gospel is nothing else than the teaching and the precept of Christ.
I have parted with all gold and silver.
I have left off carrying money in my purse; content with food obtained from day to day; without anxiety for the morrow and without care as to how I shall be fed or wherewithal I shall be clothed; and you ask if I believe the gospel?
You see in me the blessings of the gospel; and yet you ask if I believe the gospel.
Manes entirely rejected the account of the Incarnation given in the Gospels, alleging, as a modern critic might do, that it was not the account of eyewitnesses, but a mass of fables which had grown up after the memory of the events recorded had faded away[1106].
Jesus, he said, was not born of woman, but came forth from the Father or First Man, and descended from heaven in the form of a man about thirty years of age[1107].
But the body in which He appeared was an illusion only and was no more that of a real man than the dove which descended upon Him at the baptism in Jordan was a real dove, and it was not true to say that He was put to death by the Romans and suffered on the cross[1108].
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg being the case, he declared that Jesus, the mortal or suffering Jesus, was nothing but the universal soul diffused throughout Nature and thus tormented by its association with matter.
While these are one and the same, we believe also that the Father properly dwells in the highest or chief light, which Paul calls ‘light inaccessible,’ and the Son in the second or visible light.
And as the Son is himself two-fold according to the apostle, who speaks of Christ as the power of God and the wisdom of God, so we believe that His power dwells in the Sun and His wisdom in the Moon[1111].
We also believe that the Holy Spirit, the third majesty, has His seat and His home in the whole circle of the atmosphere.
Then He vanishes and in His stead appears a cross of pure light, surrounded by a multitude of other forms representing the same shape and image.
Later, however, he withdrew this, and put him a century earlier[1116].
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg the Christian sources hitherto referred to, and probably formed in an atmosphere where the necessity for outward conformity to either the Zoroastrian or the Christian faith was a good deal less cogent than it was further west.
As the Kingdom of Darkness, whenever and wherever described, is the exact opposite and counterpart of that of the Light, we shall not return to it again, but assume that 322 in describing the one we are mutatis mutandis describing the other.
The God of Light has one substance of which all the powers of light were made, but three forms or hypostases, called in the Greek Formula of abjuration “faces” or persons, which added to his own personality make a supreme tetrad.
These three hypostases are his wisdom, power, and goodness, by which is probably meant that he operates in the lower powers through these qualities, while remaining himself remote in the “inaccessible light[1118].” He possesses also five houses or dwellings, which are also called his worlds and even his members.
As for the appellation of the Mother we are still in ignorance[1123].
These are the Ether, the Wind, the Light, the Water, and the Fire before mentioned, which together compose the soul of the world, and hence of man, who is in every respect its image.
Here we have the second triad or “second creation,” of which, as has been said, only the last member takes any active part in what follows.
As we have already seen, the Living Spirit speaks a word like a sharp sword, and the image of the First Man answers[1126] and is drawn up out of hell.
These two, the sword or Appellant and the image or Respondent, together mount towards the Mother of Life and the Living Spirit, and the Mother of Life “clothes” the Image—no doubt with a form or “nature,”—while the Living Spirit does the same with the compelling word[1127].
Then they return to the earth of darkness where remains the soul of the First Man in the shape of his five sons.
In the meantime, the Living Spirit has also given birth to five sons.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg flay the rulers of darkness, and to carry their skins to the Mother of Life.
She stretches out the skins to make the sky, thereby fashioning ten or eleven or even twelve heavens.
She throws their bodies on to the Earth of Darkness, thereby forming eight earths[1129].
There is, however, a third act to the drama.
Again, the lesser Powers of Light, this time the Mother of Life, the First Man, and the Living Spirit, cry to the Very Great Father.
The Light-Powers feel themselves contaminated and oppressed by the contact, and perhaps even in some fear lest they should again have the worst in a renewal of the conflict.
Again, the Very Great Father hears them and sends to their assistance a third creation, called this time simply the Messenger.
Who this Messenger is, is the main puzzle of the new documents.
This third creation was no more content than his two predecessors to enter upon the task allotted to him without further help.
The Legate, he makes Manes say, was of both sexes, and on his 329 appearance in the Sun-ship, both the male and female rulers of Darkness became so filled with desire that they began to give up the light which they had taken from the sons of the First Man.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg gave birth to a horrible monster like the King of Darkness.
Moreover, the female demons, who were pregnant at the time, miscarried and their untimely births ate of the buds of the trees.
Jesus was sent to Adam and found him sleeping a sleep of death, but awoke him, made him stand upright, and gave him to eat of the Tree of Life, while he separated him from his too seductive companion.
But later there seems to have been instituted a band of twelve Apostles in manifest imitation of the Apostles of Jesus, who perhaps corresponded to the Masters or highest degree that we have seen called the Sons of Gentleness.
There were also seventy-two bishops answering to the seventy-two disciples of Christ, who are perhaps to be identified with the Sons of Knowledge.
Then came the Presbyters or Sons of Intelligence whose functions were chiefly those of missionaries and who were perpetually, like Faustus, travelling for the propagation of the faith[1142].
This seems to have been the organization generally adopted for 331 Christian countries, and we meet with it there up to a very late date.
What organization they did adopt outside Europe and Africa we shall probably have to wait to discover when more of the documents coming from Turkestan have been deciphered.
Hating images with as much energy, perhaps, as Zoroaster himself, they had neither statues nor lights nor incense in their meeting-places, which must in the West have been as bare and as unadorned as a Scottish conventicle.
The whole service seems to have consisted of hymns and prayers, in the first of which the mythology of the sect doubtless found expression, while the second mainly consisted of those praises of the Powers of Light, which praises were thought, as has been said, to have an actual and objective existence and thus to fulfil a considerable part in the scheme of redemption.
Up to the present we have very few examples of the hymns.
With regard to the prayers, we are a little better informed.
“Free us by thy skill, for we suffer here oppression and torture and pollution, only that thou (the First Man?)
To praise thee is to praise equally thy troops, thy justified ones, thy word, thy majesty, thy good pleasure.
The title and first few lines of this prayer have been lost, owing to the fact that the Chinese plan of writing on a continuous sheet of paper many yards in length, which was then rolled up with the last lines innermost, was adopted by its transcribers.
The prayer or litany is in 15 sections or classes, the number having doubtless a mystical reference[1153], and is followed in the Russian and English examples by a recapitulation which is not without value.
“[The Son of?]
God and the Devil, Light and Darkness then intermingled.
All the princes of the Demons came with the insatiable and shameless Demon of Envy and a hundred and forty myriads of demons banded together in evil intent, ignorance, and folly.
Hence, O my God!
If we have said ... is its foundation and root.—If we have said if anyone animates a body it is God; or that if anyone kills, it is God.—If we have said Good and Evil have alike been created by God.
If we have said it is He [God] who has created the eternal 336 Gods.
O my God, if in our sin we have spoken such awful blasphemies, having unwittingly become false to God.
If we have thus committed this unpardonable sin.
O my God, I N.N.
[1157] now repent.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg earth.
O my God, if in our sin we have unwittingly sinned against the God of the Sun and Moon, the Gods enthroned in the two resplendent Palaces.
If, although calling him the True, Mighty, and Powerful God, we have not believed in him.
If we have uttered many spoken blasphemies.
If we have said the God of the Sun and Moon dies, and his rise and setting comes [?]
If we have said, our own bodies were created before the Sun and Moon.
Since they were unable to go to the heaven of God and are now upon the earth.
Since the ten heavens above, the eight earths beneath, exist on account of the Fivefold God.
O my God, if in our sin we have unwittingly offended against or caused grief to the Fivefold God by an evil and wicked mind.
If we have allowed our fourteen members to gain domination over us.
If we have in any way sinned against the dry and wet earth, against the five kinds of animals, and against the five kinds of herbs and trees.
If instead of spreading the decrees and commandments, we have impeded them.
O my God, if in our sin against these five kinds of animated and moving beings from the great to the small, we 338 have beaten and wounded, abused, and injured, and pained, or even put them to death.
If thus we have become the tormentors of so many animated and moving beings.
The sinfulness of feeding upon, injuring, or even angering the lower animals is here much more strongly insisted upon than in the other documents and 340 demands repentance even in the case of the Hearers, and this points directly to a closer connection with Buddhism than hitherto has been thought possible.
The first is he who holds to false doctrines; the second is he who invokes the Demon as God and falls down before him.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg against God, we have prayed to the Demon.
The Light Principle we knew to be the Paradise of God and the Dark Principle to be the Land of Hell.
We knew what existed before Heaven and Earth, the Earth of God, was.
We knew how God and the Demon fought with one another, and how Light and Darkness became mingled together, and how Heaven and Earth were created.
We knew how the Earth of the Rulers and its Heaven will disappear, and how the Light will be freed from the Darkness, and what will then happen to all things.
Four bright seals have we carved upon our hearts.
If now wittingly, or by feebleness of mind, or from idleness of body, or because our minds were set on the cares and business of this world, we have not thus gone to prayer for the cleansing of ourselves from sin.
How many deceitful and unseemly words do we not speak!
How many unseemly deeds do we not do!
Thus do we prepare torments for ourselves by crimes and frauds.
Since we have walked body and soul in the love of the greedy and shameless Demon of Envy, and the Light of the Five Gods which we absorb in our food every day thereby goes to the Land of Evil.
We are full of defects and sins!
We are thine adversaries and grieve thee by thoughts, words and deeds, for the sake of the greedy and shameless Demon of Envy.
Gazing with our eyes, hearing with our ears, seizing with our hands, and trampling with our feet, we ever torture and impede the Light of the Five Gods, the dry and wet earth, the five kinds of animals, and the five kinds of plants and trees.
So full are we of defects and sins!
On account of the Ten Commandments, the seven kinds of Alms, the three seals, we are called Hearers; yet we cannot perform what these claim of us.
If we have not walked according to the letter and spirit of the spoken words of God.
If we have grieved the hearts of the Gods.
If we have been unable to keep the Days of Atonement, the rigid fast, to offer the Praises and the Blessings according to the Law and the Rite.
This practice was certainly known to St Augustine, and was not likely to sink into oblivion in a community in contact with Buddhists, among whom monks living upon food given in alms by the faithful were a common sight.
But the reason assigned by St Augustine for the practice, which was before obscure, here receives full explanation.
The same accusation was made, as has been many times said above, by nearly all the sects of the period against each other, and we have no means of determining its truth.
The case is different with regard to pictures.
This was said to have been done in commemoration of Manes as their founder and on the date preserved as the anniversary of his death[1188].
St Augustine speaks, too, 350 of their keeping Easter[1190].
It seems possible that this was only done in Christian countries, in accordance with their usual custom of conforming in outward matters, and we have no evidence of their doing anything of the sort in Turkestan.
As has been said, he and his followers rejected the Old Testament entirely, not indeed denying its inspiration, but declaring this to have come from the Evil Principle.
As for the rest, anything that was said by them 351 either in their simplicity and ignorance, while they were yet inexperienced in the truth, or with malicious design was inserted by the enemy among the statements of truth, or was incautiously asserted by other writers and thus handed down to later generations —of all this we desire to know nothing.
It may be so; but, as all the copies of these works which have come down to us have been expurgated or, in the language of the time, “made orthodox,” by the removal of heretical matter, there is little proof of the fact.
It seems by an extraordinary chance to have nearly escaped us, having been apparently missed by all the European expeditions because it was written in Chinese characters.
There are many grounds for thinking that it may originally have been written in Pahlavi, in which case it may have been contemporary with Manes himself; but it frequently makes use 353 of Buddhist phrases often derived from the Sanskrit[1201].
At all events they show that the practice of adapting his religion, as far as might be, to accord with that previously held by those among whom he was trying to make proselytes, goes back to the very origin of the sect.
The theory of the macrocosm and the microcosm, which teaches that the body of man is in itself a copy of the great world or universe, is here carried to excess[1202], and we hear much of the “trees” which certain demons, previously sticking to the elements, says the treatise, “like a fly to honey, a bird to bird-lime, or a fish to the hook[1203],” plant in the soul to the corruption and ultimate death of the better desires there implanted by the Light.
The combat waged against the diabolic vices by the virtues is also described with great minuteness, but in language in which it is sometimes difficult to discover whether the author is consciously using allegory or not.
He established (there) the dark thought in which he planted a tree of death.
Then he shut up the Excellent Wind in the city of the nerves.
He 354 established (there) the dark feeling in which he planted a tree of death.
Then he shut up the strength of the Light in the city of the veins.
He established (there) the dark reflection in which he planted a tree of death.
Then he shut up the Excellent Water in the city of the flesh.
He established there the dark intellect, in which he planted a tree of death.
Then he shut up the Excellent Fire in the city of the skin.
He established there the dark reasoning in which he planted a tree of death.
The Demon of Envy [the name generally used in the treatise for the Devil] planted these five poisonous trees of death in the five kinds of ruined places.
He made them on every occasion deceive and trouble the original luminous nature, to draw in from without the nature which is stranger to it, and to produce poisonous fruit.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg and so on.
Yet another point is that the two sexes are here said to have been formed by the devil out of jealousy and rage at beholding the sun and moon, and in imitation of the two luminaries.
It seems plain therefore that in attributing these various origins to the division of mankind into sexes, none of the three teachers was drawing upon tradition, but was merely inventing ad hoc.
There remains to be considered the history of the sect, as to which we have become better informed during the last few decades than at one time seemed possible[1209].
Prohibited in the Roman Empire from the outset, they nevertheless made their way along both shores of the Mediterranean, and all the efforts of the Imperial authorities proved powerless to suppress them.
It was probably the Arab conquest which drove them to make their 357 headquarters on the very borders of the civilized world as known to the ancients and in what is now Turkestan.
His so-called conversion put into the hands of the Catholic Church a weapon for the suppression of all rivalry, of which she was not slow to make use.
Already in his reign many of the heathen temples were torn down[1217], and under the rule of his morose and gloomy successor, Constantius, the work of demolition went on apace[1218].
As for the Gnostic sects, which since Hadrian’s time had striven with such success as we have seen to combine magic and other ancient beliefs with Christianity, they found but short shrift at the hands of the triumphant Church.
By an edict issued by Constantine before his own reception into the Church, all their “houses of prayer” were confiscated for the benefit of the Catholic Church, their meeting even in private forbidden, and their books seized and burned[1223].
Of those whom they had deceived, some, intimidated by the emperor’s threats, disguising their real feelings, crept secretly into the Church.
From this time until our own, Christianity has reigned in the West with no serious rival.
In Europe, however, she continued in unchecked supremacy, gathering to herself and 360 assimilating the barbarians who at one time seemed likely to extinguish all civilization; and she thus became a bond uniting many nations and languages in one community of faith and thought.
She even succeeded in keeping alive the remains of that Greek art and learning which still form our best and proudest intellectual possession, and if during her reign many of the precious monuments of antiquity perished, the fault was not entirely hers.
In every respect, her rule was supreme; and such enemies as she had in Europe were those of her own household.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg defection was punished by an unsparing use of the secular arm.
In the days of her infancy, and before she thus came into her inheritance, Christianity borrowed much from the rivals over which she was in the long run to reign supreme.
Her outward observances, her ritual, and the organization of her hierarchy, are perhaps all due to the associations that she finally overcame.
That, in such matters, the Church should take what was useful to her was, as said above, part of her consciously expressed policy, and doubtless had much to do with her speedy triumph.
To show that her dogmas also took many things from the same source would involve an invasion into the domain of professional theology, for which I have neither authority nor desire.
But if, at some future time, investigation should show that in this respect also Christianity owes something to her forerunners and rivals, the argument against her Divine origin would not thereby be necessarily strengthened.
That, in the course of her development, she acquired characteristics which fitted her to her environment would be in strict conformity with the 361 laws which appear to govern the evolution of all institutions; and if the Power ruling the universe chooses to work by law rather than by what seems to us like caprice, such a choice does not show Him to be lacking either in wisdom or benevolence.
As was said at the outset, everyone must be left to place his own interpretation on the facts here attempted to be set forth.
On the contrary, it may be that Christianity would then appear as a link—although a most important and necessary link—in a regular chain of events which began more than three centuries before she emerged from her birthplace in Palestine into that Roman world which in three centuries more was to be hers of right.
No sooner had Alexander’s conquests made a world-religion possible, than there sprang up, as we have seen, in his own city of Alexandria, a faith with a far higher and purer idea of Divinity than any that had until then been known in the West.
Against all these in turn, Christianity had to struggle in a contest where the victory was not always on her side: and if in time she overthrew them all, it can only be because she was better fitted to the needs of the world than any of her predecessors or contemporaries.
186 Abraham, named in Mag.
106 n. 6; ii.
33 n. 1; excavations at, i.
117 n. 2; baptism in name of, by Marcus, ii.
189 n. 1.
60 Achilles, his horror of Hades, i.
59, 150; his flattery of Zeus, i.
95; his purification by Ulysses, i.
142 n. 2 Acropolis, sacred things of Eleusis lodged in, i.
52 Acrostics, use of, in Jewish, Greek and Christian literature, i.
139 n. 1; ii.
38; gives birth to Second Man or Son, ibid.
40; forms triad with Holy Spirit, ii.
2, 3; all things except matter contained in, ii.
44 n. 2, 64; all light returns to, ii.
94 n. 3.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg place of, ii.
137 n. 3; ruler of Zodiac, ii.
152; delays redemption of souls, ii.
153; sends demon in shape of flying arrow, ii.
325; slayer of monster, ii.
106; in Coptic, ii.
47; ruler of planetary sphere in Diagram, ii.
69; meaning of name of, ii.
71 n. 1; address of soul to, ii.
72 Adonis, wailed for in Athens, temp.
16; Dying God of Mediterranean, i.
47; identified with Osiris, i.
16, 52; early worship of Alexandrian gods in, i.
52; and of Eleusinian, ii.
55 n. 2, 58, 60, 64 n. 3; ii.
143, 152, 153; souls made from tears of rulers of, ii.
153; Jesus takes away part of their power, ii.
154; divided into repentant and unrepentant, ii.
182; the mystery of, in Bruce Papyrus, ii.
22; Demosthenes’ invective against, quoted, i.
123 Afghanistan, included in Persian Empire, i.
1 Africa, political power of priesthoods in, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg Agape or Love, supreme God of Diagram, ii.
232, 253; Magi sacrifice to, ii.
236, 252; altars dedicated to, ii.
246; replaced by Jupiter O.M.
69, 70 n. 2, 74 n. 3; address to, ii.
7; Adonis wailed for when Sicilian expedition of, sails, i.
24; comes to Rome under Marcus Aurelius, ii.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg greatest individual in history, i.
4, 12 sqq.
5-8, 26-27; his deification explained, i.
18; religious associations follow conquests of, i.
29, 44; his probable plans for universal religion, i.
30; breaks down national barriers, i.
54, 107; makes world-religions possible, i.
111; his conduct towards Jews, i.
150; re-settles Samaria, i.
177; son of Zeus in serpent form, ii.
49; his effect on cosmology and ethics, ii.
294 n. 2, 295 n. 2.
82; his success against Persians, ii.
119 Alexandria, its foundation by Alexander, i.
5; its importance not at first recognized, i.
30; a Greek city, i.
82 n. 2, 86; destruction of temples at, by Theodosius, i.
83, 84; Hadrian’s opinion of, i.
156; Simon Magus’ doctrines at, i.
105 Amazons, the story of, suggests bisexual deity, ii.
112 n. 1; ii.
21 n. 5; his date, ii.
13; translates Bruce Papyrus, ii, 190; his date for Bruce Papyrus, ii.
194; quoted, ii.
178, 191, 192, 193, 195 Amen of Thebes, the god, father of Alexander, i.
18; priesthood of, i.
23, 31 sqq.
52 Amenhotep IV, King of Egypt, failure of monotheistic teaching of, i.
11; priests of Amen crush heresy of, i.
142; and in Bruce Papyrus, ii.
141; and in Bruce Papyrus, ii.
33; Osiris the bull of, i.
45, 102; Jesus the conqueror of, i.
182, 186; horrors of Egyptian, ii.
181 n. 1; ii.
324 n. 4, 355.
117; names of, i.
181, n. 1; ii.
103 n. 3; likeness of, to “roots” of Simon Magus, ii.
103 n. 3; in Avesta, ii.
32 n. 4 Anatolia, its religious peculiarities temp.
107 n. 2 Andrew the Apostle, Saint, name of, shows predilection of Jews for Greek names, i.
153, 157; no names of, in O.T., until Daniel, i.
158; rulers over tribes of demons, ibid.
Simon M., i.
110; souls after death, brides of, ibid.
151; transports Jewish families to Anatolia, ii.
151, 156, 162, 163; Book of Daniel written temp., i.
170; Samaritans accept reforms of, i.
35; tribal deity of jackal totem, i.
36; his seeking for Osiris in Rome, i.
72; mask of, used as disguise, i.
25; and Adonis, i.
31; daughter of Zeus, i.
137 n. 1; Orphic hymn to, i.
143; the Mother of the Gods in Cyprus, ii.
40; called Mother of All Living in Asia, ii.
26 n. 3; quoted, i.
145 n. 1, 158, 169, 182 n. 4; ii.
42, 57 Apollo, the god, his birthplace, i.
16; identified with Horus, i.
48, 63; his contempt for mankind, i.
57; his place in Orphic legend, i.
238; distinct from Helios, i.
240; worship of, under Julian, i.
179; quoted, i.
182, 188, 189, 193, 194; ii.
90 n. 5 Apostles, demand only faith from converts, i. lvii; do not borrow from earlier creeds, i.
88; their meeting with Simon Magus, i.
176, 177; in Clementines, i.
10; souls of, in P.S.
7 n. 2; quoted, i.
87 n. 1; ii.
7; Alexander’s pursuit after, i.
112 n. 2 Architect of the Universe.
281; restores worship of Ahura Mazda, ii.
284 Ares, the god, identified with Roman Mars, i.
17; Homeric or Orphic hymn to, i.
22 Aristophanes, quoted, i.
17 n. 1 Aristotle, his monotheism, i.
10; says that religion follows form of government, i.
12, 15; that Orpheus did not exist, i.
121 n. 1 Armageddon, covers name of Rome, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg kings of, claim descent from Persian heroes, ii.
124 n. 3; ii.
173 Artemis, the goddess, the Ephesian, i. lvi, 40; birthplace of Greek, i.
16; Indian worship of, i.
100 n. 2; priestesses of Ephesian, called bees, i.
See Diana Aryans, their dealings with lower races, i.
181 n. 1 Asia, before Alexander, i.
1; made Greek by Alexander, i.
5; rush of Greeks to, i.
7; Greek spoken throughout, i.
8; cruelty of Assyrian domination in, i.
12; returns to Persian ways, ii.
29, 36, 49, 67 n. 3; gods of, coalesce with Greek, i.
141, 156; ii.
236; priestesses called bees in, i.
143 n. 4; Jewish atrocities in, temp.
26, 76; Jewish settlements in, ii.
28; Jewish magicians in, temp.
40; Babylonian culture in, ii.
48; serpent worship in, ii.
49, 77, 78; reverts to Persian ways, ii.
33, 37 n. 1 Asoka, his missions to Greek kings, i.
94, 114 Assyria, penitential psalms of, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg Jews tributary to, i.
3; suzerains of Hebrews, i.
150; name used for Syrians in Christian times, ii.
47, 69 n. lord of third gate, ii.
70 n. 2, 73, 74 n. 3; address to, ii.
73 Astarte, the goddess, worship of, brought into Greece, i.
25; Phoenician form of earth goddess, i.
126; dove, totem-animal of, ii.
107; name of celestial guard in Bruce Papyrus, i.
113; fundamental idea of, i.
114; system of correspondences results from, i.
115, 116; impulse given to, by Greek mathematics, i.
116, 117; all religions in Graeco-Roman world take note of, i.
117, 118; gives new life to Gnosticism, i.
31; her Anatolian name and identification with other goddesses, ii.
40 n. 1; her identity with the Mother of the Gods, ii.
197 Athanasius, Saint, creed of, i.
89 Athena, the goddess, identified with Minerva, i.
17; her part in Eleusinian Mysteries, i.
39; the Homeric, i.
57, 95, 124 n. 3; statue of Helena of Tyre as, i.
18 n. 2 Athens, foreign worships in, i.
16, 17 n. 1, 137; accepts deification of Alexander, i.
18; gathering in, for Eleusinian Mysteries, i.
38-41; Alexandrian religion in, i.
52, 76; Orphic myths brought into, by Epimenides, i, 121; Orphic gold plates in Museum at, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg Atlas.
17, 136; his legend, i.
39; identified with Sun, i.
137 n. 1, 145; ii.
21; Phrygia, home of worship of, ii.
352; quoted, i.
103 n. 4; ii.
177; Galatians become Roman temp., ii.
119 n. 1; ii.
228; position of Christianity under, ii.
23; restores Roman arms in the East, ii.
226; gives up Dacia to Goths, ii.
151; his disobedience, ii.
155; sends demon in shape of flying arrow, ii.
117; emanation doctrine in, ii.
35; First Man in, ii.
38 n. 3; Supreme Being in, ii.
243; denounces magic, ii.
275 n. 2; doubtful about eternity of evil, ii.
289; quoted, ii.
323, 341, 342.
106 n. 4 Babylon, break up of priesthoods of, i.
122; rich Jews remain in, after captivity, i.
172; Jewish families from, transported to Phrygia, ii.
33; Jewish taste for cryptograms derived from, ii.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg Babylonia, Zoroastrian borrowings from, i. lxi; original home of Dying God, i.
38 n. 1; relics of Sumerian beliefs in, i.
100; astral theory originates in, i.
36; and Western astrology, ii.
235 Babylonians, astronomy of, i.
69 n. 3; figure earth like boat, ii.
48; think sky a rocky vault, ii.
249 Bacchanals, orgies of, from Thrace, i.
83; Orphic initiate called, i.
139 n. 1; Orphic hymns to, i.
2, 5, 143; wine called, i.
168; and worship of double axe, ii.
67 n. 3.
40 n. 1 Bactria, home of Roxana, i.
5; tale of Possessed Princess of, i.
10; Alexander’s massacres in, i.
13; its struggles against Alexander, i.
28; Buddhism and Zoroastrianism in, ii.
65 Baluchistan, included in Persian Empire, i.
61; teaching of Primitive Church as to, ii.
115 n. 3; Marcus adds Hebrew exorcisms to, ii.
74 n. 1; names and place of, ii.
151, 179; in P.S.
119; his life, ii.
214 n. 2; Manes knows doctrines of, ii.
280, 290 n. 4; his doctrines enter Persia, ii.
283 Barnabas, hailed as Zeus, i.
191 n. 3; ii.
53 n. 2; Epistle of, quoted, ii.
192 Baruch, Apocalyptic literature attributed to, i.
79; Apocalypse of, quoted, ii.
9 n. 1; says body of Jesus a phantasm, ii.
27 n. 3; disciple of Menander, ii.
89; his teaching, ii.
90; his borrowings from Egyptian religion, ii.
93; his relations with Buddhism, ii.
179 n. 3 Beast, Number of.
See Number Bedouins, introduce horse into Egypt, i.
108 n. 1; Lord of Chaos, ii.
163 Behemoth (animals), in Diagram, ii.
16; identified with Persephone, i.
24; inscriptions from, i.
52; Orphic teaching in, i.
135; worship of Bacchus comes from Thrace to, i.
238 n. 2 Book of the Dead.
48 n. 3; says Apostolic and sub-Apostolic intolerance for heresy due to Jewish nationality, ii.
10; quoted, i.
1, 2, 48 n. 3, 52 n. 1, 55 n. 1, 78 n. 2, 80 n. 1, 87 n. 2; ii.
87 n. 1; ii.
107 n. 1; creation from indivisible point, i.
194 n. 3; ii.
90 n. 5; discovery of, by Bruce, ii.
76 n. 4; its addiction to astrology, ii.
161 n. 2; makes matter non-existent, ii.
161 n. 3; pictures like those in, perhaps referred to in P.S., ii.
182 n. 2; variety of documents in, ii.
194; probable date of, ibid.
316; Greek statues of, in India, i.
285; first mentioned in Greek by Clem.
286 Buddhas, Cave of the Thousand, MS. found in, ii.
135 n. 1; its dates, i.
156 n. 1; ii.
96; in Bactria, ii.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg Budge, Dr E. A. T. Wallis, quoted, i.
1, 2, 35 n. 1, 38 n. 2, 61 n. 1, 88 n. 2, 126 n. 3, 182 n. 6; ii.
126 n. 3, 134 n. 1; ii.
336, 339, 341.
B., quoted, i.
96, 97; his consort, ibid.
144; resembles Ahura Mazda, ii.
9 Cabala, the Jewish, system of correspondences in, i.
115; its Mystery of Chariot and Mystery of Creation, i.
157; processes of “Practical,” i.
202; Marcus uses system like that of, ii.
9 n. 1; indicated in Talmud, ii.
35; likeness of, to Gnosticism, ii.
27, 77 Calabria, Orphic gold plates found at, i.
18 n. 1 Calvin, John, founder of sect, i.
19 Cambyses, Shah of Persia, conquers Egypt, i.
53; death of Simon Magus in, i.
108 Canopus, decrees of, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg sanctuary of Isis at, i.
86 n. 1 Cappadocia, Kings of, claim descent from Persian heroes, ii.
27 Carthage, outside Persian Empire, i.
1; Alexander’s plans concerning, i.
6; Roman conquest of, i.
9; his doctrines, ii.
Cicero, i. lvi; identified with Isis by Apuleius, i.
113; captivity of Jews in, i.
150; Jews tributaries to, i.
3; suzerains of Jews, i.
241 Chalmers, Thomas, founder of sect, ii.
8 n. 3; grandfather of Asoka, i.
123; known to Aristophanes, i.
124; egg formed from, i.
110 Charles, Dr R. H., quoted, i.
159 n. 1, 160, 161, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170; ii.
86; name of, has hidden meaning (Justin Martyr), i.
170 n. 5; “heresies before the Coming of,” ii.
25; angel of Great Council, ii.
9; Alexander the Great’s services to, i.
27; its rise brings about decline of Alexandrian religion, i.
84; its cardinal tenets preserved at Reformation, i.
88; said to be mere episode in history of Gnosticism, i.
111; most bitter enemy of Gnosticism, i.
112, 120; ii.
23, 359 sqq.
2; state does not at first persecute, ii.
7; lower classes in Egypt first converts to, ii.
8 n. 5, 89 n. 1; never Judaeo-Christian in Egypt, ii.
9 n. 1, 131; wars against Hellenistic culture, ii.
10; accuses sects of obscene rites, ii.
56, 82; history of Egyptian, obscure, ii.
200; attraction of Rome for innovators on, ii.
222; Manes’ imperfect acquaintance with, ii.
339; obligations of, to rivals, ii.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg triumph of, ii.
86; formulate doctrine of Trinity, i.
89 n. 2; accusations of immorality by and against, i.
179; considered Jews until reign of Vespasian, ii.
4; say old world passing away, ii.
5; proscribe heretical writings, ii.
12; apostolic, uneducated men, ii.
83 n. 1; obliged to recognize Greek philosophy, ii.
88; good position of, in Alexandria, ii.
94; belief of, early, as to Eucharist, ii.
171; oriental, flock into Rome under Hadrian, ii.
203; use of “Brother” and “Father” by, ii.
357; Julian repairs heathen temples at cost of, ii.
43; springs from right side of First Woman, ii.
46; angel or messenger of triune Deity, ii.
54, 63, 64, 65; his two visits to earth, ii.
59; descends with Sophia into Jesus, ii.
60, 61, 79; brings Mysteries to earth, ii.
65; represented by yellow circle in Diagram, ii.
105, 114; prayer of Sophia Without to, and its result, ii.
106; Marcus’ juggling with name of, ii.
79; preserves or revives features of Isis-worship, i.
85; celebration of Eucharist in, temp.
87 n. 1; Simon Magus’ aerial flight the tradition of, i.
178; resemblance of Gnostic sects to Protestant bodies outside, ii.
19; Protestant opponents of, lean to Unitarianism, ii.
21; makes no great conquests after suppressing Gnosticism, ii.
23, 24; begins to define and enforce orthodoxy, ii.
125; seduction scandals not unknown in, ii.
129; growing power of, before Constantine, ii.
144; Mysteries of the Light of P.S.
173; modifies her eschatology and ritual, ii.
219; Arian controversy brings speculations about Divine Nature within, ii.
357; Constantine’s accession leads to forcible suppression of heathenism by, ii.
309; consists of Perfects and Superiors only, ii.
328 n. 1; its constitution, ii.
330; its schisms, ii.
342; its suppression and revival, ii.
361; its rivals, i. lvii, lxii; its germ in Greek religious confraternities, i.
21; its borrowings from Alexandrian religion, i.
84, 85; its fundamental doctrines not borrowed, i.
88; its heresies, i.
119; its belief as to martyrdom, i.
145 n. 1; ii.
127; its community of goods, i.
201; its proselytizing zeal, ii.
8, 9; its destruction of Gnostic books, ii.
12; Asiatic Celts great source of heresy in, ii.
29; acrostics and word-puzzles used by, ii.
82; Trinitarian views of, ii.
125; baptismal theories of, ii.
168; Eucharistic theories of, ii.
172; Gnosticism both danger and help to, ii.
247, 260; its alliance with Constantine, ii.
261, 271 Cicero, quoted, i. lvi, lvii n. 1, 129; ii.
229 Circus Maximus, resort of vagabond magicians, temp.
108 Claudius I, the Emperor, no Christian converts of rank in reign of (Julian), ii.
8 n. 5 Claudius II, the Emperor, cannot expel Goths from Dacia, ii.
83 Clement of Alexandria, accused of heresy, ii.
14 n. 1; initiated into heathen mysteries, ii.
76 n. 2, 95 n. 2, 199; says angels dwelling in soul, Platonic, ii.
110 n. 1; first Greek author to mention Buddha, ii.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg quoted, i.
2, 3, 190 n. 1, 194 n. 1; ii.
2-6, 101 n. 2, 106 n. 3, 110 n. 1, 112 n. 3, 113 n. 1, 118, 119, 122 n. 1, 125 n. 3, 129 n. 3, 135 n. 3, 140 n. 2, 144 n. 1, 177 n. 4, 188, 205 n. 5, 219 n. 2, 239 n. 6, 286 n. 4.
8 n. 2; ii.
178; Tübingen theory as to, i.
179; quoted, i.
3, 6, 198; ii.
4 n. 1, 82 n. 2, 219 n. 2 Cleomenes, Satrap of Egypt under Alexander, i.
29 Cleopatra, last of Ptolemies, i.
20 n. 1.
See Martyrs Confraternities, religious, among pre-Christian Greeks, i.
21; hymns composed by, i.
22; superstitious practices of, i.
23; contrast between Persian and Egyptian priests and those of Greek, i.
25; propaganda of, i.
26; Alexandrian religion first spread by, i.
139 n. 3, 141; secret, among Jews, temp.
54 Constantine, the Emperor, his pact with the Church, i. lvii, lxii; ii.
9, 12, 261, 271; his edict as to heresy, i. lix n. 1; ii.
359; his conversion leaves Alexandrian religion still powerful, i.
200; only baptized on his deathbed, ii.
168 n. 6; his conversion enables Christians to suppress Gnosticism, ii.
220; his failure against Persians, ii.
226; his family religion Sun-worship, ii.
356 Copernicus, i.
127 n. 3; ii.
143 n. 1.
See Persephone, Proserpine Correspondences, doctrine of, i.
75; in Bruce Papyrus, ii.
191 n. 2.
14 n. 1, 122.
56 Crete, birthplace of Zeus, i.
37; scene of Rape of Persephone, i.
40 n. 1; Orphic myths early known in, i.
121, 122; Orphic gold plates found in, i.
45 n. 1; double axe in, ii.
320; Gospel of Nicodemus confirms Gospel account of, ii.
180 n. 4 Cryptogram.
236; quoted, i.
22, 119; ii.
139 n. 1 Cybele, her worship in Athenian associations, i.
17, 25; her legend in Asia Minor, i.
37; identified with Isis, i.
55, 56; and with Demeter and Rhea, i.
124, 126; the Mother of the Gods, i.
137 n. 1; in Orphic hymns, 139 n. 1, 143; Phrygia chief seat of worship of, ii.
28; her eunuch-priests, ii.
30 n. 3; alluded to in Jeremiah, ii.
39; identified with Ma, Artemis, Aphrodite, etc., ii.
39, 40; always an earth-goddess, ii.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg associated with double axe, ii.
258; adored by Julian, ii.
56 Cyprus, Adonis worship in, i.
40; Alexandrian divinities in, i.
52; and Orphic, i.
Cyril of Alexandria, replaces Isis by two medical saints, i.
53; and of Eleusinian Triad, i.
136 Dacia, its settlement by Trajan, ii.
55 n. 4, 135; ii.
30 Daniel, Book of, first gives personal names of angels, i.
158; assumes nations divided among angels, i.
199; addiction of Babylonian Jews to curious arts in, ii.
166 n. 2; its 12 torture-chambers, ii.
183; surrounds the earth, ii.
157 Dead, Baptism for, ii.
31, 32, 55, 132, 134; ii.
101; meaning of names of, ii.
53 Delphi, its oracle used to legitimize foreign deities, i.
77; no public worship at temple of, i.
125 Demeter, scene of her trials, i.
16, 40 n. 1; her wanderings shown to initiates, i.
42; likeness of legend of, to that of Isis, i.
43; identified with Persephone, i.
46; Homeric hymn to, quoted, i.
59; mystic marriage with Zeus, i.
83; swine sacrificed to, i.
125; an earth goddess with many names, i.
130; her widespread worship, i.
136 n. 2; associated with god of double axe, ii.
300 n. 2.
18 n. 4, 19; his attack on Egypt fails, i.
107 n. 2, 109, 114; author of psychic or animal souls, ii.
210, 211, 212, 214 n. 3; Messiah of, ii.
66-71; prayers to powers depicted in, ii.
141, 142; ii.
81, 119 n. 1, 228, 271; his persecution of Christians, ii.
12, 23; his victories over Persians, ii.
226; his adoption of Persian ways, ii.
228 Diodorus Siculus, authority for Oriental religions, i.
9; quoted, i.
17; legend of Cretan, i.
42, 125; legend of, told in Little Mysteries, i.
42; identified with Osiris, i.
43, 48; his relations with Demeter and Persephone, i.
39; identified with Hades, i.
47, 48, 130; with Apollo, i.
49; Boeotian worship of, i.
52; his mystic marriage with Demeter, i.
61 n. 1; called the Vine, i.
64 n. 3; his temple at Alexandria demolished by Theophilus, i.
83; the Liberator, i.
90 n. 1; sacrifices to, i.
95; his likeness to Tammuz, i.
124, 144; with Zeus, i.
126; soul of man part of, i.
112; soul of man united with, i.
133; widespread worship of, i.
135; identified with Adonis, i.
139; Orphic hymns to, i.
146, 147; will succeed Zeus, i.
190 n. 2; spouse of Persephone and her son, ii.
39; the soul of the world, ii.
71 n. 1.
66 Docetism, a mark of heresy, ii.
2, 3; ii.
135 n. 3; and of Great Goddess, ibid.
89 n. 1; ii.
73 n. 4; ii.
5 n. 1; with the Clementines, ii.
43, 60; used for assembly of souls, ii.
132; Gnosticism comes into Persia from, ii.
45; Ptolemies restore temple of, i.
52 Egypt, Greek gods derived from (Herodotus), i.
16; assigned to Ptolemy on Alexander’s death, i.
37; its influence on its conquerors, i.
51; religion of, degenerates into sorcery, i.
57; inspires Alexandrian views on next world, i.
60; Osiris-worship in, temp.
64 n. 3; daily services in temples, i.
66; early cosmogonies of, i.
36, 175; Ptolemy endows Alexandrian religion in, i.
76; Alexandrian religion in, temp.
83; pre-Christian features surviving in, i.
88; magicians of, use foreign words, i.
93; Magic Papyri found in, i.
126; Orphic hymns perhaps composed in, i.
141; suzerain of Solomon, i.
160 n. 4; lower classes in, first become Christian, ii.
9; opposed to monotheism before Alexander, i.
11; priests of, oppose innovations, i.
33, 46, 54; their Osiris-worship bond with Greeks, i.
38; their worship of animals, i.
50; oppose Alexandrian religion, ii.
51; respect paid to, in Alexandrian religion, i.
56, 73, 74; use foreign words in magic, i.
93; think earthly Nile copy of heavenly river, i.
116 n. 1; their idea of eating gods to get powers, i.
173; their worship of mortal gods absurd to Greeks, ii.
16; gods of, husbands of their mothers, ii.
39; their addiction to mapping-out invisible world, ii.
109; think only rich happy after death, ii.
112 n. 1; origin of their triune god, ii.
121 n. 3; their use of allegory, ii.
123; their anxiety about nature of god and future of soul, ii.
131; embrace monastic life in great numbers, ii.
195, 196; their enthusiasm for life of priest, ii.
200; degradation of Christianity and Gnosticism by, ii.
201; the wisdom of, taught to Manes’ predecessor, ii.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg See Yahweh of Israel Elephantine, mixed religion of Jews at, ii.
39 Eleusis, scene of goddesses’ trials, i.
16; Mysteries of, described, i.
38-41; initiation at, preceded by Little Mysteries, i.
43; date of reformation of Mysteries of, ibid.
49; Mysteries of, rob death of its terrors, i.
59; mystic marriage of god and goddess crowning scene at, i.
61 n. 1; formula repeated by initiates at, i.
62 n. 2; Alexandrian mysteries more popular than those of, i.
66; initiates at, carry rods, i.
68 n. 2; hereditary priesthood of, i.
100; the God and the Goddess of, i.
135; reason for secrecy of Mysteries of, i.
139 n. 2; priestesses of, called bees, i.
145; sacramental grace of Mysteries of, i.
137, 149, 150; in Paradise of Adam, ii.
71 n. 1.
101 Emanation, defined, i.
19 n. 1 Empedocles, derives everything from four roots or elements, i.
180 n. 4; ii.
20 n. 1; in Great Announcement first female power, i.
182; her Orphic and Jewish analogues, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg produces angels who make universe, i.
187, 195; seized by world-making angels and condemned to transmigration, i.
190, 196; identified with Helen of Tyre, ibid.
191; inconsistency of stories regarding, i.
97 Enoch, mass of Apocrypha connected with name of, i.
159, 160, 164; dates of same, i.
147 n. 5, 194 n. 2 Enoch, Book of, fall of angels in, i.
191 n. 1; ii.
155; quoted, i.
160, 161, 162 n. 2, 165, 169; ii.
131 Ephesus, many-breasted goddess of, i. lvi, 17; ii.
40; worship of Alexandrian gods at, i.
120; his date, ibid.
316 n. 1 Epicurus, his statement of the problem of evil, ii.
217 Epimenides, introduces Orphic myths into Athens, i.
112 n. 1; ii.
155; his date and work, ii.
10, 77; quoted, i.
190, 191, 193, 197, 198, 199; ii.
71 Eratosthenes, studies at Museum of Alexandria, i.
100 Eros, Horus takes attributes of, i.
123; Orphic, known to Aristophanes, i.
20; a “philosophic” sect, i.
151; meaning of name, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg Josephus’ account of, i.
1, 4; description of, by Pliny, Hippolytus, and Porphyry, i.
155; wild theories about, i.
157; use of Cabala by, i.
157, 158, 169; names of angels kept secret by, i.
159, 167; peculiar interpretation of Scripture, i.
168, 171; probably extinct after Hadrian, i.
170; divisions among, possible, i.
175 n. 3; Simon Magus’ teaching opposite to that of, i.
5 n. 1; points in common with Christians, ii.
37 n. 1 Ethiopians, their rule in Egypt, i.
31, 51; worship Isis, i.
87; simple mode of celebration in Primitive Church, i.
129, 187; obscene parody of, i.
22, 63; in Apostolic times follows baptism immediately, ii.
63; Marcus’ profanation of, ii.
129; called a mystery, ii.
165; views of Primitive Church as to, ii.
187; celebrated with water among certain sects, ii.
44 n. 1; hereditary priests of Mysteries of Eleusis, i.
48; Orphic doctrines well known to, i.
123; quoted, i.
20; after Alexander, Egypt becomes granary of, i.
28; Alexandrian religion passes into, i.
77; Phrygia invaded by celibate warriors from, ii.
199, 200; ii.
127 n. 1.
139 n. 1; ii.
54 n. 6; Clement of Alexandria connects it with Eve, ii.
20 n. 1 Ezekiel, the Prophet, shows hatred of Jews for Gentiles, i.
167 n. 4; quoted, i.
186 n. 2; ii.
217, 285 Ezra, the Prophet, Apocalypse attributed to, quoted, i.
3, 4; ii.
248 Fathers of the Church, their writings neglected till lately, i.
176, 200; know little of many heresies, i.
36; their account of Marcus the magician, ii.
128, 167; their hostility to Gnosticism justified, ii.
38 n. 3; quoted, i.
43, 91, 96 n. 4, 158 n. 2 Freemasonry, Catholic accusation of obscene rites against, ii.
177 Gabriel, the angel, in Book of Daniel, i.
158; named in Magic Papyri, ii.
34; name of sphere in Diagram, ii.
123, 133, 185; ii.
226; affects state of Persian Shah, ii.
30 n. 3 Ganymede, burlesqued in procession of Isis, i.
165, 167; in Diagram, ii.
164, 165, 166, 167; rebellion of Jews against, i.
172; Jewish hatred recognized by, after Titus, ii.
5; non-Jewish Christianity necessary for conversion of, ii.
124 n. 3.
177 Germany, i.
1, 85, 86 n. 2; ii.
1-6, 227 n. 1, 228 n. 2, 271 n. 2 Gilgamesh, the Babylonian hero, ii.
100 n. 1; ii.
90 n. 3.
90; the importance of knowledge of the spiritual world, i.
111; Christianity may be only episode in history of, ibid.
119; earliest pre-Christian form of, i.
176; a hydra, i.
2; early converts from, ii.
21; its services to Church, ii.
21, 202; alleged necessity for forcible suppression of, ii.
29 n. 1; likeness of, to Cabala, ii.
36 n. 1; becomes ethical after contact with philosophers, ii.
87; first form of Egyptian, unknown, ii.
93; degenerates into magic in Egypt, ii.
199; rotten before it was ripe (Inge), ii.
199 n. 3; bridge between Paganism and Christianity, ii.
200; its suppression by Church, ii.
21; form of Christian sacraments borrowed from, i.
89 n. 2; their use of magic (Hippolytus), i.
157; conceal themselves during persecution, i.
200; symbolic construction of Gospels by, ii.
6; our sources of information as to, ii.
12; writings of, ii.
15; magical ideas of pre-Christian, ii.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg exchange of doctrines among, ii.
20; introduce statues, incense, etc., ii.
56 n. 1; become active after St Paul’s preaching in Asia Minor, ii.
248; may get ideas of destiny from Babylon, ii.
246 Gospel, the Fourth, its date, ii.
208 n. 1; quoted, i.
177 n. 5; ii.
117 n. 1, 123 n. 3, 161 n. 4, 177, 190 Goths, of Dacia, converted en masse, ii.
271 Gracchus, Urban Prefect of Rome, temp.
122; Orphic gold plates found in, i.
272; financial measures against Paganism, ii.
230 Greece, Persians repulsed in their attack on, i.
15, 16; gods of, coalesce with those of Asia Minor, i.
17; its religious confraternities, i.
43; Orphic teaching first appears in, i.
112; comes into, from Thrace, i.
123; popular theology of, i.
124; propagation of Orphic ideas in, i.
135; no regular association called Orphic in, i.
15, 16; Alexander’s deification a shock to, i.
28; no priestly caste among, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg Osiris myth common to Egyptians and, i.
38; Alexandrian religion careful of susceptibilities of, i.
44; think Demeter and Persephone one, i.
46; Apollo always a sun-god among, i.
50; their fear of gods temp.
57; Homeric flattery of gods, i.
127; their view of Mysteries changes after Orphic reform, i.
145; religion of, and Jews contrasted, i.
149; adoption of acrostics and word-puzzles among, i.
168, 169 n. 1; Jews forge works of well-known authors among, i.
173; Simon Magus uses religious traditions of, i.
185, 186; laugh at wailing for Dying God, ii.
54; unlike Persians, think gods have nature of men, ii.
234; make astrology popular, ii.
235 Gregory the Great, Saint, his advice to assimilate heathen practices, i.
81 n. 2 Hades, the god, his temple at Eleusis, i.
39; his Rape of Persephone shown in Mysteries, i.
40; in Homer shares universe with Zeus, i.
47, 130, 144, 147; ii.
39; his name perhaps ineffable, i.
47, 133, 142; identified with Osiris, i.
238; identified with Ahriman, ii.
239, 253 Hades, the place or House of, passwords through, taught in Mysteries, i.
41; happy lot of initiates in, i.
102 n. 1, 104; in Orphic gold plate, i.
132; pains of uninitiated in, i.
140; like Jewish Sheol, i.
12; his war of extermination against the Jews, i.
163, 170, 172 n. 1; ii.
66; reign of Roman Law begins temp., ii.
86; Gnosticism enters Alexandria temp., ii.
89; gives back Trajan’s Persian conquests, ii.
236 Haggai, the Prophet, hatred of Jews for Gentiles shown in, i.
167 n. 4 Halicarnassus, Alexandrian worship in, i.
164 n. 1; ii.
157 n. 2; and of the Apology of Aristides, ii.
181 n. 1; ii.
173 Hecate, the goddess, identified with Isis, i.
83; Orphic hymns to, i.
142 n. 2, 147 n. 1; patron saint of sorcerers till Renaissance, i.
247; concealment of lion-headed statue in same, ii.
280 n. 3; quoted, i.
178 n. 2; ii.
6 n. 4; quoted, ii.
1, 2, 6 n. 4, 8 n. 3.
See Destiny Helen of Troy, Simon Magus’ mistress said to be reincarnation of, i.
178, 190, 196 Helena of Tyre, name of Simon’s mistress, i.
190; redeemed by Simon, i.
191; inconsistency of patristic story about, i.
193; typifies the soul in transmigration, i.
196; image of, as Athena, i.
198; said to have been called Sophia, ii.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg distinguished by Greeks from Apollo, ii.
266 Hellas, i.
305; their history and tenets, ibid.
101 Hera, her contempt for man in Homer, i.
119; his Commentaries on the Gospels not secret, ii.
98, 109 Heracles, becomes immortal because of divine birth, i.
16; rams sacrificed to, i.
238; his compulsion of Hades, ii.
239 n. 7.
5 Herculaneum, scenes of Alexandrian worship in frescoes found at, i.
66 n. 3, 67-69, 73, 87 Hercules, classical type of, on Indian coins, i.
89 n. 2 Hermes, the god, worship of, perhaps brought into Greece from Egypt, i.
17; Greek analogue of Anubis, i.
41; image of, used in magic, i.
98; hymn to, in Magic Papyrus, i.
136 n. 2; Terms of, in Athenian streets, i.
139 n. 2; St Paul hailed as, in Phrygia, i.
191 n. 3; ii.
42; leader of souls in Homer, ii.
45 Herod the Great, rebuilds and restores Samaria, i.
177 Herodotus, quoted, i.
16, 43, 48, 60, 81, 123, 136; ii.
40 n. 1; popular theology given in, i.
126; his successive ages of the world, i.
A., quoted, i.
138 n. 2 Hipparchus, studies at Museum, i.
45; makes systematic astrology possible, i.
11; Salmon’s theory about, i. lxi n. 1; ii.
11, 12; tricks of magicians described by, i.
99, 100; condemns astrology and astronomy alike, i.
112 n. 2; his “hymn of Great Mysteries,” i.
137 n. 1, 139 n. 1; ii.
175; his account of Simon Magus’ doctrines inconsistent, i.
11, 12; exaggerates diversity of Gnostic teaching, ii.
95; his views on Trinity polytheistic, ii.
131 n. 2; quoted, i. lix, lxi n. 1, 68 n. 3, 73, 99, 100 n. 4, 107 n. 1, 109, 110, 112 n. 2, 137 n. 1, 139 n. 1, 175, 179, 187, 191, 193, 194, 196, 198; ii.
248 Hogarth, D. G., quoted, i.
14, 18 n. 4, 27; ii.
29 Homer, reading-book of Asiatics post Alexander, i.
17; their indifference to mortals, i.
57; shows forth Christian doctrine of Father and Son, i.
121; the popular theology of, i.
124; the father of gods and men in, i.
185; claimed as divinely inspired, ii.
54; quoted, i.
1, 2, 59, 95, 96 n. 1; ii.
15 n. 4, 16 n. 1 Homeric Hymns, publicly recited and perhaps displaced by Orphic, i.
135; quoted, i.
91 n. 5; quoted, i.
69, 70; address to, ii.
281 Horus, the god, king of Egypt incarnation of, i.
18, 19, 51; in Alexandrian legend of Isis and Osiris, i.
34, 35; originally totem of royal tribe, i.
43, 189 n. 5; identified with Apollo, i.
48; child form of, in Alexandrian religion, i.
50; Ptolemies raise temples to Egyptian form of, i.
52; Athenian dandies swear by, i.
54; Egyptian sun-god, i.
63; in Alexandrian religion, Osiris reborn, i.
70 n. 3; ii.
39, 63; festival of birth of, i.
71; a triune god, i.
88, 189 n. 5; symbolizes perceptible world image of ideal, i.
140 n. 2.
19; Greek confraternities compose, i.
39; used in Alexandrian worship, i.
66, 72, 75; to Hermes and other gods in Magic Papyri, i.
137 n. 1; ii.
54; the collection of Orphic, i.
141 n. 2; ii.
39 n. 2, 40 n. 4, 130, 145; son of Zeus and Demeter, i.
40; analogy of his birth with that of Horus, i.
138 n. 2; the father, son, and spouse of Persephone, i.
100 n. 4; ii.
46, 47, 70 n. 2, 71 n. 1; his name, variants, attributes, and places, ii.
46, 69; the god of the Jews, ii.
49; creator and tempter of man, ii.
52; lawgiver of Jews, ii.
53; souls of “animal” men pass through his realms between incarnations, ii.
57; his attempts to prolong his rule defeated by Sophia, ii.
58, 59; birth of Jesus arranged without knowledge of, ii.
59; contrives death of Jesus, ii.
64; fragments of light pass into the terrestrial world without knowledge of, ibid.
70; address to, ii.
156; his light deceives her, ii.
183 n. 2.
105, 106; ruler of planetary sphere in Diagram, ii.
71 n. 1; address to, ii.
72; connection with moon, ii.
138, 149; the Great, a ruler of the Middle and colleague of Virgin of Light, ii.
150; his connection with moon, ii.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg India, Alexander’s exploits in, i.
5, 13; sorcerers in modern, i.
281; Manes says Buddha sent to, ii.
307; becomes acquainted with Buddhism in, ii.
139; his “receptacles” issue from his last limb, ii.
139 n. 2, 144 n. 3; lesser powers make up his name, ii.
140; Great Light his Legate, ii.
144, 158; First Mystery proceeds from last limb of, ii.
145; the footless God of Truth, ii.
145 n. 2; his heaven, ii.
146; perfect initiates will eventually become members of, ii.
164, 170; the Mystery or Sacrament of, ii.
166; its saving grace, 164 n. 6, 167, 169, 170, 171; confined to Pneumatics only, ii.
173; an Egyptian conception, ii.
175; fragmentary attempt to describe members of, ii.
15; probable source of Orphic legends, i.
124; tradition of, that water origin of all things, ii.
36; dualism of, probably derived from Persia, ii.
89 n. 1; explains number of beast as Nero Caesar, i.
169 n. 3; his garbled account of Simon’s teaching, i.
187-191, 193; makes Menander immediate successor of Simon, i.
199; his account of Marcus the magician, i.
1; his work against heresies, ii.
53, 57, 58, 60 n. 1, 61 n. 1; says Jesus lived on earth for 20 years after Resurrection, ii.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg quoted, i.
176 n. 1, 178 n. 4, 187, 190, 191, 198, 199; ii.
1, 3, 120, 121, 126, 127 n. 4, 128, 138 n. 1, 140 n. 1, 144 n. 1, 152 n. 1, 159 n. 3, 166 n. 2, 173 n. 3, 179 n. 7, 180 n. 3, 183 n. 1, 189 n. 1, 207, 214 n. 3, 220 Isaac, God of, invoked by magicians, ii.
34 Isaiah, the Prophet, hostility to Gentiles in post-Exilic passages of, i.
136 n. 1; its date, ii.
163 n. 3; souls passing from one heaven to another must give password, ii.
177 n. 2; quoted, ii.
154 n. 4, 163 n. 3 Ishtar, the goddess, legend of her Descent into Hell, i.
31 n. 1, 45 n. 1; personification of Earth, ibid.
300 n. 1.
35; in early Pharaonic Egypt only a magician, i.
38; in Phrygia and Syria, mother of all living, ibid.
40, 43; in Pharaonic Egypt wears cow’s head, i.
45; the Greek, identified with Demeter, i.
48; her breast-knot and sistrum, i.
49; Isis suckling Horus, i.
53; oaths by, fashionable in Athens temp.
54; her names and titles in address to Lucius, i.
56; the haven of peace and altar of pity, i.
158; initiation into Mysteries of, i.
61-63; her child the Sun, i.
245; Osiris sometimes called her son, i.
63; both mother and father of other gods, i.
65, 143; statue of, dressed like Catholic Madonna, i.
66; silent adoration of image of, i.
67; frescoes of scenes in worship of, i.
67-69; her connection with moon, i.
68 n. 3; her seeking for Osiris acted publicly, i.
70; the festival of the ship of, i.
71-74; the great earth-goddess, i.
73, 126; ii.
45 n. 1, 300 n. 1; “one, who art all things,” i.
75; seven temples of, in Rome, i.
83; emblems of virility used in worship of, i.
84; entry of features of ritual of, into Catholic Church, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg tonsure of priests, etc., derived from, i.
84; Trinitarian doctrine of, i.
88; Horus at once son and spouse of, i.
189 n. 5; ii.
39; Simon Magus may derive some of his doctrines from religion of, i.
31; Egyptian legend of Ra and, i.
45 n. 1.
165, 166, 167 n. 4; her monotheism, i.
7 Italy, break-up of Pythagorean school in, i.
152 n. 1, 182 Jackson, Prof. A. V. Williams, authority for late date of Avesta, i. lxii Jacob, Apocrypha attributed to sons of, i.
163; contrasted with Esau, i.
164 n. 2; the seed of, oppressed, i.
166; god of, invoked by magicians, ii.
26 Janet, M. Pierre, quoted, i.
110 Japan, instance of Oriental nation Europeanized, i.
8 n. 1 Jehovah, seven vowels cover name of, i.
103 n. 2; name used in Magic Papyrus, i.
71 n. 1.
186 n. 2; says Jews sacrifice to Mother of Gods, ii.
32; quoted, ii.
161; prophecy that Gentiles shall rebuild, i.
177; destruction of same temp.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg idolatry in, ii.
110 n. 1 Jesuits.
156; acrostic name of, i.
169 n. 1; Alpha and Omega name of, i.
171 n. 1; Simon Magus appears to suffer in likeness of, i.
16; Apocryphal sayings of, in Gospel of Egyptians, etc., i.
196 n. 2; ii.
219; His unfulfilled promise of Second Advent, ii.
3; analogy of His Passion and that of Osiris, ii.
6; tradition of revelations by, after Resurrection, ii.
17; Unitarian views of, among modern Nonconformists, ii.
20; called the Angel of the Great Council, ii.
43 n. 2; tradition as to prolonged earthly life of, ii.
76; Gospel of Nicodemus describes visit to Hades of, ii.
53, 59, 60; salvation only attainable through, ii.
56; body of, contains parts from all three worlds, ii.
59; Christos and Sophia descend into, ii.
60; teaches on earth for 18 months after Resurrection, ibid.
62, 63, 65; abandons earthly body at Ascension, ii.
65; the True Gate, ii.
73 n. 3; identified with great god of Greek Mysteries, ii.
106, 159; spouse of Sophia Without, ii.
106, 113, 114; matter made through, ii.
107; transforms passions of Sophia Without, ibid.
115 n. 2, 116, 119; earthly actions of, mere symbols, ii.
124; never called Lord, ii.
196 n. 1; ii.
154; one with his disciples, ii.
80, 164; teaches on earth for 11 years after Crucifixion, ii.
135; his ascent into firmament and return, ii.
136; describes births of Himself, St John Baptist, and Apostles, ii.
137-139; address of powers to, ii.
139-143; the First Mystery, ii.
144, 159, 161, 171; other powers His members, ii.
145; rule of, during Millennium, ii.
151; shortens times for elect’s sake, ii.
156; words of, recorded by Philip, Thomas, and Matthew, ii.
157; brings mysteries to earth for man’s salvation, ii.
158; all worlds made through, ii.
161, 162; the victim in the Eucharist, ii.
92 n. 3, 189; his magical invocation of his father, ii.
180; shows Middle Way and its tortures, ii.
198; appeals to fears and cupidity of disciples, ibid.
193; teaches on earth for 12 years after Crucifixion, ibid.
208, 210; Paul only real apostle of, 209, 211; slain with connivance of Demiurge, ii.
219; and as to His nature, ii.
303; maker of Great Wheel, ii.
307; messenger of God like Zoroaster, Buddha, and Mani, ii.
330; Son of First Man, ii.
146 n. 3, 164; the overseer of the Light, ii.
186; he and his followers arranged in similar order to higher powers, ii.
165; mysteries of the Light described in, ii.
173; Schmidt’s theory that these are included in Bruce Papyrus, ii.
190; this theory refuted, ii.
51; their pronounced monotheism, i.
89, 149; the magicians of the poorer classes in Rome, i.
108; their Sabbath influenced by astrological ideas, i.
117; only clergy, paupers and fanatics among, return from Captivity, i.
149 n. 2, 172; their critical position post Alexander, i.
151; Old Testament made familiar to, by Septuagint, i.
157; their belief in power of name, i.
33; Messianic hopes of, and their result, i.
159-163; Apocrypha inspired by same, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg fanaticism of Palestinian, i.
172; Jews of Dispersion inclined to compromise with Hellenism, i.
173; secret Hellenizing among, i.
32; their hatred of Samaritans, i.
186 n. 2; Simon Magus’ doctrines appeal to, i.
202; first Christians regarded as, ii.
4; unpopularity of, leads to Christian separation from, ii.
5; their influence on Gnosticism doubtful, ii.
9; accused by Church of filthy rites, ii.
28; their influence on Anatolian religion, ii.
31; Oriental, given to magic, ii.
33; Anatolian, bring method of exegesis from Babylon, ii.
34, 35; Egyptian, give male and female assessor to Yahweh, ii.
43 n. 2; unpopularity of, in Rome, temp.
305; Manes’ dislike of, ii.
153 n. 4, 163 Joel, the Prophet, shows hatred of Jews for Gentiles, i.
167 n. 4 John Baptist, St, said to be Essene, i.
156; Simon Magus follower of (Clementines), i.
137, 149, 150.
9 n. 1; pre-eminent place of, in next world, ii.
182 n. 2.
4 n. 3, 5 n. 3, 28, 85 n. 3, 278 n. 1, 315 n. 1 Jovian, the Emperor, not a persecutor, ii.
117; Samaritans retain little of, i.
181 n. 1; attempts to reconcile it with Hellenic culture, i.
200; Gentiles ignore Christianity while still a branch of, ii.
137 n. 1.
82 n. 2, 83; notes hatred of Christian sects for each other, ii.
236; his eclecticism, ii.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg Juno, the goddess, identified with Isis, i.
239; but probably his Roman equivalent, ii.
240, 248, 277 Jupiter, the planet, god of good winds to Babylonians, i.
113; its place in astrology, i.
182 Justin Martyr, celebration of Eucharist simple, temp., i.
87 n. 1; finds hidden meanings in Pentateuch and name of Christ, i.
179 n. 5; says Simon tells followers he will never die, i.
192 n. 2; authority for Menander’s succession to Simon Magus, i.
8 n. 3, 220; his dictum on Real Presence, ii.
172; his date, ibid.
247; quoted, i.
170 n. 5, 192 n. 2, ii.
77; his symbolical use of story from Herodotus, ii.
81 Juvenal, satirizes Alexandrian religion, i.
20, 54; describes finding of Osiris, i.
84 n. 2; quoted, i.
56 n. 2, 80 n. 1, 87 n. 2, 93 n. 3, 98 n. 1, 142 n. 1, 169 n. 2; ii.
147, 164, 174, 292 n. 2.
305; his Mani quoted, ii.
181 n. 1; set over metals, ii.
288 n. 3; its discovery, ii.
287 n. 4.
103 n. 2; his translation of names of Simon’s “Roots,” i.
55 n. 3 Kohler, Dr, his views on Essene literature, i.
46; called in Orphic hymns Son of Earth and Heaven, i.
132 n. 1; age of, in Orphic myths, i.
70, 143 n. 4; ii.
255, 256; quoted, i.
1-3, 88 n. 1; ii.
316; quoted, ii.
316 n. 3, 332 n. 2, 334 n. 2, 335 n. 1, 339 n. 1, 342, 343 n. 2, 344 n. 1, 349 n. 2, 357 n. 1.
130 n. 2 Leo the Zodiacal sign, in magical ceremony, i.
143, 146, 148, 153, 154, 156, 164, 165, 167, 170, 171, 173, 175 n. 1, 191 n. 2; and in Bruce Papyrus, ii.
193; the heavenly in Persian religion, ii.
287, 289; its realm described, ii.
290; how mixed with Darkness, ii.
294, 295, 335; redemption of, 296, 297, 336, 339; Faustus’ account of three worlds of, ii.
321, 324; powers of, described, ii.
325-328; praises sung to, ii.
331; redeemed through food eaten by elect, ii.
251-253; represents Ahriman, ii.
254; his place, ii.
255, 256 Livy, quoted, i.
174; not God, but his reflection, i.
37 n. 2 Love.
See Agape, Eros Loyola, Ignatius, compelling power of prayer of, i.
218 n. 2; his teaching, ii.
24, 199, 202; ii.
128; quoted, i.
24, 199; ii.
30 n. 3, 31, 40 n. 1, 45 n. 1, 300 n. 2 Lucius, hero of the Golden Ass, apparition of Isis to, i.
56; his prayer to Isis, i.
57, 58; promise of Isis’ protection in next world to, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg his first initiation into Mysteries, i.
62, 63; his second and third, i.
64; his adoration of statue of Isis, i.
67; his monotheistic conception of her, i.
75; his complete devotion to her service, i.
83; his metamorphosis by ointment, i.
101 n. 2 Lucius, German theological writer, quoted, i.
127 n. 3 Luther, Martin, as reformer and founder of sect, i.
94; open dealing of Indian sorcerers, i.
76; sing hymns of Orpheus in Mysteries, i.
210 n. 1 Lydia, name of Mother of Gods in, ii.
29 Ma, the goddess, Lydian equivalent of Demeter, i.
126; Lydian name of Mother of Gods, ii.
101 Macaulay, Lord, his simile as to religions borrowing from their rivals, i.
84 Macedonia, its distance from Karachi, i.
4; temples to Alexandrian gods in, i.
53 Macedonians, inhabitants of Thrace called, i.
136; term used for subjects of Syrian Empire, i.
48 n. 1, 49 n. 1, 52, 55 n. 1, 118 Macrocosm and Microcosm, possible origin of theory, ii.
233, 286; priestly caste among Persians, temp.
234; religion of, described, ibid.
237; sacrifice to Ahriman, ii.
239; relations of Manes with, ii.
280; his most bitter opponents, ii.
284 Magic, its practice by Greek confraternities, i.
23; words used in, generally taken from dying religions, i.
87, 92; relations between religion and, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg practice of, increases as religion decays, i.
92; never entirely separated from religion, i.
93; prayer in, used to show knowledge, i.
96, 97; ceremonial magic described, i.
97; examples of spells used in, i.
98-107; spread of, in Rome and Asia Minor under Empire, i.
108; phenomena of, partly hypnotic, i.
109; diffusion of, leads to Gnosticism, i.
110; Egyptian Gnosticism reverts to, i.
199; astrology connected with, in practice, i.
113; effect of astrology upon, i.
158; so Simon Magus and his successors, i.
176, 198, 202; Gnostic secrecy due to magical ideas, ii.
56; Marcus’ magical sacraments, ii.
180, 183, 185; and in Papyrus Bruce, ii.
192, 193, 195; common among Coptic monks, ii.
201; word derived from Magi, ii.
233, 275; religion of Magi apt to degenerate into, ii.
275 n. 2; its connection with worship of Hecate, ii.
304; condemned by Manes and his successors, ii.
313, 314, 342 Magic Papyri, in European Museums enumerated, i.
93 n. 3; ii.
34; described, i.
97; examples of spells from, i.
98-107; probably written in good faith, i.
109; names in Diagram like those in, ii.
71; name of Seth in, ii.
76 n. 4; acrostics in, ii.
148 n. 3; Egyptian words in, ii.
29; quoted, i.
1, 2; ii.
2, 3, 4 Malays, magic of, mainly taken from Arabs, i.
92 Mallet, D., quoted, i.
181 n. 2; ii.
38; wide spread of legend of, ii.
38 n. 3; the Father of all, ii.
51; invoked by Holy Spirit to send Christos to Sophia, ii.
292, 293 n. 1; his defeat by Satan, ii.
294; delivered by Friend of the Lights, ii.
298 n. 2; Adam and Eve made after image of, ii.
302 n. 1; magic circle with name of, ii.
304; his light forms souls of man, beasts, birds, etc., ii.
221, 277, 289; life and death of, ii.
284; originality of doctrines of, discussed, ii.
285-287, 289; his two principles, ii.
305; his hatred of Jews and their Law, ii.
315; his epistle to Marcellus, ii.
317, 318; his gospel and other writings, ii.
9; entrusted by Ptolemy with foundation of Alexandrian religion, i.
44; said to have taught astrology to Greeks, i.
128 n. 1; heavens made from evil powers according to, ii.
152 n. 1; divide day into 12 hours, not 24, ii.
168 n. 6; oligarchy in Church the aim of, ii.
305; their division of everything into five categories, ii.
312, 323 sqq.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg secret script of, ii.
317; pretend Trinitarian views among Christians, ii.
319; take symbolical view of Crucifixion, ii.
320; hymns of, ii.
333; Churches of, ii.
347, 349; Apocrypha of, ii.
351; Imperial laws against, ii.
45 n. 1; Virgin of Light in, ii.
137 n. 3; like Avesta, condemns magic, ii.
277, 278; opposed to Judaism, ii.
284, 285; owes little to Egypt or Buddhism, ii.
286; simplicity of teaching of, ii.
298, 299 n. 1, 328, 329; its system of transmigration, ii.
308; teaches eternal punishment, ii.
309; its Ten Commandments, ii.
336; its fasts and alms, ii.
65 n. 6.
179 n. 2; ii.
187 n. 2; accusation of ambition against, ii.
8 n. 3; native of Pontus, ii.
27, 216, 217; ignores Sophia, ii.
134 n. 1; his life and date, ii.
204, 205; his relations with Stoics, ibid.
205, 206, 216; compared to Luther, ii.
207, 208; his alterations of Scripture, ii.
208, 209; his Antitheses, ii.
209, 213, 223; his Supreme Being, ii.
210; his Docetism, ii.
210, 211; his Demiurge the God of the Jews, ii.
211; his dislike of Judaism, 211, 212; his rejection of allegory, ii.
213; original nature of his teaching, ii.
214; anticipation of Protestant doctrines and practices, ii.
215, 216; his views as to matter, ii.
217; his influence on Church slight, ii.
222; Manes acquainted with his tenets, ii.
206; their practices, ii.
216; their divisions, ii.
171 n. 1; ii.
9 n. 1, 129; accusations of immorality against, i.
179 n. 2; ii.
9 n. 1, 99, 128; his conjuring tricks, i.
129, 183 n. 1; a Jew, ii.
99, 128; his life and practices, ii.
187-189; and with Bruce Papyrus, ii.
202; his generals’ victories over Persians, ii.
53 Marduk, the god, called by number 50, ii.
35 n. 4; name of, ineffable, ii.
37 n. 1.
26 n. 2; a sect named after her, ibid.
152; admitted by Simon Magus, i.
313 Mars, the god, why identified with Ares, i.
238; devotion of Julian to, ii.
See Ares Mars, the planet, presides over a seventh part of terrestrial things, i.
116; a malefic in astrology, i.
157 Martial, the poet, quoted, i.
54, 66, 67 Martyrs, position of, in Primitive Church, i.
145 n. 1; ii.
126, 127; distinguished from confessors, ii.
150; chief interlocutor of Jesus in P.S., ii.
157; her pre-eminent rank in next world, ii.
See Millennium Mary, the Virgin, statues of Isis re-used for, i.
85; her worship like that of Isis, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg made after likeness of seven virgins of light, ii.
150; interlocutor of Jesus in, ii.
157; suggested origin of worship of, by Church, ii.
300 n. 2.
75 n. 1; and in Magic Papyri, ii.
33 n. 2; doubts existence of mysteries in Pharaonic Egypt, i.
60 n. 5; Nu originally the Celestial Ocean, i.
73 n. 4; ii.
108 n. 1; Egyptian belief in three worlds reflecting one another, i.
175 n. 4; life in next world confined to privileged few in Egypt, ii.
3, 5, 65 n. 1, 73 n. 4, 95 n. 3, 104 n. 3, 108 n. 1, 125 n. 3, 134 n. 3, 160 n. 4, 197; ii.
93 n. 3; quoted, ii.
77 n. 2, 88 n. 1, 89 n. 5, 93 n. 3, 130 n. 1, 134 n. 4, 208 n. 3, 209 n. 1, 320 n. 3 Matter, Orphic views as to, i.
174; Simon Magus’, i.
124; quoted, i.
1, 2, 4, 147 n. 1, ii.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg Magi tribe of non-Aryan, ii.
37, 43 n. 3, 123; ii.
55; Orphic legends current in islands of, i.
17; and often bisexual, ii.
79, 80 Men, the god, in Orphic hymn, i.
67 n. 3 Menander, comic poet, notes fashion for Isis-worship in Athens, i.
86 n. 1 Mercury, the god, why Hermes called, i.
17; caduceus of, in procession of Isis, i.
See Hermes Mercury, the planet, presides over category of earthly things, i.
48; the sphere of, in Diagram, ii.
135 Messiah, Jewish expectation of, i.
164, 165, 166.
190 n. 1 Michael, the Archangel, he and Gabriel only angels named in O.T., i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg in Book of Enoch, i.
169; in Magic Papyri, ii.
52; connected with planet Saturn, ii.
285, 336 n. 1 Milk, kid bathed in, Orphic password, i.
93 Minerva, the goddess, why Athena called, i.
17; identified with Isis, i.
63 n. 5, 70 n. 1; his Octavius quoted i.
47, 137 n. 1; Orphic hymn to, i.
117; its origin, ii.
232; its connection with astrology, ii.
256 n. 3; its seven heavens or spheres, ii.
256, 257; aims at universal religion, ii.
258, 269; its ceremonies, ii.
259-262, 268, 269; its degrees of initiation, ii.
264, 269; its mystic banquet, ii.
264, 265; ritual fragment in Magic Papyrus connected with, ii.
265-267; its priesthood, ii.
268; its relations with the State, ii.
270; its decline and suppression, ii.
271-274; its survivals, ii.
274, 275; its use of magic and astrology, ii.
277, 278; its attitude towards Judaism, ibid.
231; small beginnings of worship of, in West, i.
81; devotees of, worship other gods, i.
111 n. 1; arrival of worship of, in West, ii.
228, 229; monuments of, where found, ii.
231, 232; in Herodotus and Plutarch, ii.
234; lost books on, ii.
236, 237, 252; Jupiter O. M. his only superior in pantheon, ii.
238-240; his relations with the Sun, ii.
240-241, 243, 244; his birth from a rock, ii.
241, 242; as the bringer of rain, ii.
242, 243; scenes with Bull, ii.
243; his alliance with Sun, ii.
245-247; the Banquet, and creation of animals, ii.
247, 248; the Demiurge, ii.
248, 249; the μεσίτης or Mediator, ii.
249; his relations with Ahriman and Hecate, ii.
250-254; and with Cybele, ii.
259; his relations with Alexandrian religion, ii.
259, 260; and with the Mysteries of Eleusis, ii.
260; and with Christianity, ii.
261; his chapels and rites, ii.
261, 262, 268, 269; monotheism of religion of, ii.
324 n. 1.
204; reaction towards Persian nationality during his wars with Rome, ii.
225; Magi of Asia Minor his supporters, ii.
54; his Arabs aim at universal dominion, i.
18; takes its ideas of Christianity from heretics, ii.
124 n. 3; ii.
124 n. 1; expresses Gnostic conception of nature of Jesus, ii.
29 n. 1.
66; quoted, i.
66 n. 1; ii.
139 n. 2, 153 n. 2, 175 n. 5 Morocco, monuments of Alexandrian religion found in, i.
168 n. 2; writings of, not intelligible without mystic insight (Justin Martyr), i, 170 n. 5; adherence of rich Jews of Dispersion to Law of, i.
168; and of Samaritans, i.
177; and of Simon Magus, i.
188; divine inspiration claimed for, ii.
15; magical book ascribed to, ii.
46 n. 3 Moses, The Assumption of, edited by Dr Charles, i.
164; comes from Essene School, i.
167 n. 6; quoted, i.
293 n. 1, 302 n. 1;; rescues First Man, ii.
294, 295 n. 1; forms link with many systems, ii.
300 n. 2; with other powers sends Jesus to Adam, ii.
305; an extant sect, ibid.
Murray, Prof. Gilbert, his translation of Orphic gold plates quoted, i.
139 n. 1, 142; associated with Orpheus, the expounder of Mysteries, i.
87 Mycenae, Double Axe in worship of, ii.
135; the origin of all things, ii.
139; all other good powers his “names,” ii.
140; his “completion” to be fulfilled by Jesus, ii.
143; a Twin Mystery, ii.
144, 161; proceeds from last limb of Ineffable One, ii.
145; his “receptacle” or heaven, ii.
158; sees to emanation of universe, ii.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg Mysteries of Eleusis.
26, 74; borrow from Simon Magus (Salmon), ii.
50; their triple nature of soul, ii.
53; frequent Mysteries of Great Mother, ii.
58; believe in malignity and independence of matter, ii.
64; set forth changes of soul in Gospel of Egyptians, ii.
65; their priests, ii.
68; the assembly of souls in each world of, ii.
75; Gospel of Egyptians only work attributed to (Hippolytus), ii.
79; their allegorical interpretation of all literature, ii.
81; quote Homer, Pindar etc., ii.
83; treat poets as Puritans do Scripture, ii.
300 n. 2, 309, 323 n. 4 Name, of Alexander still famous in East, i.
14; Hawk or Horus name of Egyptian kings, i.
47 n. 1; of Osiris in Book of Dead, i.
55; many names of Greek Isis, i.
56; of Pluto used in magic, i.
99; the like of Persephone, i.
100; Babylonians use number instead of, i.
104; carved on scarab and used in spell, i.
157; knowledge of, gives power over spirit, i.
158; one of Simon Magus’ Roots, i.
180, 183, 185; more powerful in magic if meaning forgotten, ii.
33; names of Yahweh used by Jewish sorcerers, ii.
37; instances of ineffable names, ii.
148 n. 3; of Dragon of Outer Darkness, ii.
166 n. 2; mysteries called names of light, ii.
173 n. 1; names in Jesus’ address to His Father explained, ii.
186 n. 3; cryptographic names in Bruce Papyrus, ii.
236-239; of lion-headed god, ii.
289; names of Satan in same, ii.
297, 304; of Cross, ii.
323, 339; of Third Legate in same, ii.
49 n. 2; frescoes of Isis-worship at, i.
67; Orphic gold plates at, i.
33 n. 1, 57 n. 3; ii.
A. W., quoted, i. lvi n. 2, 145 n. 1; ii.
32 Nemesis, Orphic hymn to, i.
142 n. 2.
321; its organization and hierarchy, ii.
330; its settlement in Turkestan, ii.
35 Neptune, the god, name of God of Nature as sea, i. lvii.
See Poseidon Neptune, the planet, unknown in classic times, i.
116 Nero, the Emperor, state recognition of Alexandrian gods temp., i.
53; his name and Number of the Beast, i.
108; Simon Magus’ fatal flight before, i.
225 Nestor, his flattery of Athena in Odyssey, i.
95 Nicaea, Trinitarian doctrine formulated at, i.
25; named after Nicolaus the Deacon, ii.
46 n. 3.
29; body of Osiris thrown into, i.
33, 34; water of, in Alexandrian religion, i.
68; allegory of Osiris as, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg water of, used in magic, i.
103 Nineveh, omen tablets from, i.
142 n. 2 Nous, first of Simon Magus’ “Roots,” i.
100 n. 4; used for name of gods in Babylonia, i.
35; of Beast in Apocalypse, i.
97, 103 n. 5 Nut, the goddess, mother of Osiris and goddess of sky, i.
183, 192; its analogues in Bruce Papyrus, ii.
193 Odysseus, speech of the dead Achilles to, i.
99, 100; heaven of Sophia called, ii.
175 Olympias, mother of Alexander the Great, i.
297, 325, 332; Babylonian prototype and classical Atlas, ii.
298 n. 1, 332; Jesus comes to earth for relief of, ii.
121; possibly inspired by Persian legends, i.
122 n. 3, 126 n. 3; Buddhism reaches West after death of, i.
50; Soul of the World, ibid.
52, 75; with his six sons forms seven earthly demons, ii.
52, 70; called Leviathan in Diagram, ii.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg this world under his government, ii.
25; different founders assigned to, by Fathers, ii.
25, 26; teaching of changes with time, ii.
26, 27, 28; aim at combining Anatolian religion with Hellenic and Christian, ii.
38, 39; their Holy Spirit or First Woman, ii.
40; their Supreme Triad of Father, Mother and Son, ii.
41; their threefold division of all things, ii.
42; accidental origin of world, ii.
44; mingling of light with matter called Sophia, ii.
45; Sophia’s Seven Heavens, ii.
46; their names and connection with Judaism, ii.
49-51; Adam and Eve made at suggestion of Sophia, ii.
51; Fall of Man and expulsion from Paradise to Earth, ii.
52; their teaching as to soul of man taken from heathen Mysteries, ii.
54; of Fathers essentially Christians, ii.
56; teach return of world to Deity, ii.
57; their view of Mission of Jesus, ii.
59, 60, 61; use sacraments of baptism and Eucharist, ii.
62, 63; their salvation through rebirth of soul, ii.
64, 65; their Diagram and its use, ii.
71-74; their doctrine of correspondences, ii.
75; their divisions and end, ii.
78; their use of Apocrypha, ii.
79; and of Canonical Books, ii.
81; mode of interpretation of all literature, ii.
83; anti-Jewish, and reverence for Jewish Scriptures probably due to their magical use, ii.
143; Supreme Being of P.S.
155 n. 3, 158; cosmologies of P.S.
160, 161; lower initiates in P.S.
165; resemblance of Eucharistic ideas in P.S.
290 n. 4.
25; says all magicians use “God of Abraham” formula, ii.
33, 34; calls Christ Angel of Great Council, ii.
66; his description of Diagram, ii.
71-74; sympathy between planet Saturn and Michael, ii.
154 n. 2, 159, 179; says Persian theology gives mystical reasons for order of planetary spheres, ii.
257; quoted, i.
73, 199; ii.
232; called Light (Plutarch), ii.
237; Romans identify him with Zeus, ii.
140; addicted to magic and poisoning, i.
47 n. 3; never existed, i.
122; said to be founder of Eleusinian Mysteries, i.
125 n. 2; transmigration doctrine of, i.
127 n. 3; mentioned in Pindar, i.
129 n. 3; poems attributed to, i.
135, 140; said to have been a Thracian, i.
136; hymns attributed to, i.
146 n. 1; Jews forge writings in name of, i.
173; explains Mysteries of Eleusis and their rites (Hippolytus), i.
175; respect paid to “Orpheus and other theologists,” i.
184 n. 3; parallel between Simon’s Silence and Night of, i.
190 n. 1; quotations from verses attributed to, i.
1, 3, 147 n. 1, 157 n. 1, 168 n. 3, 169 n. 1, 185 n. 2, 186 n. 1, 190 n. 1; ii.
124, 125 n. 2; take Dying God into their system, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg take transmigration from Pythagoreans, i.
127; attribute sacramental grace to Eleusinian mysteries, i.
131; enjoin mortification of flesh, i.
133 n. 1; “kid in milk” a password among, i.
134; teach superior worth of next life, i.
137; no association or brotherhood of, i.
145; their services to religion few, i.
150, 156, 157, 168; egg of, reappears in Book of Enoch, i.
159; Simon Magus’ successive ages of world due to, i.
186; analogy of chain of being of Simon Magus with that of, i.
188; jealousy of Simon’s angels and of Titans of, i.
190 n. 2; escape from transmigration desired both by Simon and by, i.
194 n. 3.
120; Eleusinian Mysteries secret before, i.
130 n. 1; destroys idea of nationality of gods, i.
145; Essene views as to pre-existence of soul taken from, i.
156; abstinence for religious reasons begins with, ii.
32, 33; legend of, i.
33, 34, 35; two-fold origin of Osiris legend, i.
43, 44; his animal forms in Egypt, i.
45; identified with Hades in Alexandrian religion, i.
59; scenes in earthly life of, not kept secret in Egypt, i.
60, 61; initiate in Alexandrian religion enacts Passion of, i.
62; Alexandrian Horus, Osiris re-born, i.
63; “god of the great gods,” etc., i.
64 n. 1, 65, 137 n. 1, 145; in Alexandrian religion, water the emblem of, i.
68, 73; in same, Passion and Resurrection of, openly celebrated, i.
73 n. 1, 84; wine the blood of, i.
87; asked to grant “cooling water” to dead, i.
88; magician identifies himself with, i.
103; the god-man first of those who rose from the dead (Budge), i.
133 n. 1; so in religion of Pharaonic Egypt, i.
134 n. 3; the Cosmos the “emanation and displayed image of” (Plutarch), i.
181 n. 2; Simon’s god, like Osiris, his own spouse, son, etc., i.
189 n. 5; ii.
39; Greeks say death of Osiris should not be wailed for, ii.
21, 54; name of, ineffable in Egypt, ii.
37 n. 1; “the holy horned moon of heaven,” ii.
154 n. 3.
73 n. 4.
See Uranus Ovid, quoted, i.
161 n. 3; ii.
224 n. 3 Paganism, erroneous views as to relations of, with Christianity, i. lvi; merely veil for true Gnostic, ii.
18; Gnosticism road from, to Christianity, ii.
149; disappearance of its independence after Alexander, i.
161 n. 3; ii.
224 n. 3; Romans’ forced conquest of, i.
170; Jews outside, cling to Law of Moses, i.
173; charlatanism common among lower classes of, temp.
202; hatred of Gentiles shared by Jews outside, ii.
316, 332, 351; means probably legate or ambassador, ii.
101 Paradise, the Gates of, in Diagram, ii.
68; the Middle Space or Paradise of Sophia, ii.
141 n. 4, 163 n. 2, 164.
8; struggles of Syrian Empire against, i.
224; Book of Enoch and raid of, upon Jerusalem, i.
224; their age-long war against Romans, ii.
225, 226; leadership of, transferred to Persia, ii.
226; their eclectic religion, ii.
282; decline of power of Magi under, ii.
2, 3; belief in, leads to community of goods, i.
162; fading of belief in nearness of, ii.
198; all allusions to, excised from N.T.
209 Passion, of Dying God of Mediterranean basin, i.
37; of Osiris, publicly celebrated in Imperial Rome, i.
101 Paul, Saint, the Apostle, Simon Magus baptized before conversion of, i.
176; German theory of identity of Simon Magus with, i.
5 n. 2; Anatolian religion temp.
53 n. 2; success of his preaching to Gentiles and its result, ii.
76; mix Orphic with astrological teaching, ii.
80; quoted, ibid.
281 Persephone, scene of trials of, Eleusis and Asia, i.
37, 42, 124, 125, 138, 145; ii.
39; her temple at Eleusis, i.
39; her Rape or capture by Hades shown in Mysteries, i.
39; her deliverance by Hermes, i.
41; her identification with Demeter, i.
124, 142 n. 3; ii.
130; Orphic gold plate addressed to, i.
136 n. 2; Adonis made spouse of, i.
138; Orphic hymn to, i.
142, 143; identified with Aphrodite, Cybele, and Isis, i.
145, 189 n. 5; serpent present in all Asiatic legends of, ii.
253 Persepolis, one of the four capitals of Persian Empire, i.
3 Persia, religions of, come westward after Alexander, i. lvii; First Man legend appears in religion of, i. lxi; obscurity of dates of religion of, i. lxii; description of, before Alexander, i.
1-4; rush of Greeks to, i.
7, 8; emigrants from, settle in Asia Minor, ii.
229; difficulty about religion of, temp.
3, 12; priests of, officers of state, i.
24; Egyptian policy under, i.
51; astrology comes westward after Asiatic conquests of, i.
113; religion of, temp.
122; suzerains of Jews, i.
150; revival of nationality of, under Roman Empire, ii.
224, 225; wars between Romans and, ii.
225-227; Roman Court adopts manners and institutions of, ii.
84 n. 2.
17; Black Stone of, transported to Rome, ii.
131, 132 Peter, St, the Apostle, his dealing with Simon Magus, i.
176; Simon follows and opposes him (Clementines), i.
178; causes death of Simon Magus by prayer, ibid.
212; denies that Jesus proclaimed himself God (Clementines), ii.
140 n. 2 Peter and Paul, Apocryphal Acts of, i.
98 n. 1, 210 n. 1; swallowed by Zeus, i.
124; ruler of First Age of World, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg one of the three “philosophic” sects of Jews (Josephus), i.
155 n. 2; aim at universal supremacy for Jews, i.
25 Philip, St, the Apostle, instance of Greek name borne by Jew, i.
173 n. 2; baptizes Simon Magus, i.
157 Philip, The Gospel of, quotation from, ii.
22, 136 n. 2; banishes Alexander with Ptolemy and others, i.
10; Hebrews subject to, i.
150; Kings of, suzerains of David, i.
154; sole authority for secret doctrine of same, i.
157, 168; gives number of same at 4000, i.
170 n. 3; his own beliefs and system, i.
174; his views on eternal punishment, i.
175 n. 1; makes lower world reflection of higher (Hatch), i.
183 n. 3; borrows less from Greek mythology than Simon Magus, i.
185; makes stars rulers of earthly things, i.
186, 187; angels the patterns after which worlds made, i.
187 n. 3; his system contrasted with Simon Magus’, i.
202; uses allegorical exegesis as propaganda of Hellenistic culture, ii.
9 n. 1; some Gnostic leaders make Jesus Logos of, ii.
38 n. 3; takes Platonic view that God too high to touch matter, ii.
42; allegorical interpretation of, ii.
82; forced to harmonize Plato with Jewish traditions, ii.
286 n. 4; quoted, i.
154, 157, 174, 175, 187; ii.
175 n. 5; what its quotation of Great Announcement proves, i.
11; documents quoted in, not earlier than 200 A.D., ii.
62; Matter did not and Giraud did know it, when they reconstructed Diagram, ii.
219 Phoenicia, body of Osiris washed ashore in, i.
37; so the earth-goddess, i.
28; birthplace of most legends of Dying God, i.
28; “Mysteries of the Mother” in, i.
199; meeting-place of different creeds, ii.
28; its government by priest-kings, ii.
30, 67 n. 3; defection from Judaism of Ten Tribes in, ii.
32; prevalence of Jewish magicians in, temp.
34, 35; mother of gods called Cybele in, ii.
40; great goddess of, perhaps derived from Ishtar, ii.
45 n. 1; traces of pantheism in, ii.
64; double axe used by gods of (Ramsay), ii.
74; Stoic philosophy has a seat in, ii.
56; why St Paul gives them summary of O.T.
54; their belief in deification of man, ii.
48; describes blessedness of initiates into Mysteries, i.
122; his doctrine of transmigration, i.
129; his poems recited at games, i.
135; quoted, i.
121; some Orphic elements come into Greece, temp., i.
155; her history, ii.
155-157; meaning of allegory of, ii.
162; receives her adversary’s place, ibid.
186; and in Bruce Papyrus, ii.
177; as in other apocrypha, Jesus changes his shape according to heavens he traverses, i.
191 n. 4, ii.
60 n. 1, 154; texts, translations, and summaries of, ii.
17, 159-163; like Babylonians, makes heavens formed from powers of evil, ii.
60 n. 1; puts stay of Jesus on earth after Resurrection at 12 years, ii.
61 n. 1; Eucharistic ceremony of, ii.
63 n. 1, 192; powers mentioned in Diagram and in, ii.
1, 3, 73 n. 2, 74 n. 1; “Receptacles” and Place of Truth in, ii.
117 n. 1, 177; MS. of, and its provenance, ii.
134, 135; heavens of Ineffable One and First Mystery not described in, ii.
148 n. 1; thought by some the Interrogations of Mary, ii.
157; doctrine of interpretation in, ii.
164; lesser initiates must give passwords and seals, ii.
165, 169; mystery of the First Mystery is Baptism, ii.
168-170; mystery of the Ineffable One is the Eucharist, ii.
170-171; supreme revelation of book union with Jesus, ii.
171; “Mysteries of Light” not described in P.S.
173; open to all the world, ii.
178; read by Fathers?, ii.
179; astrology condemned in, ii.
185; cryptogram between 1st and 2nd vols of, ii.
188 n. 2; fragment in Bruce Papyrus links P.S.
192, 193; parent work on which all the others based, ii.
293 n. 2; quoted, i.
1, 2, 188, 193 n. 4, 194 n. 1, 292 n. 2, 293 n. 2.
11; says few real initiates in mysteries, i.
140; creator of, not jealous, i.
149 n. 1; his ideas the paradigms of perceptible things, i.
198; God of, too high to touch matter, ii.
42; says souls given daemons as guides through life, ii.
214; quoted, i.
65, 140, 149 n. 1; ii.
64; the same in Diagram, ii.
144 n. 8 Pliny, solar monotheism of, i.
155; quoted, i.
155 n. 1 Plutarch, his monotheism (Dill), i. lvii; makes Zoroaster 5000 years before Trojan War, i. lxii; a chief source of our knowledge of Eastern religions, i.
9; authority for meeting of Philip and Olympias, i.
22; his contempt for oracles of foreign gods, i.
65 n. 4; says water the emblem of Osiris, i.
68; gives episode of Isis as swallow, i.
70 n. 1; puts festival of Birth of Horus at spring equinox, i.
144 n. 3; Osiris and Set neither gods nor men but great daemons, ii.
16; acquainted with Persian religion, ii.
228, 229; describes Persians as sacrificing to Hades, ii.
249; equates Hades with Ahriman, ii.
255; thinks evil must have separate principle of its own, ii.
289 n. 3; quoted, i.
22, 23, 48, 70 n. 2, 144 n. 3; ii.
16, 214 n. 2, 228, 229, 249, 255, 289 n. 3.
136 n. 2; in Orphic hymn to Persephone, i.
90 n. 5; referred to in Bruce Papyrus, ii.
9, 204; and of Mithridates, ii.
204 n. 3; its kings claim descent from Persian heroes, ii.
268; quoted, i.
104 n. 3, 155; ii.
236, 249, 265 n. 2, 268 Poseidon, the god, Greek type of, on Indian coins, i.
17 n. 2; of Homer, shares empire with Zeus, i.
46; cattle and horses sacrificed to, i.
See Neptune Powers, the Three Triple.
268; one of the last Pagan noblemen, ii.
141; highest spirit in Treasure-house, ii.
147; power passed into Confusion originates in, ii.
220 Priests, state officials in Persia and Egypt, i.
24; of Greek confraternities, i.
25; greed of Egyptian, i.
28; always powerful in Africa, i.
31; their disastrous rule in Egypt, i.
31, 32; hereditary, of Mysteries, i.
39; native Egyptian, keep aloof from Alexandrian, i.
51; of Isis on Herculaneum frescoes, i.
68, 69; importance of, in Alexandrian religion, i.
76, 77; secular and regular, in same, i.
79, 80; break up of Asiatic and Egyptian colleges of, spreads magic, i.
22; temporal power of Anatolian, ii.
29; Cybele’s eunuch, ii.
31; high priests of Magic Papyri, ii.
205; of Persians, the Magi, ii.
267, 268; like modern churchwardens, ii.
146 n. 1; makes man come from tears of gods, ii.
153 n. 2, 176; quoted, i.
63, 137 n. 2; ii.
4 n. 1.
See Farrah Proserpine, Isis called Stygian P. by the Sicilians, i.
56; Lucius at initiation treads threshold of, i.
32; priesthood of, in early times, i.
18; his wisdom in choosing and ruling Egypt, i.
29, 30; decides to found syncretic religion uniting Egyptians and Greeks, i.
30; his court and capital both Greek, i.
44; his Museum and its “stuffed capons,” i.
48, 77; Egyptians reject his religious schemes, i.
51; success of his religion outside Egypt, i.
52, 53, 54; five centuries between him and Apuleius, i.
76; seizes Jerusalem, i.
151; colonizes Samaria with “Macedonians,” i.
177 Ptolemy II Philadelphus, Asoka’s mission to, i.
108 n. 1; a leader of the Italic School, ii.
119; his letter to Flora, ii.
131 Punjab, part of, in Persian Empire, i.
1 Purser, Louis Charles, collects authorities on Orpheus, i.
124; says our souls part of world-soul, i.
129; his theory of transmigration, ibid.
127; find withdrawal from world necessary to salvation, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg Ra, the god, corporation of priests of, earliest in Egypt, i.
31; the sun-god, i.
31, 63; Osiris invoked with him in Book of Dead, i.
32; legend of, and Isis, i.
38 n. 2; ii.
78 Ramsay, Sir William, F.R.S., has revived Alexandrian alchemist’s dream of transmutation, i.
45 Ramsay, Sir William Mitchell, says name of Christians not mentioned by classic writers, i.
1 n. 1; all gods of mysteries forms of One, i.
56 n. 4; date of Hadrian’s visit to Egypt, i.
86 n. 5; thinks Anatolian Jews coalesce with natives, ii.
29; characteristics of Anatolian religion, temp.
1 n. 1, 56 n. 4, 86 n. 5; ii.
1, 2, 3, 31 n. 1, 40 n. 3, 67 n. 3 Raphael, the archangel, name of, in Magic Papyri and O.T.
34; in Diagram name of terrestrial daemon, ii.
70; planet Mars connected with, ii.
75 n. 1 Rawlinson, Canon George, on government of Persian Empire, i.
2, 3 Rawlinson, Sir Henry, Omen Tablets in Cuneiform Inscriptions of W.A., i.
11 n. 3, 149 n. 2; ii.
19; dissidents near to, strictly Christian, ii.
357; leaves Church stronger than before, ii.
147; sorcerers of, use words of Mass, ii.
58; describes policy of Church of Rome as to Pagan customs, i.
85; abundance of diviners and sorcerers in Rome of Nero, i.
163 n. 1; revolt of Jews under Trajan, i.
172 n. 1; says Gnosticism attacks infant Church like croup, ii.
94 n. 3; quoted, i.
83 n. 1, 85 n. 1, 124 n. 3, 163 n. 1; ii.
87; to true Gnostic all religions merely veils, ii.
18; quoted, i.
87 n. 3; ii.
123; Orphic poems recited by, at games, i.
83 Rhea, the goddess, the earth-goddess sometimes called Cybele, Demeter etc., i.
139 n. 1; ii.
54 Rhodes, worship of Alexandrian gods at, i.
285 n. 2; on authenticity of letter to Marcellus, ii.
305 n. 1; quoted, ii.
151; their toleration for Jewish religion and customs fruitless, i.
163; punish Palestinian towns for rebellion, temp.
170; receive orgiastic worship of Cybele, ii.
30 n. 3; their long struggle with Persians, ii.
278, 356 Rome, becomes monarchical as she acquires world-power, i.
19; Alexandrian gods obtain a foothold in, i.
53; their worship becomes an established church in, i.
79; gathering of charlatans in, temp.
108; Orphic gold plates found at, i.
199; all heretics attracted to, ii.
203 Roots, the six of Simon Magus, i.
51 Roxana, wife of Alexander the Great, i.
47; the same in Diagram, ii.
69; address to, ii.
149; why so called, ii.
149 n. 2; appears in Bruce Papyrus, ii.
149; his action at Incarnation, ii.
149 n. 2; identified with Gate of Life, ibid.
149 n. 2, 187; gives cup of perception to righteous soul in same, ii.
182; in same bound with his subjects to Sphere, ii.
137; rites of, described by Demosthenes, i.
145; Phrygia seat of worship of, ii.
151; their sympathy with Hellenism, i.
167 Salmon, Dr George, his theory of forgery of Gnostic documents, i. lxi n. 1; ii.
11 n. 2; on authorship of Clementines, i.
11 n. 2; thinks return of worlds to Deity rather than salvation of mankind aim of Gnosticism, ii.
207; quoted, i.
178 n. 1; ii.
3, 4, 222 n. 1 Salome, speech of Jesus to, in Gospel of Egyptians, i.
5 n. 3 Samaria, Simon Magus’ deeds in, i.
177; religion of, temp.
184 n. 2; Simon said to appear to, as the Father, i.
192; appeal of Simon’s doctrines to, i.
52; identified with Satan in Ascension of Isaiah, ii.
61, 136 n. 2; the god of, called Adam, i.
137 n. 1, 139 n. 1; ii.
20, 80, 86; charlatans round altars of (Plutarch), i.
23; purification of religion of, i.
24; typical statue of, i.
55; all Greek and foreign gods included in, i.
56; merciful and compassionate to man, i.
58; friend of man in next world, i.
59, 60; initiation into “nocturnal orgies” of (Apuleius), i.
64; special hymn and air addressed to, i.
70; April festival of, i.
71; Oracle of, at Alexandria, i.
82; statue and temple of, at Alexandria destroyed by Christians, i.
84; ritual of, adapted to Christian use, i.
85; joint worship of, and Christ (Hadrian), i.
101, 104, 125 n. 3; representation of, on scarab used in Jewish spell, i.
106, 107; identified with Sun, i.
132 n. 3; Simon Magus may have borrowed from religion of, i.
269 Sargon, King of Akkad, astrological tablets going back to reign of, i.
10; maker of the body in Gnosticism, ii.
210; composite form of, in that of Manes, ii.
48; connection in Diagram between S. and demon Michael, ii.
256; lead associated with, ii.
9; his Docetism, ii.
17; confusion as to name of, ii.
47 n. 3; denounces marriage and procreation as work of Satan, ii.
118 n. 1; ii.
185 n. 2; affinity of male and female soul explained, i.
195; sexes united at the length, i.
48 n. 4, 152 n. 1; body of man made by evil daemons, ii.
54 n. 2; place of punishment of wicked souls above the earth, ii.
69, 182 n. 1; planet Jupiter ruler of the Five Planets, ii.
75 n. 1, 148 n. 3; the Serpent of Outer Darkness the Outer Ocean, ii.
92 n. 3, 172; many members of the Ineffable One, but one body, ii.
149 n. 3; Virgin of Light has seven virgins for assistants, ii.
155 n. 3; says Baptisms and Chrism lead soul into Place of Light, ii.
167 n. 1; renunciation of the world leads to Mysteries of the Light, ii.
172 n. 3, 192; sacraments called Mysteries of Light, etc., ii.
173 n. 1; the MS. of, described, ii.
180 n. 3; gives prayer of Jesus in unknown tongue, ibid.
182 n. 2; extracts from other documents probably mixed with, ii.
182 n. 3, 183 n. 2; threefold division of soul into Power, Moira and Counterfeit of the Spirit, ii.
189; sacraments of Bruce Papyrus resemble those of, ii.
193; degradation of belief in, ii.
194; returns to native Egyptian ideas, ii.
195-198; fear of hell sanction of belief in, ii.
198; quoted, i.
118 n. 1, 195 n. 1, 196 n. 2; ii.
193; functions of, never alluded to, ii.
179 n. 3; his mistake about Menander, i.
199 n. 7; on community of goods, ii.
18, 134 Scythia, in story of Manes probably means Turkestan, ii.
177 Secrecy, of Mysteries of Eleusis very strict, i.
47 n. 1; of initiation into Mysteries of Isis, i.
62; of Alexandrian doctrine that Osiris god of dead, i.
64 n. 3; observed as to contents of chest carried in procession of Isis, i.
130 n. 1; or jealousy, i.
139 n. 2; of tenets of Hellenizing Jews, i.
175 n. 2; as to Dying God not observed by Cretans, ii.
1; Alexander when in, said to receive grapes from Greece, i.
28; affection of Persians for, ii.
125 Seneca, last speech of, ii.
157; belongs to Western Diaspora, ii.
53 n. 2.
51; Athenian, facing the Acropolis, i.
78 n. 2; recluse in S. of Memphis, i.
79, 80; destruction of Alexandrian, i.
138; in Orphic poems represents earth, i.
26 n. 4; “Bull father of serpent,” etc., ii.
39; external Ocean figured as, ii.
49; in Asia Minor emblem of goddess’ husband, ii.
61; called Leviathan in Diagram, ii.
78; enemy of sun-god in Egypt, ibid.
135 n. 3; death figured as seven-headed, ii.
156 n. 3; Outer Darkness s. with tail in mouth, ii.
247, 250; “the World-ruler, the Great S.” in Magic Papyrus, ii.
33; defeated by Horus, i.
36; aided in war by Ethiopians, i.
37; the “Osiris whom S. murdered” in Magic Papyrus, i.
105; magician threatens to tear S. limb from limb, i.
125 n. 3; like Osiris, a great power or daemon (Plutarch), ii.
46 n. 3; a Jewish but apparently non-Christian sect, ii.
58, 150; Gentiles to be swallowed up by (Enoch), i.
86; Jewish forgeries in name of, i.
53; Orphic gold plates found in, i.
131; Demeter and Persephone tutelary deities of, i.
17 Simon Magus, accused of magic by Hippolytus, i.
110; thinks souls attracted into bodies by sexual desire, i.
153 n. 3; founder of pre-Christian sect, i.
176; traditional account of Simon’s life and death, i.
178; German theory that S. was St Paul, i.
179; his Great Announcement, i.
179, 180; his borrowings from Zoroastrianism, i.
232, 291; his succession of similar worlds, i.
38 n. 4; his system compound of Greek and Hebrew traditions, i.
187; his account of creation of man, i.
188, 189; teaches transmigration of souls, i.
190; Simon’s “redemption” of Helena of Tyre, i.
191; discrepant accounts of his death, i.
192; his theory as to division of sexes, i.
355; sources of his doctrine, i.
197, 198; history of sect, i.
198, 199; his heresy source of all subsequent Gnosticism, i.
200-202; allegorical interpretation of Scripture by, i.
201 n. 1; ii.
82, 213; said to be follower of St John Baptist, ii.
6 n. 4; does not admit divinity of Jesus, ii.
25 n. 5; system of, owes much to his personality, ii.
26; borrowings of later heresies from, ii.
43; gives independent origin to matter, ii.
44; calls Helena Sophia, ii.
63, 64; his “flaming sword” and double axe, ii.
67 n. 3; did his doctrines reach Alexandria?, ii.
207; story of Helena reproduced in Christian account of Manes’ predecessor, ii.
285 n. 3.
200 n. 3; ii.
18 n. 3; why the first Christians neglected, ii.
2; headship of sect of, ii.
211; Messiah of Jews to appear on (Enoch), i.
10; conceals his doctrines from everybody but Plato, i.
11; convicted of bringing new gods into Athens, i.
82 Solomon, King of Israel, believes in other gods than Yahweh, i.
46; advises creation of man, ii.
51; brings about Fall of Man, ii.
52; arranges births of John Baptist and Jesus, ii.
57; chief agent in redemption of the light, ii.
58; Christos sent to her assistance, ii.
59; descends with Christos into Jesus, ii.
60, 79; leaves Jesus at Crucifixion, ii.
64; her place in Diagram, ii.
74 n. 1; her “middle space,” ii.
101; her Fall, ii.
104, 114; her identification with the Earth, ii.
104 n. 4; form given to her by Christos and the Holy Spirit, ii.
106; Jesus sent as spouse to, ibid.
108; called the Mother of All Living, ii.
110. n. 1; her heaven the heavenly Jerusalem, ii.
110; sends angels into chosen souls, ii.
110, 112; pneumatic souls belong to, ii.
112; Demiurge learns from, ii.
114; psychic souls receive instruction in heaven of, ii.
115; descended into Virgin Mary, ibid.
60; pre-ordained destiny of, comes in with astrology, i.
174; division of, into male and female which seek each other (Simon Magus), i.
17; of the world, the god of the Greek mysteries, ii.
53; man’s soul, part of soul of world, ii.
109, 112 n. 3; men’s souls one of three classes, ii.
112; souls of psychics receive further instruction in Heaven of Sophia, ii.
136; St John Baptist born with soul of Elijah, ii.
139, 149; souls of men during Millennium and after death, ii.
164, 165; effect of mystery of First Mystery upon soul of dying, ii.
167; effect of mystery of Ineffable upon man’s soul after death, ii.
182, 183, 186, 199; the Counterfeit of the Spirit duplicate of soul proper, ii.
184; cup of oblivion given to soul after punishment, ii.
187; fate of the soul in Pharaonic Egypt, ii.
295 n. 2; soul of man according to Manes, ii.
309; of soul of Zoroastrian in Avesta, ii.
311, 312 Spain, monuments of Alexandrian gods found in, i.
181 n. 1; ii.
40; forms Trinity with Father and Son, ii.
41; Christos son of, by the Father-and-Son, ii.
42; birth of Sophia from, ii.
44, 45; blue circle in Diagram, ii.
294; discrepancy as to part played by him in deliverance of First Man, ii.
302 n. 1; speaks word like pointed sword, ii.
325; bewails captivity of the Light, ii.
327; probably the “Father” of St Augustine’s “love song,” ii.
175 n. 5; ii.
140; personified in Gospel of Peter, ii.
140 n. 2.
19; say all gods different forms of one Divine energy, i.
56; Alexandrian religion may owe something to, i.
155 n. 2; Tarsus one of principal seats of, ii.
2 n. 1; mentions Candace Queen of Ethiopians, i.
14 n. 2 Sulla, worship of Alexandrian gods in Rome, temp., i.
113 Sunday, compromise of Church as to coincidence of, with Lord’s Day, i.
3; Alexander’s marriage of Europe and Asia at, i.
5; Greeks flock to, i.
121; Orphic legends possibly learned by Greeks at, i.
122 n. 3, 126 n. 3 Swedenborg, Emanuel, ideas of Simon Magus revived by, i.
37 n. 1 Syria, Buddhist mission to, i.
20; only road of attack on Egypt, i.
29; Adonis legend in, i.
37; Hadrian’s visit to, i.
126; Palestine buffer State between Egypt and, i.
163; proconsul of, rebuilds cities destroyed by Jews, i.
48 n. 3; calls Jews enemies of the human race, i.
43 n. 2; First Man in (Harvey), ii.
122 n. 3; women weeping for, in Temple of Jerusalem, ii.
259; allusion to, in St Augustine, ii.
170 Taylor, Thomas, the Platonist, first translator of Orphic hymns, i.
39; no entry into, for uninitiated, i.
41; could not have held more than 3000, i.
285, 286; also called Buddha, ii.
285; suggested meaning of name, ii.
18 n. 1; the like of innovating on doctrines of their leaders, ii.
118; his own heretical views on Trinity, ii.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg describes respect paid by primitive Church to martyrs, ii.
1, 3, 220 n. 5, 260 n. 5, 263 n. 3, 268 n. 4 Testament, the Old, names of God in, used for magical purposes, ii.
33; Greek version of, belongs to Western Diaspora, ii.
277; rejected by Manes, ii.
278, 350; quoted, i.
1, 6, 180 n. 1; ii.
1, 2, 33 n. 1, 43 n. 2, 45 n. 1, 85, 94 n. 3, 114 n. 3, 136 n. 1, 155 n. 3, 210 n. 3.
See Daniel, Ezekiel, Habakkuk, Haggai, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Joel, Zachariah Testament, the New, frequent mention of magicians in, i.
108; account of Simon Magus in, i.
208; Manes calls himself Paraclete announced in, ii.
351; quoted, i.
108 n. 6, 145 n. 1, 176, 177 n. 5, 182 n. 4, 188 n. 1, 191 n. 3; ii.
1, 3, 288 n. 3.
100 n. 4; ii.
47 n. 3; used in most spells, ii.
71 n. 1.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg Thebes, the Greek, i.
6, 13; the Egyptian, succeeded by Memphis as religious capital, i.
6 n. 4; said to be first who corrupted the Church because not made bishop, ii.
55; like Apuleius makes Thessaly home of sorcerers, i.
291 n. 3; makes surrender of First Man to Satan tactical, ii.
294 n. 2; amplifies earlier account of deliverance of First Man, ii.
1, 2, 302 n. 1; does not mention Wheel, ii.
297 n. 2; his elaborate account of creation of man and other animals, ii.
216 Theodosius, the Emperor, sanctions demolition of heathen temples in Alexandria, i.
109 n. 1; describe repose of spiritual and psychic souls until Consummation, ii.
111 n. 1; astrological destiny of man modified by baptism, ii.
115 n. 3; Jesus receives tincture from planetary worlds in His descent, ii.
116 n. 1; quote opening words of Fourth Gospel, ii.
117 n. 1, 177 n. 4; date of, ii.
148 n. 1 Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria, “the perpetual enemy of peace and virtue” (Gibbon), i.
84 Theophilus, Bishop of Antioch, first to mention by name St John’s Gospel, ii.
214 n. 2, 289 n. 3; gives independent principle to evil, ii.
121 n. 4 Theseus, made immortal because son of divine father, i.
18 Thessaly, inhabitants of, called Thracians, i.
351 Thomas, missionary despatched by Manes into Syria, ii.
79 Thoth, the god, the ibis-totem brought into legend of Osiris, i.
77 n. 2 Thrace, gods of, early brought into Athens, i.
16; Orphic teaching comes into Greece through, i.
136; their horror of birth and delight at death (Herodotus), ibid.
37 n. 1 Tiamat, the goddess, heaven and earth made out of her dead body in Babylonian legend, ii.
53, 78; no Christian converts of rank in reign of, ii.
44 n. 1; his use of Eleusinian Mysteries, i.
61 Timothy, son of Eunice, of Jewish descent, but not circumcised (Ramsay), ii.
42, 125; sons of Heaven and Earth, i.
126 n. 3; man in Orphic teaching made out of ashes of, i.
127; Orphic contempt for body which belongs to, i.
144; Orphic hymns invoke, i.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg parallel to jealousy of, in system of Simon Magus, i.
254 Titus, the Emperor, repeated rebellions of Jews after destruction of Temple by, i.
170; Christians regarded as Jews till time of, ii.
81 Trajan, the Emperor, in his time knowledge of Latin not necessary at Rome, i.
9; atrocities committed by Jews throughout East, temp., i.
225; conquers Dacia and colonizes it with Orientals, ii.
127; origin of belief in, i.
129; doctrine of, in Pindar, ibid.
130, 134; taught by Simon Magus, i.
141; the Great Powers of the Right emanate from, ii.
352; quoted, ii.
1, 3, 339 n. 1, 341 n. 1, 346 n. 1, 352, 353, 354.
1, 4, 327 n. 2, 329 n. 1, 350 n. 4, 356 n. 4.
121 n. 4.
133; never represented with stars, ibid.
45 n. 1 Uranus, the planet, not known in classical times, i.
187 n. 2; Docetism of, i.
81 n. 1; persecuted by orthodox, ii.
96; divide into two schools, ii.
118, 119; views of, as to Devil, ii.
126, 127; high price of their mysteries, ii.
127 n. 4; their success in Egypt, ii.
132; protected by Julian, ibid.
168; say Catholics only capable of salvation, ii.
180 n. 3; most numerous of heretics, ii.
9 n. 1; Docetism of, ii.
27, 28; connection between systems of V. and of Simon, ii.
45 n. 1, 93; first makes Gnosticism workable form of Christianity, ii.
93; importance of system of, in eyes of Fathers, ii.
95; his Supreme Being, ii.
98-103; its possible explanation, ii.
99, 100; his Fall of Sophia and its consequences, ii.
104-108; his Four Worlds or “Places,” ii.
108, 109; his three species of souls, ii.
112; his Christology, ii.
113, 114; his life, followers and successors, ii.
117-121; his religion contrasted with that of Church, ii.
124, 143; moral dangers of teaching of, ii.
127, 128, 129; services of, to Christianity, ii.
132, 133; revival in Paris of religion of, ii.
135, 158, 159; boundary Powers common to both, ii.
140 n. 2; the Power of P.S.
149 n. 5; verbal juggling common to both systems, ii.
169; V. probable author of first two books of P.S., ii.
291; quoted, ii.
226, 281; his defeat lets Goths into Dacia, ii.
230-232, 248; god of sky and prototype of Zeus, ii.
Vatican, monument of Isis-worship in, i.
135; guardian of, ii.
161 n. 3 Venus, the goddess, identified with Greek Isis, i.
See Aphrodite Venus, the planet, omen of distress among Assyrians, i.
48; her sphere in Diagram, ii.
77; siege of Temple of Jerusalem by, ii.
25 n. 3; his story that Simon calls Helena, Sophia, ii.
73 n. 2; causes soul of Elijah to be planted in St John Baptist, ii.
137, 150; her place and office, ii.
137 n. 3; one of the two Leaders of the Middle, ii.
150; working agent in salvation of souls, ii.
158; her dealing with soul which has received lesser mysteries, ii.
165, 174; the like with second mystery of First Mystery, ii.
184; sends soul of slanderer into afflicted body, ii.
181 n. 1; receives faithful soul at death, ii.
278, 283; his attempt at reformation of Zoroastrianism unsuccessful, ii.
182; a place of torment, ii.
187 Wesley, John, founder of a “Free Church,” ii.
297, 306, 308.
115 n. 1; his discovery of worship of Vedic gods in Asia Minor, ii.
41 n. 2; story of superfluous Light which falls from, ii.
44; Sophia springs from left side of, Christos from right, ii.
47 n. 1; speaks of a supernal and infernal Zeus, i.
47 n. 1; ii.
239 n. 6; makes Zeus both male and female, i.
47 n. 4; calls stars and planets, gods, i.
46 Xenophon, authority for visits of the King’s Eye to satraps, i.
2 n. 1; treats Socrates as polytheist, i.
10; Hebrew Prophets’ and Psalmists’ monotheistic conception of, i.
107; according to Jews, promises them exclusive temporal advantages, i.
150; on same authority, makes world for sake of Jews, i.
187; the “Father” of second or intermediate world of Simon, i.
32 n. 4, 43 n. 2; name of, specially used in magic, ii.
33; name of, ineffable after Alexander, ii.
37 n. 1; Sophia his delight and instrument, ii.
27 n. 1 Zachariah, the Prophet, shows hatred of Gentiles, i.
17; Cretan legend of, i.
37; the same as taught at Eleusis, i.
137; called “Highest of All” (Aeschylus), i.
138; sewing of heart of, in thigh of Zeus and its result, i.
75 n. 1, 148 n. 3; perhaps Guardian of Veil of Treasure-house, ii.
339 Zeus, Crete or Asia Minor birthplace of, i.
16; identified with many gods of Asia and Europe, i.
37, 42, 138; union with Demeter shown in Mysteries, i.
40, 61 n. 1; Hermes sent by, to Hades for deliverance of Persephone, i.
55; Achilles’ flattery of, i.
133; relations of Orphic, with Demeter and Persephone, i.
142, 144, 145; Titans enemies of, ii.
190 n. 1; Barnabas hailed as, in Phrygia, i.
191 n. 3; ii.
42; legend of Z. and Persephone referred to Asia Minor, ii.
231; “the whole circuit of the sky” to Persians (Herodotus), ii.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg mentioned by Hesiod, i.
130; and with Adonis, i.
137; the serpent lover of Persephone, i.
67 n. 3.
137 n. 1, 154; Pythagoras’ division of, ii.
293 n. 2; the Wheel with twelve buckets in same, ii.
297 n. 2; the twelve daughters of the Third Legate, ii.
126 n. 3; ii.
214 n. 2; name and doctrine of, known in West long before Plutarch, ii.
234; reform of, directed against worship of Ahriman (Rosenberg), ii.
280; divine origin of teaching of, acknowledged by Manes, ii.
316 Zoroastrianism, borrows from Babylonia, i. lxi; our ignorance of origin and dates of, i. lxii; adopts theory of seven planetary spheres surrounding earth, i.
117; Orphic poems seem reminiscent of reformed, i.
181 n. 1; Simon Magus’ ideas in part derived from (Franck), i.
310 Zwingli, founder of a “Free Church,” ii.
19 CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A.
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS Footnotes 1.
Bk I. c. 23, p. 214, Harvey.
Salmon in Dict.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 5.
The Canonical Apocalypse was probably written after the siege of Jerusalem by Titus in 70 A.D., while the first unmistakable mention we have of St John’s Gospel is by Theophilus of Antioch a hundred years later.
Earlier quotations from it are anonymous, i.e.
c. 22, says that the Church was untroubled by heresy until the reign of Trajan.
Community of Goods.
Lucian, de Mort.
See Epistle of Barnabas, c. XXI.
(1911), p. 9.
On the ignorance of the first Christian writers, see de Faye, op.
“Those which say they are Jews, but are not”; Rev.
The Clementine Homilies, though of much later date, never speak of the Christians otherwise than as Jews.
Josephus, Wars of the Jews, Bk VII.
12, 17, 19, 20.
The episode of the “Woman clothed with the Sun” of the Canonical Apocalypse is supposed by some to refer to this.
Fuller in Dict.
p. 14, says that “St Paul was a Jew by birth, imbued with the exclusiveness and disdainful spirit which inspired his race and influenced all their dealings with other nations.” 20.
See Josephus, Wars, Bk VII.
See Chapter II, supra.
c. 11) make this last a contemporary of Simon Magus.
45, 46, 47.
Clement of Rome, First Epistle to the Corinthians, c. 44.
Bk I. c. 26, pp.
(1888), p. 392.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 47.
Bk I. c. 7) accuses of the seduction of Christian women, apparently in his own time, since the words of Marcus’ ritual, which the Bishop of Lyons quotes, are in much corrupted Hebrew, and the Jewish Cabala was used by him.
See also the Dict.
Salmon in Dict.
c. 5, § 4.
An excellent and concise account of the discovery and the subsequent controversy as to the authorship of the book is given by Salmon in the Dict.
Christian Church, pp.
See Introduction, etc.
Gibbon, Decline and Fall, II.
He died after the completion of his task, and before the book could be printed.
None of these versions are entirely satisfactory, and it is much to be wished that an authoritative edition of the two works could be put forward by English scholars.
The present writer gave a short history and analysis of them in the Scottish Review for 1893 under the title “Some Heretic Gospels.” 46.
I. p. 179 and note.
This may be accounted for by what has been said above as to both being pre-Christian in origin.
Bk I. c. 1, I. p. 9, Harvey.
Here he is called ὅμοιος τε καὶ ἴσος τῷ προβαλόντι, “like and equal to him who had sent him forth.” There is certainly here no allusion to “begetting” in the ordinary sense of the word.
As in the epithet of Persephone in the Orphic Hymn quoted above.
See Chapter IV, supra.
See his What is Christianity?
Iliad I. ll.
57, 330; XIV.
Plutarch, de Is.
XXV., XXVII., XXX.
Probably this was one of the reasons why the Mysteries which showed the death of a god had in Greece to be celebrated in secret.
Bk I. c. 19, II.
p. 200, Harvey.
Bk I. c. 18, p. 197, Harvey.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 61.
Bk I. c. 1, § 13, pp.
Bk I. c. 1, § 31, pp.
Bk I. c. 19, § 3, p. 202, Harvey; Hippolytus, op.
For that against the Freemasons, “Devil Worship and Freemasonry,” Contemporary Review for 1896.
See n. 1, supra.
To this may be added the inherent malignity of matter and the belief in salvation by knowledge.
As in the case of Clement of Alexandria, who seems to have been initiated into most of the heathen mysteries then current.
c. 1) show that it could be immediately followed by the Eucharist without any intermediate rite or preparation.
See Hatch, H. L. pp.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 77.
As Hatch, H. L. pp.
For the possibilities of Greek science, had it not been opposed by the Church, see ibid.
Perhaps such a result was to be expected.
Bk V. c. 62.
The Canonical Apocalypse is not earlier than 70 A.D., and was probably written soon after the fall of the Temple of Jerusalem.
The question really depends upon Hippolytus’ sources, as to which see last chapter, pp.
De Faye, Introduction, etc., p. 41.
See n. 3, p. 47, infra.
92. ἑαυτοὺς γνωστικοὺς ὀνομάζοντες.
c. 7, pp.
Ramsay, Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia, II.
1) is quoted in support.
World, p. 100.
Ramsay, Cities, etc., I. p. 9.
Ramsay, Cities, etc., I. p. 87.
I. p. 92.
Ramsay, Cities, etc., I. pp.
132, 263, 264, for other identifications.
The American edition, 1911, contains some additional notes.
Dill, Nero to Marcus Aurelius, pp.
See n. 1, supra; Suetonius, Nero, c. LVI.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 110.
Ramsay, Cities, etc., II.
(1911) p. 350.
See n. 3, p. 28, supra.
Was this why Daniel was called “Master of the Magicians”?
9; v. 11.
1878, I. pp.
126, 127, and authorities there quoted.
See last note.
c. 34, and Bk I. c. 22.
See Chapter III, vol.
I. n. 6, p. 106, supra.
194 sqq., gives many specimens of these spells.
Papyri in B.M.
Does this mean the adepts in magic or the heads of a sect?
I. c. 24.
p. 314, says that the existence of the Cabala is indicated in the Talmud.
See Chapter V, vol.
169, 170, supra.
See King, Seven Tablets of Creation, 1902, I. p. 66.
See Chapter VII, supra.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 128.
Bk I. c. 6.
Including in that name some who attained to high office in the Catholic Church.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg Πατέρων πάντων Πάτερ, αὐτοπάτωρ, Προπάτωρ, ἀπάτωρ, Υἱὲ σεαυτοῦ.... Μύστας δὲ νόος Τά τε καὶ τὰ λέγει, Βυθὸν ἄρρητον Ἀμφιχορεύων.
So the name of Osiris himself was said to be ineffable.
2nd series, vol.
The name of Yahweh became ineffable directly after Alexander.
(1884), p. 172.
In every case, the magical idea that the god might be compelled by utterance of his secret name seems to be at the root of the practice.
226 sqq., Harvey.
As to its origin, the issue is still very doubtful.
Until we are able to compare the dates of these two sources it seems idle to speculate as to which is the original one and which the derived.
Theocritus, Idyll, II.
See Chapter II.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 140.
162, 197, and R.H.R.
See n. 1, p. 31, supra.
See Strong, The Syrian Goddess, p. 52 and n. 25.
See n. 1, p. 31, supra.
Ramsay, Cities, etc., I. p. 9.
Bk I. c. 28, p. 227, Harvey.
146. ἀρσενόθηλυς, Hippolytus, op.
See next note.
See Salmon in Dict.
152. ὰποκατάστασις (see p. 57 infra).
As Salmon has shown with great clearness, this, rather than the redemption of individual souls, is the aim of all post-Christian Gnostic systems, Dict.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 153.
Something, however, has evidently been expunged from the earlier version of the story, and it is possible that the later interpolation is due to the desire of the translator to make the teaching of the heretics as repulsive as possible.
156. εἰς τὸν ἄφθαρτον ἀνασπασθῆναι Αἰῶνα, ἣν καὶ ἀληθινὴν ἐκκλησίαν καλοῦσι.
p. 228, Harvey.
This Divine Family or Council must have been an old idea in post-exilic Judaism.
Justin Martyr, Dial.
c. 126, says that Christ is called the “Angel of the Great Council” by Ezekiel, but the expression is not to be found in the A.V.
Bk V. c. 53, also speaks of a prophecy in which Jesus was described as the “Angel of the Great Council, because he announced to men the great counsel of God”—a pun which curiously enough is the same in Greek as in English.
p. 43, n. 7.
The expression “Angel of the Great Council” recurs in the Gnostic epitaph from the Via Latina given later (Chapter IX).
227, 228, Harvey.
See Rogers, op.
The heaven which there is fashioned from the powers of evil, is here at any rate half divine.
Bk I. c. 28, p. 229, Harvey.
p. 228, Harvey.
Her most prominent characteristics show her to be a personification of the Earth, the mother of all living, ever bringing forth and ever a virgin, as is shown in the “Goddesses Twain,” Demeter and Cora.
Bombay, 1912, pp.
Whether the Persians also drew this conception from the Babylonian Ishtar is a question which some years ago might have been answered in the affirmative.
Bk I. c. 28, p. 230, Harvey.
Bk I. t.
26, p. 184.
In all these he is the son of Sophia and presides over one or more of the super-terrestrial heavens, although the particular place assigned to him differs in the different sects.
2) projected by one of the “triple-powered” gods of our universe and sent down into Chaos for the destruction of the heroine; in one of the later documents of the book we see him as lord of a particular portion of Chaos, where he presides over the punishment of a certain class of sinning souls.
His name offers many difficulties.
165. εἰδικὸς κόσμος, Hippolytus, op.
By the expression Demiurge he means that he fashioned it from pre-existent matter, as a workman builds a house.
231, 232, Harvey.
1912, p. 134, and Pl.
It is certainly of Asiatic or Anatolian origin, and seems to be connected with volcanic phenomena.
Other editors wish to read ἐρείδεσθαι “fixed” for ἐρεῖσθαι.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 173.
See n. 1, p. 45, supra.
So Hippolytus, op.
See Ramsay, Cities, etc., I. pp.
See Ramsay in last note.
Bk V. c. 7, pp.
Is this the origin of the ideas on the Macrocosm and the Microcosm?
See Chapter XIII, infra.
See n. 3, p. 41, supra.
Charles, Book of the Secrets of Enoch, pp.
It is curious that she did not also mention herself or the First Woman.
This is the story of the earliest or Greek text; the Latin says that he said it to divert the minds of his rebellious sons.
For Eve’s creation, see n. 2, p. 58, supra.
The idea of the seven evil demons is a very old one in the East.
See the Babylonian story of the assault of the seven evil spirits on the Moon.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 190.
The LXX or Greek version of the Old Testament belongs to the Western Diaspora rather than to the Eastern.
See Acts xiii.
See Hippolytus, op.
193. πλάσμα τὸ πήλινον, Hippolytus, op.
Hippolytus, see n. 1, supra.
Bk V. c. 8, pp.
A verse: Son of Saturn, son of Jove Or born of mighty Rhea’s love.
Holy name, that sounds so dear To that ancient Rhea’s ear.
Thee the old Assyrians [read Syrians] all The thrice-wept Adonis call.
To thee for name has Egypt given The holy horned moon of heaven [Osiris].
Unfruitful now or barren desert brown, Now the rich golden harvest mowing down.
Or whom the blossoming almond-tree Brought forth on the free hills the piper wild to be.
Pan, I call!
Evan the wild Bacchanal: Or that bright Shepherd that on high Folds the white stars up in the silent sky.
Τουτέστι, φησίν, οὐδεὶς τούτων τῶν μυστηρίων ἀκροατὴς γέγονεν εἰ μὴ μόνοι οἱ γνωστικοὶ τελειοι.
The “this” refers to the text: “He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.” 201. ἐκ τῶν σωμάτων τῶν χοϊκῶν ἀναγεννηθέντες πνευματικοὶ οὐ σαρκικοί “being born again from the earthly body, not as fleshly but as spiritual men”.... Οἱ δὲ αὐτοί, φησί, Φρύγες τὸν αὐτὸν πάλιν ἐκ μεταβολῆς λέγουσι θεόν.
Bk V. c. 8, pp.
Berger, Études, etc.
202. τῶν ἐπουρανίων καὶ ἐπιγείων καὶ καταχθονίων.
203. τὴν ἀσυμφωνίαν τοῦ κόσμον.
17, refers to τοῖς ὑλικοῖς καὶ χοϊκοῖς “to the material and earthly,” and that “to those that are near” to τοῖς πνευματικοῖς καὶ νοεροῖς τελείοις ἀνθρώποις “to the spiritual and understanding perfect men.” Hippolytus, op.
Bk V. c. 8, pp.
The Latin translator is no doubt responsible for this confusion.
209. τὰ μικρὰ μυστήρια τὰ τῆς σαρκικῆς γενέσεως: Hippolytus, op.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg occasioned by disobedience and ambition.
I. p. 191, n. 4).
That is to say, that which does not perish and return to the Deity.
This again is given almost verbatim.
Yet some tradition of a long interval between the Resurrection and the Ascension was evidently current in the sub-Apostolic age.
c. 33, § 3, p. 331, Harvey.
Some part of this statement appears in the Greek text.
Bk V. c. 10, pp.
Probably for the supposed “Chaos” in the second line of the Psalm should be substituted some words like “the projected Thought” of the Father.
Bk V. c. 7, p. 148; ibid.
See Chapter X, infra.
See p. 18 supra.
3, 4 to have been made without the Word is in fact this world.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 223.
Οὐ δύναται οὖν, φησι, σωθῆναι ὁ τέλειος ἄνθρωπος, ἐὰν μὴ ἀναγεννηθῇ διὰ ταύτης εἰσελθὼν τῆς πύλης.
c. 13, and n. 2, p. 196, Chapter VI, vol.
Οἱ οὖν ἱερεῖς καὶ προστάται τοῦ δόγματος γεγένηνται πρῶτοι οἱ ἐπικληθέντες Ναασσηνοί.
See Chapter II, vol.
I. p. 60, supra.
See Chapter IV, supra.
III, and Giraud, op.
See Arthur Evans, Mycenaean Tree and Pillar Cult, 1901, pp.
Is it possible that this is the explanation of the double axe as a divine symbol?
If this idea were at all prevalent in Anatolia at the beginning of our era, it would explain Simon Magus’ mysterious allusion to the flaming sword of Genesis iii.
24, “which turns both ways to guard the Tree of Life,” and is somehow connected with the division of mankind into sexes.
See Hippolytus, op.
The names of the circles, etc., in the original are from above downwards: Ἀγάπη, Ζωή, Πρόνοια, Σοφίας, Γνῶσις, Σοφία, Φύσις, and Σύνεσις.
See n. 1, p. 58 supra.
v. 9, p. 48, and Editor’s notes for other references.
Harvey, however, op.
6, and Rev.
See the quotation from the Gospel of Philip later in this chapter, p. 79, infra.
This seems to be the sphere of Saturn, the furthest or 7th reckoning from the earth and therefore according to the astronomy of the time the nearest to the upper heavens.
Was the symbol of life the Egyptian ♀ or ankh?
The φέρων ἤδη τὴν ἰδίαν σύμβολον “bearing my own beard as a symbol” seems to refer to the attitude of the Egyptian dead, who is represented as holding his beard in his right hand when introduced into the presence of Osiris.
The sphere of Venus?
The sphere of Mars?
No allusion is made elsewhere to the φραγμὸν πυρὸς “fence of fire”; but we do of course often hear of an empyrean or heaven of fire stretching over the earth.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg system.
No system of correspondences, however, can be devised that does not break down on scrutiny.
But it may well be that good and bad spirits occupying corresponding places in the universe were sometimes called by the same names.
Though Babylonian in origin it must early have found its way into Egypt.
p. 385 and Chapter VI, supra, vol.
I. p. 183 and n. 3.
Soul, perhaps, does not here mean anything more than animating principle, spark, or breath of life.
See p. 42, supra.
259. τοὺς τελείους ἀβασιλεύτοὐς γενέσθαι καὶ μετασχεῖν τοῦ πληρώματος, Hippolytus, op.
See also the same expression in n. 3, p. 41, supra.
He gives, op.
p. 79, a map showing their chief seats from the head of the Persian Gulf on the one hand to Crete and the Adriatic on the other.
He might be the Egyptian Set, whose name is transliterated in the Magic Papyri as Σηϊθ.
His appearance in Egypt first as the brother and then as the enemy of Osiris has never been fully accounted for.
See “The Legend of Osiris,” P.S.B.A.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 268.
Bk V. c. 13, pp.
See Giraud, op.
English translations of some of them have appeared in the “Apocryphal Acts” etc.
He says the fact had been already noticed by Harvey.
It is, of course, another indication of the Anatolian or Syrian origin of the sect.
16 seems the text referred to.
Bk V. c. 25, pp.
Sophia is evidently the serpent in this combination.
The same may be said of practically all Christians of the Apostolic age.
See Hatch, H.L.
Bk V. c. 21.
Kenyon, Greek Papyri, p. 83.
1 Kings xviii.
See Josephus, Bell.
c. 19, § 2.
Dill, Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius, p. 346.
See Chapter II, vol.
I. p. 76, supra.
t. I. p. 398.
Bk I. c. 15.
I. p. 86, supra.
But something has evidently slipped out of the text.
If Christ and Satan were both the enemies of Yahweh, we should have the συμφώνησις or fellowship declared impossible by St Paul in 2 Cor.
t. I. p. 349.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 307.
p. 203, and Hippolytus, op.
The revelations in question must therefore have been made after the Resurrection.
c. 21, pp.
310. ἀθελήτως καὶ ἀνοήτως καὶ ἀναισθήτως.
See Chapter IV, vol.
I. p. 123, supra.
Ἦν, φησίν, ἐν αὐτῷ τῷ σπέρματι Υἱότης, τριμερὴς κατὰ πάντα, τῷ οὐκ ὄντι θεῷ ὁμοούσιος, γενητὴ ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων, Hippolytus, op.
Egyptian Religion, p. 78.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg gives no authorities for the statement.
There seems no authority for Matter’s statement that he was of Jewish origin.
p. 176, and Clement of Alexandria as there quoted.
Ἐπεὶ οὖν γέγονε πρώτη καὶ δευτέρα ἀναδρομὴ τῆς Υἱότητος, καὶ μεμένηκεν αὐτοῦ τὸ Πνεῦμα τὸ Ἅγιον τὸν εἰρημένον τρόπον, στερεωμάτων ὑπερκοσμίων καὶ τοῦ κόσμου μεταξὺ τεταγμένον: Hippolytus, op.
Bk V. c. 8, pp.
c. 4, pp.
10, םש ריעז וקל וק וצל וצ translated in the A.V.
See Salmon, s.h.v.
c. 20; Bk IV.
9, 138; Bk VI.
Ι. p. 4.
Gibbon, Decline and Fall, vol.
c. 27, p. 174, Bury.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg chapter.
Bk I. c. 1, § 1, pp.
9, 10, Harvey.
p. 10, Harvey.
See p. 128 infra.
Bk I. c. 1.
Bk I. cc.
See Chapter VI, vol.
I. p. 174, supra.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 357.
Not “self-existent,” but maker of his own φύσις or nature.
See n. 2, p. 98 supra.
Harvey reads here αἰώνιος “everlasting,” which makes at least as good sense as the other.
They are also probably places or receptacles.
It is worth noticing that these are the three “theological” virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity.
c. 23, pp.
Ἀπὸ δὲ τῶν δεκαδύο ὁ δωδέκατος καὶ νεώτατος πάντων τῶν εἰκοσιοκτὼ Αἰώνων, θῆλυς ὢν καὶ καλούμενος Σοφία, κατενόησε τὸ πλῆθος καὶ τὴν δύναμιν τῶν γεγεννηκότων Αἰώνων, καὶ ἀνέδραμεν εἰς τὸ βάθος τὸ τοῦ Πατρός.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg that this is “the good and heavenly Jerusalem,” the land in which the children of Israel are promised milk and honey.
c. 31, pp.
His name of Horus was probably suggested by that of the old Egyptian god whose figure must have been familiar to every Alexandrian.
c. 32: ἔδοξεν αὐτοῖς μὴ μόνον κατὰ συζυγίαν δεδοξακέναι τὸν υἵον, δοξάσαι [δὲ] καὶ διὰ προσφορᾶς καρπῶν πρεπόντων τῷ Πατρί.
XII., possibly with reference to this passage.
Chapter XIII, infra.
Κατὰ τοῦτο τοίνυν τὸ μέρος, θνητή τις ἐστὶν ἡ ψυχή, μεσότης τις οὖσα· ἔστι γὰρ Ἑβδομὰς καὶ Κατάπαυσις.
n. 1, p. 109, infra.
c. 33, pp.
24, 27; Mark iii.
22; Luke xi.
Called also the Heavenly Jerusalem.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg souls of men is confirmed by Hippolytus, op.
Bk V. c. 14, points out that the notion of demons dwelling with the soul is to be found in Plato, and quotes the passage from the Vision of Er (Rep. Bk X. c. 15) about the souls of men between births each receiving from the hand of Lachesis a demon as their guides through life.
Hope Moulton, op.
See Chapter XII, infra.
Εἶτα τὸ δεῖπνον τὸν γάμον κοινὸν πάντων τῶν σωζωθέντων, ἄχρις ἂν ἀπισωθῇ πάντα καὶ ἄλληλα γνωρίσῃ.
Ὅταν γὰρ τὸν μὲν κόσμον λύητε, ὑμεῖς δὲ καταλύησθε, κυριεύετε τῆς κτίσεως καὶ τῆς φθορᾶς ἁπάσης.
It has nothing to do with soul as we understand the term.
c. 36, pp.
“Wherefore when things on high had been put straight, it had to be according to the law of sequences that those here below should be put straight also.” 397.
2, 3) about being the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but “by my name Jehovah was I not known unto them” is quoted.
n. 2, p. 116 infra.
78): Μέχρι τοῦ βαπτίσματος οὖν ἡ εἱμαρμένη, φασίν, ἀληθής· μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο οὐκ ἔτι ἀληθεύουσιν οἱ ἀστρολόγοι.
Ἔστι δὲ οὐ τὸ λουτρὸν μόνον τὸ ἐλευθεροῦν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἡ γνῶσις τίνες ἦμεν, τί γεγόναμεν, ποῦ ἦμεν, ἢ ποῦ ἐνεβλήθημεν, ποῦ σπεύδομεν, πόθεν λυτρούμεθα, τί γέννησις τί ἀναγέννησις.
c. 35, pp.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 404.
That is, not a martyr, but one who had suffered for the faith without losing his life.
c. 4, § 1, vol.
p. 175, objects to this.
p. 172, n. 1; ibid.
See n. 2, p. 116 supra.
p. 4, Harvey.
This appears to be hyperbole rather than dualism.
De Faye, Intro.
Rather a suspect name for a hymn writer.
See n. 3, p. 117 supra.
See n. 2, p. 118 supra.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 428.
This may have been due either to their Egyptian extraction, or to the necessity of putting the matter in a way that would be intelligible to their Egyptian disciples.
Their ancestors, the Egyptians of the early Dynasties, when they wanted to describe how gods of both sexes came forth from one single male deity, did so by means of a very coarse image.
1892, p. 293 and n. 7.
244, 245, agrees that Clement looked upon the Son as a creature only.
1891, p. 27.
c. 29, pp.
2 John iv.
c. 36, pp.
p. 4, Harvey.
c. 15, § 2, pp.
152, 153, for references.
VII, n. 1, p. 8 supra.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 446.
Gibbon, Decline and Fall, Bury’s ed.
c. 4, §§ 1-15.
7-8 passim, pp.
A similar miracle is performed by the risen Jesus in the Bruce Papyrus.
[Αἰώνων πα]τρικοὺς κ[αὶ].... b. Οὐκ ἔσχεν κοινὸν βιότου [τ]έλος ἥδε θανοῦσα· κάτθανε καὶ ζώει καὶ ὁρᾷ φάος ἄφθιτον ὄντως· ζώει μὲν ζωοῖσι, θανὲν δὲ θανοῦσιν ἀληθῶς.
Though dying, she has not suffered the common end of life, She is dead, and yet lives and actually beholds the light incorruptible, To the living she is alive, and dead only to those really dead.
O Earth, why dost thou wonder at this new kind of shade?
That the lady’s name was Flavia seems evident from the acrostic contained in the first verse.
The passage does not appear in the Canon.
p. 126, quoting St Jerome.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 453.
c. 3, pp.
It is doubtful whether the edict can have been enforced before the emperor’s death abrogated it.
The sect therefore had adherents in Italy about 360 A.D. 458.
Salmon in Dict.
Mus., 1905, p. 173, n. 2, says that it was bought at the sale of Askew’s effects for £10.
0d., and that Askew himself bought it from a bookseller.
39-43, 347-348, and t. III.
p. 255, n. 1; and Clem.
Bk V. c. 6.
Bk I. c. 31.
It was doubtless to this that the text “Be ye wise as serpents, harmless as doves” refers.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg largely in the Mycenaean and Cretan worship of the goddess.
See Ronald Burrows, Discoveries in Crete, 1907, pp.
137, 138, and Index for references.
16, 17: “But the saints will come with the Lord with their garments which are now stored up on high in the seventh heaven: with the Lord will they come, whose spirits are clothed.... And afterwards they will turn themselves upward in their garments, and their body will be left in this world.” Cf.
Charles, Ascension of Isaiah, pp.
399 sqq., where he says that this was also the teaching of St Paul.
Chapter XIII infra.
So that Judas Iscariot received a super-excellent soul as well as the other eleven, unless we are to suppose that his successor and substitute Matthias was one of those chosen from the beginning.
c. 47, § 2, p. 368, Harvey.
II, pt 1, pp.
If we might alter this last into βαρβαριωθ, we might see it in a great: number of magic spells of the period.
26, 28, 33, 34.
Whatever they may mean, we may be quite sure that they can never contain with their few letters the three pages or so of text which are given as their interpretation.
VIII, n. 2, p. 38 supra.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 474.
That is to say, their names make up his name as letters do a word.
So in the system of Marcus referred to in Chap.
See also § 5 of same chapter.
Those who wish to understand the system are recommended to read the whole of the chapter quoted.
1, v. 10).
From the Coptic word here translated “Precept,” we may guess it to be a personification of the Jewish Law or Torah which, according to the Rabbis, before the creation of the world existed in the heavens.
Are these the letters mentioned in last note?
Πρεσβευτής, properly, “ambassador” or “agent.” Doubtless a prototype of our sun.
Παραστάται, “Comrades” or “witnesses” or “helpers.” They can here hardly be anything else but the Five Planets.
Προηγούμενος “Forerunner” does not seem to occur in classical Greek.
p. 171 infra.
One is rather tempted to see in the name a corruption of ἀγραμματέον in the sense of “which cannot be written,” but I can find no authority for such a use of the word.
This Εἱμαρμένη or “Destiny” is the sphere immediately above our firmament.
IX, n. 3, p. 115 supra.
Bk V. c. 10, says that God is ineffable, being incapable of being expressed even in His own power.
These things I will tell you in the emanation of the universe.
121, 122 supra.
Ὡς γὰρ οἱ Πυθαγορικοὶ διεῖλον εἰς δώδεκα καὶ τριάκοντα καὶ ἑξήκοντα, καὶ λεπτὰ λεπτῶν εἰσὶν ἐκείνοις, δεδήλωται· οὕτως οὗ τοι τὰ ἐντὸς Πληρώματος ὑποδιαιροῦσιν.
c. 11, pp.
What he does say is that the Ineffable One has two χωρήματα or receptacles and that the second of these is the χώρημα of the First Mystery.
It is, I think, probable that an attempt to describe both these χωρήματα is made in one of the documents of the Bruce Papyrus.
191, 192 infra.
These are here again set out seriatim, and as the order in the main corresponds with that in the five words translated in the text, it serves as a check upon this last.
The order of the powers in the text was given in the article in the Scottish Review before referred to, and, although this was written 20 years ago, I see no occasion to alter it.
1 and 3, p. 141 supra.
As has been said, it is difficult not to see in this “1st Precept” a personification of the Torah or Jewish Law.
See n. 3, p. 146 supra.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 499.
See n. 2, p. 136 supra.
The middle world is of course that where light and darkness mingle.
He doubtless founded his opinion on the passage in the Hebrews.
The name seems to mean “Holy King” Cf.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 505.
See last note.
IX, p. 112 supra.
See n. 3, p. 137 supra.
See also Schmidt, K.-G.S.
1, p. 75.
VIII, where he is called “the holy horned moon of heaven.” 516.
See note 1, p. 138 supra.
See n. 2, p. 142 supra.
See Chapter IX, p. 104 supra.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 521.
See p. 163 infra.
But all the astrology of the time seems to have divided the astronomical day not into 24, but into 12 hours.
(Nov.-Dec. 1911), p. 540, n. 4.
But curiously enough, not the “souls” of fish.
See Schmidt, Hist.
Is this one of the reasons why Jesus is called Ἰχθύς?
This idea of man being made from the tears of the eyes of the heavenly powers is an old one in Egypt.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 526.
See n. 1, p. 148 supra.
Μέρος τευχῶν Σωτῆρος, pp.
In another part of the last-named document, the Moon-ship is described as steered by a male and female dragon (the caduceus of Hermes?)
See n. 2, p. 159 infra.
Budge, Book of the Dead, passim.
IX, v. 15) “And thus His descent, as you will see, will be hidden even from the heavens, so that it will not be known who He is.” Charles, The Ascension of Isaiah, p. 62.
67, 70, 73 and 79.
212, 213, and the Epistle of Barnabas, N.T.
In the Latin version of the last-quoted book, it is assigned to Daniel, which shows perhaps the connection of Enoch with all this quasi-prophetic or apocalyptic literature.
IX, p. 101 supra.
Thus, as is usual in matters of religion, the gods of one age become the fiends of the next.
His bipartite appearance may be taken from Ezekiel viii.
Probably the latter.
This demon in the shape of a flying arrow seems to be well known in Rabbinic lore.
485, 486, describes him as having a head like a calf, with one horn rising out of his forehead like a cruse or pitcher, while to look upon him is certain death to man or beast.
The basilisk with seven heads seems to be Death.
Death, as we have seen in Chap.
These “three times” are not years.
Bk I. c. 21) gives for the birth of Jesus.
This doctrine of ἑρμηνεία occurs all through the book.
The author is trying to make out that well-known passages of both the Old and New Testaments were in fact prophetic utterances showing forth in advance the marvels he narrates.
A translation has since been published in Cambridge Texts and Studies, vol.
We may therefore put their date about the year 200.
73, 74 supra.
9: ὅτι ἐν αὐτῷ κατοικεῖ πᾶν τὸ πλήρωμα τῆς θεότητος σωματικῶς.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg op.
As has before been said, this is attempted in one of the documents of the Bruce Papyrus.
191, 192 infra.
Yet the First Mystery is not the creator of Matter which is evil, because Matter does not really exist.
14: “(O Father) I have given them thy word; and the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.” The parallel does not seem so close as to make it certain that one document is copying from the other.
IX, p. 107 supra.
See last note.
IX, p. 108 and n. 1 supra.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 555.
See last note and n. 5, p. 147 supra.
p. 302 and note.
Or they may cover a kind of allegory, as we might say that Agape or Love makes Faith, Hope, and Charity.
But I believe it to be more likely that the “12 mysteries” are letters in a word.
And these names differ one from the other, but they belong to each of the twelve, so that he who saith one name, saith all the names.
Learn that the 18 were first, and then after a pause, he says 300.
(In) the 18, I = 10, H = 8, thou hast Jesus (Ἰησοῦν).
And because the Cross was meant to have grace in the T, he says also 300.
He expresses therefore Jesus by two letters and the Cross by one.
None has learned from me a more genuine word.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 567.
“The True Word” or the Word of the Place of Truth.
It should be noted that these are only required of the psychics or animal men.
No doubt in the Greek original the actual seal was here figured.
For examples, see the Bruce Papyrus, passim.
The idea is typically Egyptian.
3 (1897), p. 325: no spell was in the view of the ancient Egyptians efficacious unless accompanied by a talisman or amulet which acted as a material support to it, as the body to the soul.
p. 296, n. 1, for references.
The Emperor Constantine, who was baptized on his deathbed, was a case in point.
The motive seems in all these cases to have been the same: as baptism washed away all sin, it was as well to delay it until the recipient could sin no more.
p. 295 and note, for references.
See n. 2, p. 166 supra.
27, 29, are quoted in support.
22; 1 Cor.
16 and v. 30 are quoted in support.
v. 30, quoted in support.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 586.
Justin Martyr was probably born 114, and martyred 165 A.D. For the passage quoted in text, see his First Apology, c.
p. 183 infra.
Αὐτοὺς δὲ μὴ διὰ πράξεως, ἀλλὰ διὰ τὸ φύσει πνευματικοὺς εἶναι, πάντῃ τε καὶ πάντως σωθήσεσθαι δογματίζουσιν.
And they say that we of the Church are these people.
Wherefore they declare that good deeds are necessary for us: for otherwise we could not be saved.
It is to be observed that these “cleansing mysteries” will only admit their recipients to the light of the Kingdom of Jesus—not to that of the First Mystery or of the Ineffable One.
Gibbon, Decline and Fall, vol.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 598.
p. 130, n. 2.
See n. 2, p. 153 supra.
30 Sept. 1909, p. 13.
(1897) p. 325.
See p. 190, infra.
102, 192, says in effect that St John’s Gospel appeared after the Apostle’s death and was not accepted without opposition.
147, 170, 176.
c. v. 614.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 616.
ⲞⲨ ⲘⲈⲢⲞⲤ ⲎⲦⲈ Ⲏ ⲦⲈⲨⲬⲞⲤ Ⲙ ⲎⲤⲰⲦⲎⲢ, or (in Greek) Μέρος τευχῶν Σωτῆρος.
Thus, the whole invocation reads: αεηιουω, ϊαω, αωϊ, οϊαψινωθερ, θερ[ι]νοψ, νωψιθερ, ζαγουρη, παγουρη, νεθμομαωθ, νεψιομαωθ, μαραχαχθα, θωβαρραβαυ, θαρναχαχαν, ζοροκοθορα Ιεου Σαβαωθ.
p. 43, and pp.
Paris, 1892, pp.
Paris, 1897, pp.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 623.
See Kohler, op.
It is possible that what follows after this is not from the Μέρος τευχῶν Σωτῆρος but an extract from yet another document.
In the text of the Μ. τ. σ.
116, 117, Harvey.
This is also briefly mentioned in the part of the Μέρος τευχῶν Σωτῆρος just described.
Paris, n. d. p. 175.
See Budge, Book of the Dead, 1909, vol.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 633.
That is the Sphere of Destiny acting through its emissary the Moira or Fate described above, p. 184 supra.
It is a curious example of the fossilizing, so to speak, of ancient names in magic that Shakespeare should preserve for us in the Tempest and Macbeth the names of Ariel and Hecate which we find in the Μ. τ. σ.
So that it could not profit by the knowledge of the awful punishments prepared for sinners.
I do not know that this idea occurs elsewhere.
I. p. 47.
Bk I. c. 19.
Write them with a sign that the sons of God may show them forth of this place.
This is the name of the Deathless One ααα ωωω, and this is the name of the word by which the Perfect Man is moved: ιιι.
These are the interpretations of the names of the mysteries.
The first is ααα, the interpretation of which is φφφ.
The second which is μμμ or which is ωωω, its interpretation is ααα.
The third is ψψψ, its interpretation is οοο.
The fourth is φφφ, its interpretation is ννν.
The fifth is δδδ, its interpretation is ααα, which above the throne is ααα.
See n. 3, p. 180, supra.
157 and 163.
Paris, 1891, p. 106.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg here, it doubtless means that they were arranged in the same order as the powers above them in pursuance of the principle that “that which is above is like that which is below,” or, in other words, of the doctrine of correspondences.
Perhaps the House or Place of Ἀλήθεια or Truth many times alluded to in the Μ. τ. σ.
She seems to be here called “the Great Virgin of the Spirit.” Cf.
We may imagine another year to have been consumed by the revelations made in the book.
See p. 147, n. 5, supra.
p. 211; Schmidt, K.-G.S.
t. I. p. 395.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 667.
To make things more difficult, the guardian sometimes had a different name for every hour.
124, n. 2, 163.
(1897), p. 325.
The kings, according to a belief which was evidently very old in the time of the Pyramid-Builders, were supposed to possess immortality as being gods even in their lifetime.
Gibbon, Decline and Fall, vol.
p. 214, Bury’s ed.
154, 155, and authorities there quoted.
Hatch, H. L. pp.
129, 130, 293, 307-309.
p. 118 supra.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 686.
Dill, Nero to Marcus, pp.
31-33, and Hadrian’s letter there quoted.
Justin Martyr’s two Apologies are among the best known of patristic works.
He probably knew nothing about the place.
Bk I. c. 2.
p. 150; cf.
p. 139, disbelieves it.
The council was held 692 A.D. See Salmon in Dict.
Bk I. c. 27.
The story that he seduced a virgin is now generally held to mean merely that he corrupted the unsullied faith of the Church.
Bk V. c. 22.
So Salmon, art.
So Salmon, art.
This view, however, cannot apply to Justin Martyr who was, as we have seen, his contemporary.
See n. 5. p. 205 supra.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 708.
According to him, Jesus was not born of woman.
c. 31, pp.
The whole controversy is well summed up in Matter, Hist.
See Matter, op.
Bk V. c. 1.
Bk V. c. 5.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 730.
Bk V. c. 14.
Bk V. c. 16.
Bk V. c. 18.
But see n. 2, p. 217, infra.
c. 2, where the king of this world who rules by law and rejoices in the destruction of sinners is mentioned.
p. 490, calls him the representative of the Protestant spirit.
p. 207, supra.
Bk I. c. 27.
113 and 145.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 751.
After Jesus had revealed Himself to the Creator and received his confession of ignorance, Jesus illuminated Paul and made him His apostle.
Bk I. c. 16.
756. ἐδημιούργησε τὰ γενόμενα.
c. 37, and in Clem.
Bk V. c. 13.
According to Hippolytus, op.
So Salmon in Dict.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 767.
351, 352; 439, 450.
As in B.C.
See Morrison, The Jews under the Romans, p. 58, for authorities.
Chapter V. Vol.
I. p. 101, n. 3, supra.
p. 519; III.
Horace, Odes, Bk IV.
317, 318, for authorities.
I. p. 209.
Severus’ victories are doubted by Gibbon; and Prof.
Bury apparently supports his author.
Bury in his Appendix 17 points out that the whole history of Valerian’s capture is still very obscure.
I. p. 340.
I. p. 375.
See Prof. Bury’s note 83 on page cited.
I. p. 373.
249, 250, tells the story excellently and dramatically.
Horace, Odes, Bk I. Ode 38.
I. p. 382.
Although his authority in such a matter is suspect, there can be little doubt of the fact.
The date should probably be 304 A.D. See n. on Table of Dates, Vol.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 788.
Dill, Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius, pp.
He thinks the worship was first introduced here by the legions from Germany.
(Sept. Oct. 1911), pp.
Herodotus, Bk I. c. 131.
Prof. Hope Moulton, Early Zoroastrianism, 1913, pp.
The text is given in the J.R.A.S.
West, Pahlavi Texts, pt I.
(Sacred Books of the East), pp.
Hope Moulton, op.
Herodotus, Bk III.
c. 61 sqq.
p. 674; Rawlinson, History of Herodotus, 1862, vol.
Herodotus, Bk I. c. 140; VII.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 810.
Plutarch, de Is.
Chapter III, vol.
I. p. 114 supra for examples.
Dill, Nero to Marcus Aurelius, pp.
449, 450, for authorities.
I. p. 103, n. 4, supra.
I. p. 123 supra.
Cory’s Ancient Fragments, 1832, pp.
125-142, and p. 251 infra.
p. 326 and Fig.
p. 336, reproduced in the article in the P.S.B.A.
p. 261 and Fig.
p. 349, and Pl.
II., Inscriptions 80 (p. 107), 129 (p. 115), 318 (p. 140), 386 (p. 149), 522 (p. 167), and 470 (p. 160).
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 827.
160, 392, 393, and article in P.S.B.A.
Plutarch, de Is.
Bk I. c. 60.
Herodotus, Bk VII.
Bk V. c. 11, says Zeus is the same as Hades.
He quotes Euripides as authority for the statement, but I do not know the play in which it appears.
He also, op.
Heracles, of course, applied compulsion to Hades.
1912, p. 137, for authorities.
p. 91, no.
2; p. 99, nos.
30, 34; p. 102, no.
49; p. 103, no.
p. 99, no.
p. 105, no.
62; p. 116, no.
p. 96, nos.
17, 20; p. 117, no.
139; p. 145, no.
I. p. 200.
p. 350 (Monument 246).
1 of Mon.
246 (p. 350).
p. 395, and Fig.
It is not invariable, as the sculptor was sometimes evidently governed by considerations of space.
West, Pahlavi Texts, Pt 1, S.B.E.
p. 298, Fig.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 851.
p. 515 and Pl.
p. 310, Fig.
192 bis b (7), also I. p. 167 and n. 5.
p. 346, e (1) and Pl.
p. 339, b (6) and Pl.
p. 326, b (3) and Fig.
I. p. 304, puts these scenes in a slightly different order.
VII, where the sequence is fairly plain.
p. 338, c (5) (Klagenfurt).
I. p. 172.
p. 337, c. (4) (Klagenfurt).
I. p. 173.
I. p. 173, and n. 3.
Like the thrust of the Spanish bull-fighter which is supposed to split the heart.
The theory is ingenious, but not very plausible.
I. p. 186, for authorities.
I. p. 197.
Plutarch, de Is.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 875.
I. p. 175, Fig.
Justin Martyr, First Apology, c. LVI.
Pl VIII, shows this most clearly.
I. p. 178, and Fig.
Plutarch, de Is.
265, 266, for authorities.
He relies on a fragment of Dion Chrysostom which does not appear to have this meaning.
p. 213, Fig.
p. 236, or P.S.B.A.
p. 213, Figs.
p. 216, Fig.
47; p. 238, Fig.
68; p. 259, Fig.
p. 196, Fig.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 896.
p. 7 and note.
Plutarch, de Is.
7, in P.S.B.A.
The Orphic invocation of the Titans referred to in Chap.
I. p. 116, n. 3 supra can be thus explained.
p. 215, Fig.
13 of P.S.B.A.
p. 238, Fig.
15 of P.S.B.A.
XIII., 1891, p. 177.
See Chapter IX, p. 108 supra.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg house between Paganism and Christianity.
But see Chapter XIII, infra.
For “musical” there should probably be read mystical, the τ being easily omitted by a copyist.
Charles, Bk of the Secrets of Enoch, pp.
The Greek Apocalypse of Baruch, published by James in Cambridge Texts and Studies, vol.
1, p. 44.
He has, however, got the order wrong, as copper is generally associated with the planet Venus, tin with Jupiter, iron with Mars, silver with the Moon, gold with the Sun, and lead with Saturn.
See p. 234, supra.
Hope Moulton, Early Zoroastrianism, p. 260.
Somewhere about 204 B.C.
Turin, 1828, vol.
It has been quoted in this sense by Hatch, H.L.
173 and 413, argues against this construction.
p. 261, Fig.
Papyri, p. 65.
c. 27), was not unconnected with his own transformation into the shape of an ass.
See n. 1, p. 259, supra.
See also Gibbon, vol.
p. 498, Bury (Appendix 15).
Justin Martyr, First Apology, c. LXVI.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 937.
Augustine, In Johann.
(1911), p. 397 and n. 1.
I. p. 65.
p. 204, Fig.
30, and p. 493, Fig.
430; or P.S.B.A.
1 and 2.
See Chapter II, Vol.
I. p. 62, supra.
p. 18, for the passage in St Jerome in which these degrees are enumerated.
p. 294, Fig.
149; p. 298, Fig.
154; p. 300, Fig.
156; p. 304, Fig.
161; p. 488, Fig.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 959.
I. p. 175, Fig.
VIII, p. 74, n. 3, supra.
I. p. 291.
c. 16 says this was so.
c. 7, for his life under Julian.
His career is well described by Dill, Roman Society in the Last Century of the Western Empire, 1899, pp.
17, 18, 30, 154, 155.
I. p. 326.
Thirty-five seems to be the greatest number belonging to any one chapel.
I. p. 327.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 981.
Dill, Last Century, etc.
p. 29, n. 2.
329, 330; Dill, Nero to Marcus Aurelius, p. 624.
See p. 342 infra.
As in Shakespeare’s Macbeth.
45, 349, 350.
p. 195, where the authenticity of the decree is defended.
For the provocation given to the Empire by the anti-militarism of Manes see de Stoop, op.
83, 116, 118, 119.
6-7, 25-31, transcribes the epistle to Marcellus, its answer, and the exposition of Turbo, and could scarcely have heard, as early as 375 A.D., about which time he wrote, of St Augustine’s discussion.
It is a pity that he did not see his way to keep the old numeration of the chapters.
Stokes in Dict.
328, 329; cf.
p. 93, examines all the evidence for this and comes to the conclusion given in the text.
Malcolm, History of Persia, London, 1821, Vol.
XII supra, p. 232.
See n. 1, p. 278 supra.
This was certainly not so; but it was probably only from their followers that he derived any acquaintance with Christianity.
See n. 7, p. 280 supra.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 1016.
p. 171, attributes to Mani.
Morrison, Jews under Romans, p. 325 for authorities.
The first mention of Buddha in Greek literature is said to be that by Clem.
Bk I. c. 15.
9th edition, s.v.
See p. 293, n. 2.
So Socrates, Eccl.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 1033.
The authenticity of the letter is defended by Kessler, op.
1036. τῶν κακῶν ἐπὶ τὸν θεὸν ἀναφέρουσιν, ὧν τὸ τέλος κατάρας ἐγγύς.
It is evidently intended for a quotation from Heb.
8, which however puts it rather differently as ἐκφέρουσα δὲ ἀκάνθας καὶ τριβόλους ἀδόκιμος καὶ κατάρας ἐγγύς, ἧς τὸ τέλος εἰς καῦσιν.
See p. 335 infra.
It is therefore used when possible in the remaining notes to this chapter.
Plutarch, de Is.
Yet the point does not yet seem capable of decision, as Plutarch may here be only giving us his own opinion.
This is really the crux of the whole question.
Among these, the Babylonians, for instance, from the earliest times portrayed their demons as not only attempting to invade the heaven of the gods, but as being in perpetual warfare with one another.
But the very little we know of Babylonian philosophy would lead us to think that it inclined towards pantheism of a materialistic kind rather than to dualism.
Kessler substitutes Courage for Generosity and seems to make these “souls” the members’ derivatives.
See last note.
See Chapter XII, p. 251 supra.
Rogers, Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, Frontispiece and Figs.
1 and 13).
Something of the kind seems indicated in the “Little Point,” from which all material powers spring, referred to by Hippolytus and the Bruce Papyrus.
Chapter X, p. 146 supra.
177, 178, and may be accounted for by the crude figure by which the Egyptians explained the coming-forth of the universe from a single male power.
See Budge, Hieratic Papyri in the Brit.
These were also the “sons” of Darkness or Satan.
p. 16, says few conceptions were more widely spread throughout the East.
It should be remembered that in the Asiatic cosmogonies the fixed stars belong to the realm of good as the representatives of order, while the planets or “wanderers” are generally evil.
According to the Christian tradition, the Powers of Darkness devoured only the soul of the First Man which was left below when his body, as will presently be seen, returned to the upper world.
p. 18, n. 4.
p. 27, n. 2.
The idea that the Sun’s rays had a purifying effect shows shrewd observation of nature before his bactericidal power was discovered by science.
So does the association of the Moon with water, which doubtless came from the phenomenon of the tides.
Is the Column of Glory the Milky Way?
From the Persians it probably passed to the Stoics and thus reached the Western world slightly in advance of Christianity.
c. 10) mentions the Wheel briefly and rather obscurely.
515, n. 2, 516, 517, n. 3).
There can be little doubt that it is to be referred to the Zodiac.
p. 549, and notes 2 and 5).
III., says plainly that the Sun and Moon were formed out of that part of the light (here called δύναμις “power”), which, although it had been captured by the powers of matter, had not been contaminated, while that which had suffered some slight and moderate stain became the stars and sky.
The author here evidently refers to the Sun and Moon only.
See p. 323, n. 4 infra.
n. 1, says it has dropped out of the text, which seems likely.
The story is given verbatim later, p. 306 infra.
34-39, however, seem to be exactly similar to the story in the text.
Her identification with the Spirit of the Right Hand or first Power created by the Supreme God of Light has been mentioned above (note 1, p. 293 supra).
p. 511 et al.
“[The] Power of the Good One, no longer a perceptible light, but as if one should say, an emanation of God.” Some years ago, we could hardly have looked for her prototype or first appearance in the history of religions in any other direction than Babylonia, where the worship of Ishtar, her Babylonian counterpart, goes back as far as we can trace Babylonian religion.
Now, however, it is plain that other races than the Babylonians may have been concerned in the spread of the worship of the Great Mother throughout Western Asia.
1-8, and notes 24, 25, and 30, on pp.
52, 53 and 30 op.
Zoroaster and Manes may therefore have taken their mother goddess from an Aryan rather than from a Semitic original.
c. 6) also knows that the Living Spirit has, like the First Man, five sons, to whom we shall return later.
16), and how this word caused to appear the image of the First Man.
p. 24, and note 5.
26, 28), and also of the “commands” of the Holy Spirit to the Hearers, which are plainly allusions to the Living Spirit or Ζῶν Πνεῦμα of the Christian Fathers.
34- 49, and App.
It should be noted, however, that some part of this story was known to St Augustine.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 1072.
p. 517, n. 3) make this the work of the Living Spirit, but they are clearly wrong.
This idea of the macrocosm and microcosm according to which the body of man is a replica of the universe is found in nearly all later mysticism—also in the Cabala and in the later Zoroastrian treatises.
Probably a clerical error.
c. X., pp.
The word used is κέλεφος; but the Latin texts all read “elephant.” 1082.
Ἐρῶ ... πῶς μεταγγίζεται ἡ ψυχὴ εἰς πέντε σώματα, op.
The soul of the rich man is in the same chapter said to pass into the body of a beggar and thereafter εἰς κόλασιν αἰώνιον “to everlasting punishment.” Is it from this source that the Calvinists took their doctrine of eternal damnation?
X, p. 187 supra.
That the crown was designed as a protection against the spirits of evil, there are many indications in the last-mentioned document.
Kessler would here read “gods” for “goddess.” 1086.
That is to say, the particular world of light, whether Gentleness, Knowledge, Intelligence, Discretion, or Discernment, from which the soul descended.
See Kessler, op.
See the Orphic belief about the uninitiated being plunged in mud, Vol.
p. 131 supra.
This is perhaps the first instance in antiquity of the Gospel of Work.
See H. C. Lea, History of the Inquisition, vol.
I., p. 94.
See, however, n. 4, p. 349 infra.
Josephus, Antiquities, Bk XX.
2-4, breaks off his history at the critical point.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 1104.
Augustine, contra Faust.
c. 2; ibid.
6, 8; ibid.
Augustine, contra Faust.
The quotation in the text is taken from Matter, Hist.
p. 198 cit.
For the controversy, see J.R.A.S.
434 sqq., 696 sqq.
p. 1, n. 2, and authorities there quoted.
Ἀναθεματίζω πάντας οὓς ὁ Μάνης ἀνέπλασε θεοὺς, ἤτοι τὸν τετραπρόσωπον Πατέρα τοῦ Μεγέθους καὶ τὸν λεγόμενον Πρῶτον Ἄνθρωπον ... καὶ τὸν ὀνομαζόμενον Παρθένον τοῦ φωτὸς κ.τ.λ.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 1119.
9, 10, would substitute Reason for Knowledge and Will for Feeling.
The first of these may pass as correct, since Nous appears as the first emanation of the Highest God in all the systems which preceded that of Manes and from which he is likely to have copied.
p. 513, and n. 1).
The image is probably his body or substance, which is of the substance of the Very Great Father.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 300 supra described as the ἀρχηπλάσμα, probably as being the very substance of darkness as the Very Great Father is of the Light.
As he says in note 5 on the first-mentioned page, the passage as it stands is inconsistent.
The former document, however (see p. 343 infra), speaks of them as being concerned in the purification of the Light.
(1913), p. 101.
All these subordinate deities were known to St Augustine.
Αἱ δὲ προβολαὶ πᾶσαι, ὁ Ἰησοῦς ὁ ἐν τῷ μικρῷ πλοίῳ, καὶ ἡ μήτηρ τῆς ζωῆς, καὶ οἱ δώδεκα κυβερνῆται, καὶ ἡ παρθένος τοῦ φωτὸς καὶ ὁ πρεσβύτης ὁ τρίτος ὁ ἐν τῷ μεγάλῳ πλοίῳ, καὶ τὸ ζῶν πνεῦμα καὶ τὸ τεῖχος τοῦ μεγάλου πυρὸς καὶ τὸ τεῖχος τοῦ ἀνέμου, καὶ τοῦ ἀέρος, καὶ τοῦ ὕδατος, καὶ τοῦ ἔσωθεν πυρὸς τοῦ ζῶντος πρὸς τὸν μικρὸν φωστῆρα οἰκοῦσιν, ἄχρις ἂν τὸ πῦρ κατανελώσῃ τὸν κόσμον ὅλον· ἐν ποσοῖς πότε ἔτεσιν, ὧν οὐκ ἔμαθον τὴν ποσότητα.
For the part played by him in the Chinese treatise see op.
p. 536, and n. 2.
87, 99) and part II.
See West, Pahlavi Texts, part I.
See n. 2 supra.
It seems there to mean simply “element.” Cf.
VIII, n. 3, p. 74 supra.
Bk V. c. 14, pp.
2, 3; and p. 581, and n. 4.
193, 196 and n. 2.
They also give a dissertation on the common life of the Elect.
It remains to be seen whether this was anything more than a copy of the monastic institutions of the Buddhists.
For obvious reasons, such an organization was not adopted in lands where they had outwardly to conform to other religions.
p. 576, s.v.
Augustine, c. Faust.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 1148.
One of the silk banners obtained by the German expedition seems to have depicted this scene.
Augustine, c. Faust.
Are “the two sciences” the Living Spirit and his Intelligence or Reason?
See H. C. Lea, History of the Inquisition, index.
3 × 5, is therefore a number which came naturally to them.
On this word see p. 323 supra; cf.
This was the name given to the incarnate, as distinguished from the spiritual, messengers of the God of Light to man.
n. 2, p. 294 supra.
Because by so doing the existence of the diabolic creation would be prolonged.
503, n. 1.
On this being mentioned in a paper in the J.R.A.S.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg be put 300 years later, J. cit.
219 sqq., especially pp.
1911, p. 301.
Herodotus, Bk I. c. 131.
c. 4) distinctly says “Jesus Christ is the son of the First Man.” Cf.
515, n. 2, and p. 516, n. 3.
c. 2) calls “God the Son.” 1169.
Evidently the incarnate or human messengers, Zoroaster, Buddha, Jesus, and Manes.
The heavenly “legates” are never depicted as “preaching” to men.
VIII p. 68 supra.
IX p. 123 supra.
See n. 4, p. 349 infra.
One is almost tempted to see in it a corruption of the Yom Kippur or Day of Atonement of the Jews.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 1179.
Augustine, c. Faust.
This was doubtless true in the West and in lands where they were exposed to severe persecution.
This explains its translation from its original Pahlavi into the language of the converts and each copy bearing the name of the owner.
p. 56, for authorities.
As has been many times said above, every religion and sect at the time accused the others of these filthy practices, without our being able to discern any proof of the justice of the accusation in one case more than in another.
All contemporary authorities are agreed that they were forbidden to drink wine.
Augustine, c. Faust.
See Kessler, op.
p. 191 sqq.
Aug. c. Faust.
p. 508, and n. 1.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 1202.
Their Chinese names are discussed by MM.
1, 2, and 544, n. 1), wherein are gathered nearly all that can be said about them.
The learned commentators decide that their functions still remain mysterious.
But see next note infra.
See notes 2 and 3, p. 327 supra.
A very brief summary of the history of the sect was given by the present writer in J.R.A.S.
That the persecution instituted against them by Diocletian slackened under Constantine and Constantius, see de Stoop, op.
Gibbon, Decline and Fall, III.
See de Stoop, op.
See de Stoop, op.
1216. de Stoop, op.
Bk V. c. 5, for instances.
S. Dill, Roman Society in the Last Century of the Western Empire, pp.
Transcriber’s Notes: Footnotes have been collected at the end of the text, and are linked for ease of reference.
TO 330 A.D., VOL.
2 (OF 2) *** Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!)
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement.
If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession.
“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.
It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.
There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.
There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.
Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States.
If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed.
Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work.
You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.
The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work.
Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change.
If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges.
Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that: • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.
The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.
Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.” • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark.
Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from.
If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund.
If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.
If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
2 (of 2) | Project Gutenberg KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come.
In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.
Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.
To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States.
U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses.
Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.
PREFACE iii This book grows out of the conviction that geography in the schools must return somewhat to human interests.
In saying this the author will scarcely need to defend himself against the charge of undervaluing physiography.
It is only a question of wise adaptation to youthful students.
Elementary history also needs to be placed in its setting of physical conditions.
It is here attempted to promote both these objects in the study of the eastern United States.
If geography and history can be well correlated, both of these great themes may be taught with economy of time and with stronger interest.
Much more might be said concerning the growth of centers, the agriculture, and the commerce, but the limits of space are rigid.
The geography is not taught formally, but is woven in with the story.
Care has been given to the maps of the several regions, that they should clearly express the essentials and avoid the vagueness of many small-scale representations of the Appalachian belt.
Cunard Steamship 3 2.
Union Station, Springfield 6 3.
South Station, Boston 12 6.
Henry Hudson 16 7.
Sir William Johnson 20 8.
Old Fort Johnson, Amsterdam, New York 26 10.
De Witt Clinton 43 14.
Erie Canal, Utica 46 15.
Erie Canal, Syracuse 48 16.
Erie Canal and Solvay Works, Syracuse 51 18.
De Witt Clinton Train 54 19.
Twentieth Century Limited 57 20.
Rounding the Noses, Mohawk Valley 59 21.
Penn Square, Lancaster, Pennsylvania 65 22.
Bridge over Conestoga Creek, Lancaster, Pennsylvania 67 23.
Old Road House, Chambersburg, Pennsylvania 71 26.
Freight Locomotive, Pennsylvania Railroad 75 27.
Tunnel, Portage Railway 76 28.
Broad Street Station, Philadelphia 77 29.
Bridge, Pennsylvania Railroad, above Harrisburg 79 30.
Pennsylvania Railroad Shops, Altoona 80 31.
Horseshoe Curve, Pennsylvania Railroad 81 32.
Rock Cut, Pennsylvania Railroad 84 33.
Old Road House, Brownsville, Pennsylvania 92 36.
Cumberland and Gap in Wills Mountain 95 37.
Bridge and Monument, National Road, near Wheeling, West Virginia 96 38.
Mount Royal Station, Baltimore 99 viii 39.
Chesapeake and Ohio Canal, Cumberland 100 40.
Highest Point on Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, Sand Patch, Pennsylvania 103 41.
The Observation End, Baltimore and Ohio Railroad 110 44.
River Front, Cincinnati 125 50.
James River Gap in the Blue Ridge 134 52.
Hilly Farm Lands, near Knoxville 136 53.
Great Valley, from the Pinnacle, Cumberland Gap 139 54.
Cumberland Gap from the East 143 55.
Daniel Boone 145 56.
Pineville Gap, Cumberland River 147 57.
Cornfield near Cumberland Gap 150 58.
Kentucky Blue Grass 152 59.
Three States Monument, Cumberland Gap 153 60.
George Rogers Clark 157 61.
On the French Broad 159 62.
James Robertson 164 64.
Old Statehouse, Knoxville 166 66.
Street in Knoxville 168 67.
On the Campus, University of Tennessee 169 68.
Statehouse, Nashville 173 70.
Chattanooga from Cameron Hill 175 71.
Broad Street, Atlanta 177 72.
Fulton Bag and Cotton Mills, Atlanta 178 73.
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta 179 74.
Iron Furnace, Birmingham 180 MAPS Eastern United States Frontispiece New England 4 New York 26 Pennsylvania 64 Southern Appalachian Region 132 FROM TRAIL TO RAILWAY 1 CHAPTER I BOSTON AND THE BERKSHIRES From the time of the settlement of Massachusetts Boston has had a large share of the business of the country.
Her natural advantages are great.
On the one hand there is her harbor, sheltered by many islands from the storms of the Atlantic; on the other are tidal rivers and level highways leading to the interior of the state.
Emerson, who was born in Boston, wrote: Each street leads downward to the sea, Or landward to the west.
For generations, as the city has grown, her people have been crowding back the ocean by filling in the shallows, and now her busy streets extend over acres of “made land,” while from the south, the west, and the north, lines of railway connect her with all parts of America.
Not many years after the War of the Revolution a Boston merchant ship went around the world.
She took on board a native at Hawaii, sold her load of furs in Canton, rounded Cape Horn, and anchored at length in Boston harbor.
So great an achievement did this seem that Governor 2 Hancock and the people said fine things and made merry.
This little ship was eighty-three feet long, and you could measure off seven or eight times her length on one of the big liners of to-day.
Later the same ship set sail again, and on the west coast of America, in one of the roughest seas, her master, Captain Gray, saw the mouth of a great river.
He was determined to enter it.
Having crossed the breakers, he sailed up the river more than twenty miles, and to-day it bears the name of his ship, the Columbia.
Boston was reaching out into the wide world.
Many years later this discovery had much to do with securing the rights of the United States in the Oregon country against the claims of Great Britain.
There were dangers on the ocean then which to-day we do not fear, for pirates still lay in wait for merchantmen and foreign powers took liberties with American ships.
One vessel seen in Boston harbor was named Catch-me-if-you-can.
They urged the great commercial advantage of having the ships run westward to Boston after stopping at Halifax, and so powerful were these arguments that the first Cunard liners came steaming into Massachusetts bay.
As if to help in the fight against Boston, the harbor froze over in the winter of 1844, and the Cunard 4 ship, the Britannia, could not sail.
Determined to hold their own, the Boston people engaged Frederick Tudor, a great exporter of ice, to bring his machinery from the fresh-water ponds and cut a way.
He soon made a lane of open water, and the Britannia sailed out for Liverpool.
While ocean trade was growing much had been done on the land.
Settlements were first made at Plymouth, Salem, and Boston, and as soon as possible the rough forest trails joining these towns were changed into roads.
Many ferries and bridges were needed to cross the streams, and roads were carried back into the country as the people settled farther from the sea.
After Providence was begun, in the Narragansett country, and the rich lands along the Connecticut were settled, there was need of roads across the hills of Massachusetts, so that the colonists could visit each other, exchange letters, and thus be less exposed to danger from savages in the great American wilderness.
The highway leading along the east coast was called Bay Road.
A post rider went between Boston and New York in 1704, and a rough path he had to travel.
It was thought remarkable, four years later, that a woman, Madam Sarah Knights, made that journey.
She afterwards taught school in Boston, and Benjamin Franklin was one of her pupils.
Somebody scratched these lines on a window pane in her schoolroom: Through many toils and many frights I have returned, poor Sarah Knights; Over great rocks and many stones, God has preserved from fractured bones.
In western Massachusetts is the great Berkshire country.
Through most of its length the Housatonic river runs to the southward.
On the first is beautiful Pittsfield, and on the second is busy North Adams with its mills.
In sight everywhere are the mountains, not very high and usually covered with forest, but sometimes bold and rocky.
Farther north we should call them the Green mountains, but here we name them the Berkshires.
These long ranges of mountains run from north to south, and while it was easy to follow the valleys between them, it was hard to go across them from east to west or from west to east.
Boston and all the chief towns of New England lay eastward, and the rest of the country was west of the mountains.
If a Massachusetts family wished to settle in the fertile lands of western New York or Ohio, they had to cross the mountains.
In our day the mountain region is full of towns and beautiful summer homes, but then it was a wilderness which in places was almost impassable.
If it was difficult to make a single journey between the Connecticut river and the Hudson, it was quite out of the question to carry grain and fruit from the West to Boston, and to bring back in exchange the goods made in her factories.
Opposite the place where this stream enters the Connecticut the beautiful city of Springfield has now grown up, partly on the low grounds and partly on a terrace.
It is readily seen that the Westfield valley forms a natural roadway from here westward to Pittsfield, and on toward Albany and the Mohawk in New York.
We cannot say that the valley was made for the cities, but the cities were made, in part at least, because the valley was there.
The gorge of the Westfield was so rugged that a hundred years ago it seemed almost impossible to make a 7 good wagon road through it.
There were some people, however, who thought that it could be done and who determined to do it.
Their courage won, and before long there was a good highway all along the roaring river.
This was accomplished soon after 1825, but it did not solve all the problems of the Massachusetts people, for, as we shall soon learn fully, the Erie canal was finished in that year, and a long string of canal boats began to carry produce from the West to New York.
The good people of Boston watched all this going on.
Every load of grain was headed straight eastward as if it were coming to Massachusetts bay, thence to go by vessel to Europe.
And New England had only a wagon road across the mountains!
Shipowners, seeing that there was plenty of western freight in New York, sent their boats there.
It was indeed time that Boston people began to ask themselves what they could do.
They still had ships, but these were usually “down East” coasters, and the noble vessels from far eastern ports, laden with spices and teas, silks, and all the spoils of Europe and Asia, rarely 8 came to Boston, but brought more and greater loads to New York and Baltimore, where they could lay in corn and wheat for the return voyage.
Rather strangely they thought it 9 could be done for a little less than a million dollars.
Every one was talking now of railways, but few thought that rails could be laid across the Berkshires.
It was even said in a Boston paper that such a road could never be built to Albany; that it would cost as much to do it as all Massachusetts would sell for; and that if it should be finished, everybody with common sense knew it would be as useless as a railroad from Boston to the moon.
We need not be too hard on this writer, for it was five years later when the De Witt Clinton train climbed the hill from Albany and carried its handful of passengers to Schenectady.
One of the friends of the railway scheme was Abner Phelps.
When he was a senior at Williams College, in 1806, he had thought of it, for he had heard about the tram cars in the English coal regions.
We do not know how it was 10 intended that the cars should be held back, for it was long before the invention of air brakes.
The line was built to its western end on the Hudson in 1842, and thus Boston, Worcester, Springfield, and Albany were bound together by iron rails.
There was only a single track and the grades were heavy.
The road brought little trade to Boston, and most of the goods from the West still went by way of the Hudson to New York.
It was, however, a beginning, and it showed that the mountain wall could be crossed.
It would take a long time to tell how the tunnel was made; indeed, it was a long time in making.
It was begun in 1850 or soon afterwards, and the work went slowly, with many stops and misfortunes, so that the hole through the mountain was not finished until November 27, 1873.
In order to help on the work the engineers sunk a shaft a thousand feet deep from the top of the mountain to the level of the tunnel, and from the bottom worked east and west.
This gave them four faces, or “headings,” on which to work, instead of two, and hastened the finishing.
The whole cost was about fourteen million dollars.
They brought the ends together under 12 the mountain with a difference of only five sixteenths of an inch!
You can measure this on a finger nail and see how much it is.
The tremendous task was successfully accomplished, and Boston was no longer shut off from the rest of the country by the mountains.
In and about Boston are more than a million people, reaching out with one hand for the riches of the great land to the west, and with the other passing them over the seas to the nations on the farther side.
Man has taken a land of dense forests, stony hills, and wild valleys, and subdued it.
It is dotted with cities, crossed by roads, and is one of the great gateways of North America.
CHAPTER II 14 PIONEERS OF THE MOHAWK AND THE HUDSON If a stranger from a distant land should come to New York, he might take an elevated train at the Battery and ride to the upper end of Harlem.
He would then have seen Manhattan island, so named by the Indians, who but three hundred years ago built their wigwams there and paddled their canoes in the waters where great ships now wait for their cargoes.
If the visitor should stay for a time, he might find that Harlem used to be spelled Haarlem, from a famous old town in Holland.
Rocks and trees covered most of Manhattan island at that time, but the Dutch had a small village at its south end, where they built a fort and set up windmills, which ground the corn and made the place look like a town in Holland.
Little did the Indian dream what a bargain he offered to the white man when he consented to sell the whole island for a sum equal to twenty-four dollars; and the Dutchman, to do him justice, was equally ignorant.
All this came about because Henry Hudson with a Dutch vessel, the Half Moon, had sailed into the harbor in 1609, and had explored the river for a long distance from its mouth.
Hudson was an Englishman, but with most people he has had to pass for a Dutchman.
He has come down in stories as Hendrick instead of Henry, no doubt because he commanded a ship belonging to a Dutch company, and because a Dutch colony was soon planted at the mouth of the river which he discovered.
Hudson spent a month of early autumn about Manhattan and on the river which afterwards took his name.
Sailing was easy, for the channel is cut so deep into the land that the tides, which rise and fall on the ocean border by day and night, push far up the Hudson and make it like an inland sea.
In what we call the Highlands Hudson found the river narrow, with rocky cliffs rising far above him.
Beyond he saw lowlands covered with trees, and stretching west to the foot of the Catskill mountains.
He went at least as far as the place where Albany now stands, but there he found the water shallow and turned his ship about, giving up the idea of reaching the Indies by going that way.
Only five years after Hudson’s voyage Dutch traders built a fort near the spot where Albany now stands.
Shortly afterwards, in 1624, the first settlers came and founded Fort Orange, which is now 17 Albany.
He was an able man and became friendly with the Indians.
It told the story of a journey that he made in 1634, only four years after he came to America.
Setting out on December 11, he traveled up the valley of the Mohawk until he reached the home of the Oneida Indians in central New York.
He stayed with them nearly two weeks, and then returned to Fort Orange, where he arrived on January 19.
This is the earliest record of a white man’s journey through a region which now contains large towns and is traversed by many railway trains every day in the year.
No one knows how long there had been Indians and Indian trails in the Mohawk valley.
They, as well as the white settlers who followed them, chose the flat, rich lands along the river, for here it was easy to beat a path, and with their bark canoes they could travel and fish.
The Indians entertained Van Curler with baked pumpkins, turkey, bear meat, and venison.
As the turkey is an American bird, we may be sure that it was new to the Dutch explorer.
The Iroquois built villages, cultivated plots of land, and sometimes planted apple orchards.
They were often eloquent orators and always fierce fighters.
Among the surrounding tribes they were greatly feared.
Before the white men came these fierce warriors occasionally invaded New England, to the terror of the weaker tribes.
Sometimes they followed up their conquests by exacting a tribute of wampum.
After Fort Orange was founded they went there with their packs of beaver skins and other furs to trade for clothes and trinkets.
When Van Curler made his journey into the Indian country, he did not reach the Mohawk river at once on leaving Fort Orange, but traveled for about sixteen miles across a sandy and half-barren stretch of scrubby pine woods.
South and east of these flats are the sand barrens, and on the west are high hills through which, by a deep, narrow gap, the Mohawk flows.
A few years before his death Van Curler led a small band of colonists from Fort Orange, bought the “great flats” from the Mohawk Indians, and founded a town, calling it Schenectady, which is the old Indian name changed in its spelling.
In 1690, twenty-eight years after the town was founded, a company of French and Indians from Montreal surprised Schenectady in the night, burned most of the houses, and killed about sixty of the people, taking others captive.
But Dutchmen rarely give up an undertaking, and they soon rebuilt their town.
It was an important place, for here was the end of the “carry” over the pine barrens from the Hudson, and here began 20 the navigation of the river, which for a hundred years was the best means of carrying supplies up the valley and into central New York.
The traveler of to-day on the New York Central Railway sees on Van Curler’s “great flats” the flourishing city of Schenectady, with its shops and houses, its college, and its vast factories for the manufacture of locomotives and electrical supplies.
It is true that the Dutch pioneers played an important part in the early history of the state and are still widely represented by their descendants in the Mohawk valley, but the leading spirit of colonial days on the river was a native of Ireland who came when a young man to manage his uncle’s estates in America.
This was in 1738, nearly fifty years after the Schenectady massacre.
The young man, who was in the confidence of the governor of New York and of the king as well, is known to all readers of American history as Sir William Johnson.
He built a fine stone mansion a short distance west of the present city of Amsterdam and lived there many years.
He also founded Johnstown, a few miles to the north, now a thriving little city.
See Fort Johnson, Fig.
One of these was Hugh White, a sturdy man with several grown children.
Four miles west of where Utica now stands they stopped, cut a few trees, and built a hut to shelter them until they could raise crops and have a better home.
White was one of many hardy and brave men who settled in central New York at that time, and they doubtless thought that they had gone a long way “out West.” Certainly their journey took more time than the emigrant would now need to reach California or Oregon.
Only the simplest ways of living were possible.
They took a section of white ash log three feet long, and putting coals of fire on one end, kept them burning with a hand bellows until the hole was deep enough to hold the corn, which was then pounded for their meals of hominy.
A dozen years after White came, General William Floyd set up another mill in the northern part of what is now Oneida county.
He was one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence.
One settler cleared several acres and planted corn with pumpkin seeds sprinkled in.
The pigeons pulled up all the corn, but hundreds of great pumpkins grew and ripened.
Since the crop was hardly enough, however, for either men or beasts, the latter had to be fed the next winter on the small top boughs of the elm, maple, and basswood.
Much use was made of the river, for the only roads were Indian paths through the woods on the river flats.
These could be propelled with oars, but poles were necessary going upstream against a stiff current.
From that place, by hard work, the boatmen could make their way up to Little Falls, where the water descends forty feet in roaring rapids.
We should think Wood creek a difficult bit of navigation.
It was a small stream, very crooked, and often interrupted by fallen trees.
In times of low water the boats were dragged up and even down the creek by horses walking in the water.
On one occasion the Fort Schuyler settlement received six letters in one mail.
The people would hardly believe this astonishing fact until John Post, who had been made postmaster, assured them that it was true.
Post established stages and lines of boats to Schenectady, and soon had a large business, for people were pouring into western New York to settle upon its fertile lands.
Some turned and entered the Seneca river, following its slow and winding waters to the country now lying between Syracuse and Rochester.
But these boats were not equal to the traffic, for the new farms were producing grain to be transported, and the people needed many articles from the older towns on the Atlantic coast.
The road as laid out was six rods wide.
It was improved for a width of four rods by the use of 25 gravel and logs where the ground was soft and swampy, as much of it was in those days, being flat and shaded by trees.
The historian tells of it as a triumph, for it was an Indian path in June, and before September was over a stage had started at Fort Schuyler, and on the afternoon of the third day had deposited its four passengers at the hotel in Geneva.
A wagon could carry fourteen barrels of flour eastward, and in about a month could return to Geneva from Albany with a load of needed supplies.
In five weeks, one winter, five hundred and seventy sleighs carrying families passed through Geneva to lands farther west.
Geneva was quite a metropolis in those days, when there was nothing but woods where Syracuse and Rochester now are.
Far to the south, at Hagerstown in Maryland, a country already old, lived 26 Colonel Rochester.
When the little family procession passed down the street and entered upon the long journey up the Susquehanna valley to western New York, Rochester’s friends in Hagerstown wept to see him go.
They thought that he had thrown his money away in buying swamp lands where only mosquitoes, rattlesnakes, and bears could live, but he saw farther than they did.
If he had been unwilling to take any risk, he would never have laid out the first streets of the prosperous city which now bears his name.
We can truly say that at first salt made the city.
The beds of salt are not directly under Syracuse, but are in the hills not far away.
27 The water from the rains and springs dissolves some of this salt, and as it flows down it fills the gravels in and around the town.
While all was yet forest the Indian women had made salt from the brine which oozed up in the springs.
So long ago as 1770, five years before the Revolution, the Delaware Indians went after Onondaga salt, and a little of it was now and then brought down to Albany.
Sometimes it was sold far down the St. Lawrence in Quebec.
One of these men, a Mr. Danforth, whose name a suburb of Syracuse now bears, used to put his coat on his head for a cushion and on that carry out a large kettle to the springs.
When he had made enough for the time he would hide his kettle in the bushes and bring home his salt.
By and by so many hundreds of bushels were made by the settlers that the government of the state framed laws to regulate the making and selling of the salt, and as time went on a town arose and grew into a city.
Many years later rock salt was found deep down under the surface farther west, and since that discovery the business of Syracuse has become more and more varied in character.
The white men from Europe found first Manhattan island and the harbor.
Then they followed the lead of a river and made a settlement that was to be Albany.
Still they let a 28 river guide them, this time the Mohawk, and it led them westward.
They pushed their boats up the stream, and on land they widened the trails of the red men.
Soon there were so many people that a good road became necessary.
When the good road was made it brought more people, and thus the foundations of the Empire State were laid.
A mile or two west of this small town, in a field south of the Mohawk river, stands a monument raised in memory of a fierce battle fought on that slope in the year following the Declaration of Independence.
On the pedestal are four tablets in bronze, one of which shows a wounded general sitting on the ground in the woods, with his hand raised, giving orders to his men.
His letters and military orders show us that he could spell as poorly as any of his neighbors, and that is saying a good deal.
His army was made up of these same simple neighbors, who, though they did not know much about 31 soldierly marching, were good shots and hard hitters, fighting not for pay but to save their liberty and to protect their homes from the cruel savages.
We do not need to be told that these were not men of English blood; indeed, many of them belonged to those same Dutch families which we saw settling in the Hudson and Mohawk valleys.
And some, like the last one, were not Dutch but German, and their ancestors came not from Holland but from a land farther up the Rhine.
They had been driven out by the persecutions of one of the French kings and had come to America.
They had had a hard time, suffering much from taskmasters, from poverty, and from the savages, until finally they had gone farther west in the Mohawk valley and had received good lands lying eastward from Utica.
There they became comfortable and prosperous.
We must now tell the other side of the story and see who the invaders were and where they came from.
In Revolutionary days nearly all the people of New York were in its two great valleys.
Here, then, was an easy valley road from the sea at New York into Canada.
In these two valleys were all the farms, the towns, and of course the forts.
There were forts at Oswego and where Rome, Utica, and Albany are; at Fort Edward, Fort Ann, Ticonderoga, and many other places, making a chain of defenses in these valleys.
And because the roads, the homes, and the forts were in the valleys, we shall almost always find the armies and the fighting there.
This will help us to understand the plan which the British made in 1777, by which they felt sure of crushing the rebellion.
The year before they had to leave Boston and had come around to New York.
New York was not so large as Philadelphia then, but it was an important place, for it was the key to the Hudson valley.
This army was under General Howe.
He was confident that when he marched through the country many colonists would run to place themselves under the English flag.
In a few weeks he learned that these backwoods Americans were quite ready to meet and give battle to the 33 combined forces of the British regulars, the hired German soldiers, and the Indians with whom they were in league.
This third army was to go east, over the Oneida Carrying Place and down the Mohawk to Albany.
By this pretty plan three armies, one from the south under Howe, one from the north under Burgoyne, and one from the west under St. Leger, were to meet in 34 Albany.
They would put British soldiers in every fort on the way, capture and disarm the rebels, and have all New York under their feet.
More than this, they would thus shut off New England from Pennsylvania and Virginia, cutting the unruly colonies into two parts so that they could not help each other.
But the scheme, brilliant as it was, would not work.
None of the British armies reached Albany.
Howe did not, perhaps because he did not try.
Burgoyne and St. Leger did not, because they could not: there was altogether too much in the way.
We shall now see how this happened.
St. Leger brought into the Mohawk valley from Oswego an army of seventeen hundred men.
Some were British, some were Hessians or hired German soldiers, and the rest were Indians under Joseph Brant.
Just before the British came in sight a stock of provisions, brought on several boats up the river, had been safely delivered within the defenses.
This was early in August, and only about seven weeks before Congress had adopted the style of American flag which we know so well.
They cut up shirts to make the white.
The red is said to have been taken from a petticoat.
Certain it is that a patriot flag was made, and some think that it was the first American flag ever raised over a fortification.
The boys and old men were to do their best to care for the families and to defend their homes.
The farmer soldiers were hurrying up the valley without due watching for sudden attack, while the enemy placed themselves in ambush around a low field which was wooded and swampy.
They soon rallied and fought fiercely for five hours, until two hundred of them had lost their lives.
Much of the fighting was of the Indian sort, from behind trees, for the Dutchmen well knew the ways of the savages.
They saw that when one man fired from behind a tree an Indian would rush forward to tomahawk him before he could load his gun for another shot.
So they were ordered to stand by twos and take turns in firing.
Near Little Falls, New York Under John Johnson, the son of Sir William Johnson, were many Tories from the valley.
They and the patriots often recognized each other as former neighbors, and then the fight was more stubborn than ever, for the soldiers of freedom were bitterly angry to find old friends in arms against them.
During the battle a terrific thunder-shower came up, and both sides stopped fighting, having enough to do to keep their powder and guns dry.
Why he did not have a gay march down to Albany is now quite plain.
Several women went with them on horseback to visit their husbands, who belonged to the garrison.
The horse did not like the double load, and made great sport by throwing the Dutchman into the middle of the stream, while he carried his mistress over in safety.
General Burgoyne came nearer Albany than did St. Leger.
He sent a thousand of his German soldiers across to Bennington, among the Green mountains, to capture stores which he knew were there.
But General Stark was there also, with a little army from New Hampshire and Massachusetts, and the thousand Hessians did not go back to help Burgoyne.
All this time the patriot army was growing, for the men of the Hudson valley were maddened when they saw the bloodthirsty Indians marching with the English, and, to Burgoyne’s surprise, they had no mind to fight for the king.
Howe did not come, St. Leger did not come, and the provisions were getting short.
These could only come along the road from the north, and the colonists were already marching in behind Burgoyne’s army to cut his line of communications.
He knew that he must fight or starve.
He chose to fight.
A tall monument marks the place.
This was the battle of Saratoga, fought in old Saratoga, which is several miles from the famous resort of that name.
So it was that up and down these beautiful valleys went armies and scouting bands, as well as peaceful emigrants with their oxen, their stages, and their small freight boats.
One cannot go far 39 along the Hudson or the Mohawk without finding the site of an Indian village, the foundations of an old fort, the homestead of a Revolutionary hero, or an ancient place of worship.
There were no nobler patriots, even in Virginia and Massachusetts, than these men of the Mohawk valley.
CHAPTER IV 40 THE ERIE CANAL If we think that the men of a hundred years ago were people with few wants, who were willing to let others do the trading and make the fortunes, we are quite in the wrong.
They were as eager in business as are the driving Americans of to-day.
Once he reported that two hundred packs of beaver skins had gone down the Susquehanna river and across to Philadelphia instead of being brought by the Mohawk to New York, and he thought that if this traffic continued New York would be ruined.
All the cities on the coast were bidding for the western trade.
Heavy articles especially were sent to Quebec, while lighter freight was taken overland down the Mohawk.
When De Witt Clinton was stirring up the legislature and the people of New 41 York, he told them he was very sorry to learn that merchandise from Montreal was sold in the state for less than New York prices.
This was because there was transportation by water from Montreal, and the St. Lawrence merchants could afford to undersell those of New York.
Many people thought that the wheat and flour and other products of western New York would all go down the Susquehanna to Baltimore and Philadelphia.
Rough boats known as “arks” were built and floated down the river in the high water caused by the melting of the snows in the Allegheny highlands.
From two to five hundred barrels of flour were carried in one of these craft.
As the boats could not be sailed up the river, they were taken to pieces at the end of the voyage and sold for lumber.
The tourist on his way down the Potomac to Mount Vernon, the home of Washington, will pass by Alexandria, a quiet old town of about fifteen thousand people.
All this seems strange to us, because since the days of our great- 42 grandfathers the traffic has been going largely to New York.
The cause of the change was the Erie canal.
Yet in 1818, a few months after the canal was begun, an Albany newspaper discussed very earnestly, as one of the chief questions of the day, the danger that Philadelphia would take away the western trade.
Flour, salt, and potash had been taken to New York in large quantities, but all these products were carried as far as Schenectady in little ten-ton boats, by way of Wood creek and the Mohawk.
As the business grew it was seen to be impossible always to drag the boats up Wood creek with horses, and that the small canal, ten feet wide, which had been cut around the rapids at Little Falls, could not serve the purposes of another generation.
The credit for first thinking of such a canal has been claimed for several men, but probably it was “in the air,” and many thought of it at about the same time.
The surface of this lake is five hundred and seventy-three feet above tide water at Albany.
It was Morris’s idea to dig a channel, with a gently sloping bottom, which should send the water east in a stream deep enough to float a boat.
The water thus turned from its course would go to Albany instead of flowing through the Niagara and 43 the St. Lawrence.
There were, however, difficulties about the plan which Morris did not understand, and it was never carried out.
There were many who laughed at the surveyors when they saw them looking about, using their levels, and driving their stakes in the 44 woods and swamps.
It was even said that to dig such a canal was impossible, that it would cost too much money, that it would take too much time, and that the canal itself could never be made to hold water.
But Clinton and his supporters believed in it, and worked hard to make it a success.
They said that the cost of carrying a ton of produce in wagons a distance of one hundred miles was about thirty-two dollars.
The experience of others had proved that in canals a ton could be carried one mile for one cent, or a hundred miles for one dollar.
There is a great difference between one dollar and thirty-two dollars, especially if the difference is added to the cost of the wheat from which our bread is made, or of the lumber used in building our houses.
Clinton himself thought that it might take ten or fifteen years to make the canal, but, as we shall see, it was finished in less time than he supposed.
Clinton declared very truly that New York was especially fortunate, for the surface made it an easy task to dig the ditch.
There was no high or rough ground to be crossed, there was plenty of water to keep the canal full, and it would run through a fertile and rich country.
As Clinton was governor of New York during much of the period in which the canal was made, his name is imperishably connected with the great enterprise.
He was once candidate for the office of President of the United States, but perhaps even that office, if he had been elected, would not have given him so much honor as did the building of this great public work.
Canals were not new in Clinton’s time.
Long before the Christian era began men had dug them to carry water for various uses, such as irrigation and turning machinery.
Often, as for hundreds of 45 years in the fen country of England, canals have been used to drain wet or flooded lands and for moving boats.
Even beavers have been known to dig ditches, which fill with water, that they may float the wood which they cut to the place where they build their dams and their homes.
If a region is perfectly level, only a ditch and water are needed.
But lands are not often level for more than short distances; hence a canal consists commonly of a series of levels at different heights.
Of course the boats must be passed from one level to another by some means.
If they are small, they can be dragged up or down between two levels; but this method will not serve for large boats carrying many tons of coal, lumber, salt, or bricks, hence locks are generally used.
There are big gates at each end.
If a boat is to ascend, it runs into the lock on the lower level and the lower gates are closed.
Locks have been used in Italy and in Holland for more than four hundred years.
On April 15, 1817, the legislature passed the law for the construction of the long ditch, and the first spade was set into the earth by Judge John Richardson at Rome, New York, on July 4 of the 46 same year.
After the first spadeful of soil had been lifted, the citizens and the laborers eagerly seized the shovels, and thus everybody had a small share in beginning the great work.
Guns were fired and there was much rejoicing.
The trees grew rank and strong, and it was no light task to cut through the tangled network of roots that lay below the surface.
First the trees were cut down, making a lane sixty feet wide, and in this the canal was dug to a width of forty feet.
Powerful machines that could draw out stumps and pull over the largest trees were brought from Europe.
The wheels of the stump machine were sixteen feet across.
A plow with a sharp blade was also made, to cut down through the heavy carpet of fibers and small roots.
The trench was found to hold water, and boats were soon busy hauling produce from town to town.
The work had taken eight years and had cost a little less than eight million dollars.
There the wagons from Albany had always stopped, and there the boating up the Mohawk had begun.
As all the loads had to be shifted between the river and the land journeys, there had been work for many men.
These few 48 discontented folk, however, were hardly to be counted, among the thousands who exulted over the completed canal.
Boats were made ready at Buffalo to take Governor Clinton and the other guests to New York.
Cannon had been set within hearing distance all the way to the sea along the line of the canal.
This way of sending news was the nearest approach to the telegraph at that time.
Soon the tidings of the great event came booming down among the cliffs of the Hudson and reached New York.1 1 The time allowed for the signaling from Buffalo to Sandy Hook was one hour and twenty minutes.
From Albany to Sandy Hook only twenty minutes were required.
There were also two barrels of fine apples which had been raised in an orchard at Niagara Falls.
These were not to be eaten on the way, one barrel being for the Town Council of Troy, and the other for the city fathers of New York.
One boat in the little fleet was called Noah’s Ark, and on board were two eagles, a bear, some fawns, fishes, and birds, besides two Indian boys.
These were sent to New York as “products of the West.” At every town there was a celebration, and great was the excitement in such cities as Rochester, Syracuse, Utica, and Albany.
There were salutes and feasts and speeches and prayers, and the gratitude and joy of the people fairly ran over.
The greatest celebration of all was in New York, where everybody turned out to do honor to the occasion.
The fine ladies boarded a special boat, and the “aquatic procession” went down through the bay to Sandy Hook.
It was arranged that a messenger of Neptune, the sea god, should meet the fleet, inquire their errand, and lead them to his master’s realm.
The illumination was said to be a fine one, but perhaps their lamps and candles would now look dim.
After the canal was finished the carrying business was quite made over.
Little was heard then 50 about sending western New York fruit and grain to Philadelphia or Montreal or Alexandria.
Freighting was so cheap that a man who had been selling his wheat for thirty cents a bushel now received a dollar for it.
In the war with England, only a few years before, it had cost more to carry a cannon from Albany to Oswego than it had cost to make it.
The journey had now become an easy and simple matter.
They were let out of the woods into the wide world.
People thought that it was a fine experience to travel in the passenger boats, which were called “packets.” These were considered as remarkable as are the limited express trains of to-day.
The speed allowed by law was five miles an hour.
To go faster would drive the water against the banks and injure them.
The fare was five cents 51 a mile including berth and table.
It was said that a man could travel from New York to Buffalo with “the utmost comfort” and without fatigue.
The journey cost eighteen dollars, and only took six days!
From Utica to Syracuse, more than fifty miles, is one great level; but on nearing Rochester the canal follows an embankment across a valley, and the passengers in those days looked wonderingly down on the tops of trees.
Now all was stir and growth.
Buffalo had started on its way to become a great city.
There was no doubt that New York would soon be known as the metropolis of the western world, and “Clinton’s Ditch” became the most famous of American canals.
CHAPTER V 53 THE NEW YORK CENTRAL RAILWAY The Erie canal had not long been finished when a new way of carrying men and merchandise came into use in New York.
In the next year after the great celebration the legislature granted a charter to build a railroad from Albany to Schenectady.
It is sometimes said that this was the first time in America that cars were drawn by means of steam.
This is not true, but New York was not far behind some other states, and the De Witt Clinton train, of which a picture is shown in this chapter, looks as if it must have been one of the very earliest ones.
This train made its trial trip in 1831, which was seventeen years after George Stephenson had built his first locomotive in England.
A railroad had been opened from Baltimore, a few miles to the west, the year before, and about the same time another was built in South Carolina.
In 1826 a railroad four miles long was built at Quincy, Massachusetts, to carry granite from the quarries to the sea.
It was called a tramway, and horses were used instead of steam.
If we go to England, we 54 shall find that tramways have been used there for more than a hundred years.
Both the engine and the coaches were small and light compared with those used now.
With the great speed of to-day, all the parts of a train must be very heavy in order to cling to the track.
The engine of those days had four light driving wheels, and the engineer, it would seem, had to operate his engine while facing wind and storm.
The cab looks very much like a common express wagon made heavier than usual; and if we look at the passenger wagons, we shall see why passenger cars are called coaches.
The first ones were coaches, and every picture of an old passenger train shows that the cars were modeled 55 after the coaches of the stage lines of that age, except that the wheels were made with flat rims, with flanges to keep them on the track.
The passengers certainly could not move about, and the high perches on the top look somewhat dangerous.
One would think that the wind and the smoke of the locomotive could not have been pleasant.
The men could not go into a smoking car, and if they had luncheon they must have brought it in their pockets.
Nor could they tuck themselves snugly into a berth and sleep all night.
These things, however, were not needed upon a railroad that was only eighteen miles long.
To this day dining cars and “sleepers” are not so much used in England as in this country.
Millions of people travel there, but the land is small, they go swiftly, and can usually eat and sleep at their journey’s end.
They still speak of the “wagons” of the “goods train,” and English freight cars look almost like toys by the side of ours in America.
This shows us how closely the railways and cars are related to common roads and vehicles.
People laughed at railroads in these early days and had about as much faith in them as we now have in flying machines.
A few years ago men would have had the same sport about wireless telegraphy, or about talking between New York and Chicago with a telephone.
Mrs. Alice Morse Earle, who has written much about early life in New England, says that the farmers did not like railroads, for they thought that horses would soon be useless and would then be killed, and that there would be no demand for oats or hay.
They were afraid, too, that the noise would frighten the 56 hens so that they would not lay, that the sparks from the engine would burn up everything, and that the people would go crazy.
There was some excuse for not enjoying railway travel, for the roadbeds were often made of solid rock, and the cars did not always have springs.
The tracks were made of strap iron spiked down to wooden stringers.
These iron straps would sometimes become loose, and had an unpleasant way of curling up and piercing the floor of the coach where people were sitting.
In these days it is more comfortable and probably safer to ride in a railway train than behind a horse.
The Empire State Express runs from New York to Buffalo in eight hours and twenty minutes.
It makes but four stops on the way and covers more than fifty-three miles an hour.
To-day a man can board the Twentieth Century Limited in New York City at 2.45 in the afternoon and be set down in Chicago the next morning.
But our comfortable traveler should not despise the early days.
To go so fast and so far means that much has been done since the first small train came across 57 the sand fields to Schenectady.
Five years later the trains ran up to Utica.
This ran much of the way through woods and swamps, and in some cases timbers or piles had to be driven deep to hold up the track.
When, in time, there was talk of this the Utica people did not like it.
They thought that it would ruin the business of their town if passengers and freight need not be changed there and if trains went rushing through.
But after a while all the links between New York and Buffalo were forged into one chain, or became a “trunk line,” to put it in the modern way.
This soon became so plain that there was no further question as to uniting the various roads.
We shall see how they all became one.
He grew up in the steamboat business, and by industry and foresight became the owner of various lines plying on the Hudson, along the coast, and even across the Atlantic.
He had so much to do with shipping that at length he was known as “Commodore” Vanderbilt, although this was a nickname and not a real title.
By and by he began to buy railroads, and by 1869 he was able to unite those of the Hudson and those west of Albany into the New York Central and Hudson River Railroad.
His descendants have bought or leased many other roads, which, taken together, are often called the Vanderbilt system.
This reaches far westward into many states and joins other great cities to the metropolis by lines of steel.
Now, instead of ten-ton boats on the Mohawk, or the slow-going craft of “Clinton’s Ditch,” great freight trains rush down the Mohawk valley, bearing nearly a hundred 59 thousand bushels of grain behind one engine.
Such a load would have fed George Washington’s armies for a long time.
After a while one track was not sufficient for so many trains going east and west.
Too much time was lost in waiting on sidings and there was danger of collision.
For this reason a second track was put down, then a third and a fourth, and now all the way from Albany to Buffalo there are two tracks for passenger trains and two for freight.
Down the Hudson there are but two tracks, because the space between the river and the uplands is so narrow.
Many years ago a rival road, called the West Shore Railway, was built along the west bank of the Hudson, and then westward to Buffalo.
This with its two tracks was bought by the owners of the Central road, so that 60 now they have six tracks across the state.
Even these are hardly enough, for every year the great West has more people, raises more grain to ship to eastern cities and to Europe, and requires more goods from mills and factories along the Atlantic coast.
There are many local trains that run between New York and Albany, or Albany and Syracuse, or Syracuse and Buffalo.
These are convenient for the smaller towns and cities.
Then there are many through trains whose destination is Buffalo, Detroit, Chicago, Indianapolis, or St. Louis.
The New York Central is not the only great road that runs westward through the state.
The Delaware, Lackawanna and Western also comes from New York through the coal region of Pennsylvania, and runs near the Erie road to Buffalo.
The larger cities and the greater number of towns are, however, along the Central Railway.
Going up the Hudson and the Mohawk, the traveler will hardly pass one busy town before he is in sight of another.
When he comes in sight of Albany he will see the great Capitol building standing high over all others.
In these vats countless bushels of salt have been made, as the sun has slowly drawn off the water of the brine in vapor.
There were buildings, too, with chimneys and great boilers for making salt; but in the main the city has other interests now.
It has mills and large stores, and is a railway center.
Colonel Rochester could have had no idea of the fine city he was starting, or of the orchards, nurseries, and wheat fields that would be around it, but he lived long enough to see the flour mills at the falls doing a thriving business.
An hour or two more and the train pulls into Buffalo, the second city of New York, looking on the lake and stretching out its hands to the great world of inland sea and prairie.
To Buffalo come coal and iron and meat and wheat and corn.
Here great elevators receive grain from the ships and 62 load canal boats and railway cars for the east.
CHAPTER VI 63 OLD JOURNEYS FROM PHILADELPHIA TO THE WEST The people of New York City like to say that Philadelphia is slow, and would almost make one think that all the men there wear Quaker hats and act like William Penn.
For a long time the Quaker City was the metropolis of America, but as New York and Baltimore grew they took away some of the trade that otherwise would have gone to the city on the Delaware.
It also ceased to be the capital of the nation and thus had to depend more on its shipping and inland business.
Now to do much inland business it was necessary not only to reach the rich lowlands at hand but also to send out across the mountains.
This could not be done without roads.
When men went from New York City across the mountains they found the Great Lakes and the rich plains on their shores.
As New York found a route to the West, so Philadelphia sought out its highways to the country beyond the Appalachian mountains.
In this chapter and the next we shall see where these highways ran.
There were many stumps and logs in what was called a road, and the teams were guided less by reins than by shouts in a kind of language which the horses understood.
A traveler between Philadelphia and Washington said that often the driver would call to the passengers to lean out of the carriage on one side or the other, so that their weight might keep the balance even.
When a driver was stuck in the mud he had to wait for other teams to come up, when they would hook on with him and drag him out upon hard ground again.
They were a rough but sociable company, the teamsters of those days, feeding their horses and cracking their jokes at the taverns which lined the turnpikes.
They would stand by one another loyally, but when they met some fine gentleman on the road they did not object to taking off a wheel or crushing the frame of 65 his light carriage.
It is the eastern end of the old “Lancaster pike,” the town which gave name to the road being sixty-six miles to the west.
This is the oldest turnpike road in the United States.
This means that they went west of the 66 Susquehanna, for Lancaster is only about twelve miles east of that great river.
Many of the earlier settlers of this lowland region west of Philadelphia were Germans.
In time many others settled both around Lancaster and farther west.
There were also some Scotch-Irish, as they were called, —descendants of Scotch people who had migrated to the north of Ireland, whence their children had come to America.
These were Presbyterians, and some of them had settled in New Jersey, where they founded Princeton College.
The country between Philadelphia and the Susquehanna is one of the richest and most fertile regions in the world.
Most of it is low, with gently rolling fields and a few higher hills.
One fine farm joins another, and the great stone houses look as strong and as solid as if they had grown up out of the ground.
Huge chimneys rise from the roofs and make one think of the warm fire-places and well-spread tables of the thrifty German farmers who built these houses and lived in them.
The barns, like the houses, are large; they are often built of stone and whitewashed, and they still hold great harvests.
One side of the barn usually reaches several feet beyond the high foundation, and is called an “overshoot.” As the doors to the stables are under this, it seems to have been planned as a protection against storms.
An English traveler went over the Lancaster pike in 1796 and found it worthy of praise.
He 67 said that it was paved with stone, covered with gravel, and could be traversed in any season of the year.
About one mile east of the public square in Lancaster a fine old arched bridge of stone carries the turnpike across Conestoga creek, a stream flowing southward into the Susquehanna.
It takes its name, which has become famous in American history, from a small tribe of Indians who lived on its borders.
The early inhabitants made the water deeper by building dams with locks, and sailed their boats with loads of produce down to the Susquehanna.
It was made very large and strong, to carry freight, and was drawn by four, 68 seven, or even a dozen horses.
Hundreds of these wagons were to be seen on the Lancaster pike and on the other great roads of that time.
They were built, as freight cars are now, to carry heavy loads long distances in safety.
The advantage of this was that the loads did not slide, but rode steadily when the wagons went up and down steep hills.
The wheels were big and had wide tires, so that the heavy loads would not cut the roads.
The story is told that one of these wagons with its load of tobacco weighed more than thirteen thousand pounds, or almost seven tons.
They were painted red and blue, and were covered with a canopy of cloth, so that they looked 69 like the “prairie schooners” which in later days were the emigrant wagons of the western plains.
Each wagon had a tool box fastened at the side, and a tar bucket and a water pail hung beneath.
The drivers were rough-and-ready men, who snapped their whips in the daytime, told stories in the evening, and slept at night on little mattresses of their own in front of the barroom fire.
In the French and Indian War, when there was great need of wagons to carry Braddock’s stores, Benjamin Franklin was asked to get some of these famous conveyances.
He succeeded, for many were to be found in this part of Pennsylvania, and he sent on more than one hundred and fifty of them.
He nearly lost his fortune in consequence, for he told the farmers he would see that they were paid if the wagons and horses were not returned.
It cost the old patriot twenty thousand pounds, but fortunately the government afterwards paid the money back to him.
Not long ago the writer saw one of these wagons, with a boat-shaped box, but without a canopy, in use on a farm near Lancaster.
Following the pike westward for twelve miles from Lancaster, the traveler crosses the Susquehanna river at Columbia.
It is narrow, with a plank floor, and it serves for railway trains and wagons, as well as for foot passengers.
There is no separate place for any of these, so when a train or wagon goes on at either end a telegram is sent to the other end to keep cars and carriages from entering the bridge there.
They seem lonely enough now, but they were gay and busy places then.
It is very appropriate that the company which runs all the street cars in and about Lancaster calls itself The Conestoga Traction Company.
The pike passes through these and on to the old town of Bedford.
Then it enters a high, rough strip of land that was covered with forest long after Philadelphia had become a city and the farmers about Lancaster had built their great houses and barns.
It was used in the time of the Revolution, and many forts were built to guard it.
In laying out such roads the pioneers almost always followed trails that the Indians had made.
For long generations the red men had followed the same paths, beating them smooth and deep in the forest earth.
The white men widened the trail by using pack horses, loading the beasts well with all sorts of things.
The next step was to cut away trees, take out the stones, and make roads for wagons.
Carrying by pack horses, however, had become a great business, and the horse owners were very angry when the wagons began to take away their trade.
In 1830 a Pennsylvania citizen, then nearly a hundred years old, told of seeing the first wagon reach Carlisle, and he remembered how furious the “packers” were because they feared that they would lose their business.
It did not occur to them that they could harness their horses into teams, buy strong wagons, and be ready to make money in the new way instead of the old.
The horse owners were quite as angry about stagecoaches, and they sometimes destroyed the coaches and injured the passengers to vent their spite.
Moreover, as people often like an excuse for doing 73 wrong, and for harboring mean feelings, these men said that the stage business was bad for the cloth makers and tailors, because people could ride in coaches without spoiling their fine clothes, whereas when they rode on horseback they soon ruined them and had to buy new ones.
Almost any excuse will serve those to whom no way seems good except their own.
But the southern road crossed a rougher country than did the northern one, and so it was less easily kept in order and was harder to travel.
New York had stirred the whole country by its great canal, and the people along the Potomac were thinking of similar schemes.
Pennsylvania could not rest idle, and decided to have a canal of its own.
In 1826 the ditch was begun at Columbia, where the railroad ended, and, following the custom of the times, those in charge started the work on Independence Day.
In four years they had dug the canal, let in the water, and were running boats as far as Harrisburg.
This river cuts through the high ridges, or flows between them as best it can, taking a very winding course.
Here the highlands are so steep that the canal had to stop.
But those who were interested in the canal were not to be beaten, and they kept on digging both to the east and to the west.
A famous road, the Allegheny Portage Railway, was built with several inclined planes.
Stationary engines pulled the cars up each slope, but on the level parts of the road they were drawn by horses.
The entrance to one end of this tunnel is shown in Fig.
Goods then went by rail from Philadelphia to Columbia on the Susquehanna river.
There the boats took them to the east end of the Portage road.
The next haul was over the Allegheny Front, with its lofty forests, to Johnstown.
It was desirable to take 77 this particular boat over the heights, so a car was built which would fit its keel.
We can now look across a gorge from the coaches of the Pennsylvania Railroad, beyond Altoona, and see the grade of the old Portage Railway.
But the people did not stop with a canal.
Like the 78 men of New York, they wanted something even better than that.
They wished to have a railroad all the way, and in 1846 the Pennsylvania Railroad Company was incorporated.
By this time it was very well known that railroads were successful both in America and in England, and that steam was better than horses.
Over the Allegheny Front a route was found where the grades were not too steep for locomotives.
If we leave Philadelphia by the great Broad street station of the Pennsylvania Railroad, we shall pass out among the pleasant homes of West Philadelphia and through the fine farms of the Pennsylvania lowlands, until we come, in about an hour and a half, to the staid old city of Lancaster.
We have been here before, to learn of turnpikes and Conestoga freighters.
The next stop, if we are on an express train, will be at Harrisburg, a little more than a hundred miles from Philadelphia.
We have now come from the Delaware to the Susquehanna, and are close to the mountains.
Before we go in among them let us see Harrisburg.
It is a city of fifty thousand people, and lies along the east bank of the Susquehanna, which here is a great river a mile wide, 79 having gathered its tribute of waters from hundreds of branching streams in Pennsylvania and New York.
On the highest part of this ridge is the state capitol, a great building but recently finished.
Harrisburg is at the right point for the state government.
It is not in the center of the state, to be sure, but it is at the rear of the lowlands which reach in from the sea, and is just outside the great gateway where roads from all the northern, western, and central uplands come out on the plain.
It is a convenient center for coal and iron, and hence one sees along the river below the city many blast furnaces, rolling mills, and factories.
To the northeast rich, open lands stretch along the base of Blue mountain, and railroads join Harrisburg to Reading, Allentown, Bethlehem, and Easton.
To the southwest bridges cross the Susquehanna, and roads run to Carlisle, Hagerstown, and other cities of the Great Valley (Chapter XI).
As hamlets often gather about “four corners” in the country, so cities grow up where the great roads of the world cross each other.
29), and go through the gap in Blue mountain.
The grades are easy, the roadbed is smooth, and by deep cuts through the rocks the curves have been made less abrupt.
It is only when one looks out of the car window that the land is found to be rugged and mountainous.
All the greater valleys and ridges of the mountain belt of Pennsylvania run northeast and southwest.
The last of these to be crossed on our journey is Bald Eagle valley, from which the Allegheny Front rises to the northwest.
Here they started shops, which have now grown to notable importance.
The town became a city eighteen years after it was begun, and has to-day about forty thousand inhabitants.
In the railway shops alone may be found nine thousand men repairing and building locomotives, passenger coaches, and freight cars.
The Pennsylvania Railroad Company is now founding a great school in Altoona, where young men may be taught to become skillful and efficient in railway service.
Nestling within the great bend is a reservoir of water to supply the houses and shops of the city lying below.
Johnstown is much older than Altoona, for it was settled in 1791, but it has not grown so fast, and has only about as many inhabitants as the city of railroad shops.
Most people know of Johnstown because of the flood which ruined the place in 1889.
Several miles above the town was a reservoir more than two miles long and in several places one hundred feet deep.
After the heavy rains of that spring the dam broke on the last day of May, and the wild rush of waters destroyed the town.
Homes, stores, shops, and mills were torn away and carried down the river.
Clara Barton of the Red Cross, who went to Johnstown as soon as she could get there, says that the few houses that were not crushed and strewn along the valley were turned upside down.
More than two thousand men, women, and children lost their lives, and those that were left were in mourning and poverty.
The whole land sent in its gifts of money, clothing, and food, and the town was built up again into a prosperous city.
Near the city are found coal, iron, limestone, and 83 fire clay, and these things make it easy to establish iron works.
The Cambria Steel Company gives work to ten thousand men in its shops, mines, and furnaces.
At one place fire bricks are made, and the clay for molding them and the coal for burning them are found in the same hill.
In another town there are coal mines and glass works.
Farther west the Pennsylvania road has more repair shops, and Braddock is the great Carnegie town.
We may stop in the city of coal and iron, or we may go on to the west, over one of the main arms of the Pennsylvania Railroad system.
If we take the northern branch, it will carry us across Ohio to Fort Wayne in Indiana and to Chicago.
North and south from the great east and west trunk lines run many shorter roads, or “spurs.” On the east there is a network of short roads in New Jersey, and one of the busiest parts of the whole system is that which joins Washington to Baltimore, Philadelphia, and New York.
In the mountains it is often hard to make a roadbed wide enough for four tracks, and hence there may be only three or even two in some places.
The company has already bought several city blocks and has torn away the buildings.
Here it will build one of the greatest passenger stations in the world.
The tunnel will run on to the east, under the streets and shops of Manhattan, and under the East river.
Pennsylvania has told us the same story that we learned from New York.
Near its north end is Baltimore, one of the four great cities of our Atlantic coast.
It is one hundred and fifty miles from the open sea.
On our way we should pass Washington’s estates at Mount Vernon, the old city of Alexandria, and the national capital, Washington.
We could not sail much farther because there are falls in the Potomac which ships cannot pass.
Baltimore is at a greater distance from the open sea than Philadelphia is, and Philadelphia is farther inland than New York, but each of these cities tried to get as much of the western trade as it could.
But before they tried this they had settled 87 much of the low, flat land along the Potomac and about the Chesapeake in Virginia and Maryland.
This was often called “tide-water country,” because the beds of the rivers are below sea level, and the streams are deep enough for boats of some size.
Many plantations were beside rivers of such great depth that sailing vessels bound for London could come up to the farmer’s wharf and get his crop of tobacco.
In early days the members of the legislature were not always given so much per mile to pay the stage fares between their homes and the capital, but they were allowed the cost of hiring boats 88 instead.
Many ferries were needed, and laws about them were made before rules were laid down for bridges and roads.
Several lawmakers at one time would have been fined for their absence from the legislature of the colony had they not been excused because there was no ferry to carry them over the river which they would have had to cross.
Around Annapolis “rolling roads” were made.
These were wide paths made as smooth as possible, in order that large hogsheads of tobacco might be rolled, each by two men, to the market in that old town.
No man had so great a part in this westward movement as the young surveyor, George Washington.
Lord William Fairfax, a rich English gentleman who had settled in Virginia, had bought great tracts of forest land up the Potomac behind the Blue Ridge mountains, and he was eager to have them surveyed.
Knowing that Washington had studied surveying, Fairfax asked him to undertake the task.
The boy consented; he went beyond the Blue Ridge into the country along the Shenandoah, camped in the woods, swam the rivers, toughened his muscles, learned the ways of the red men, and three years later came back, a grown man, ready for great things.
The messenger was also to keep his eyes open and report what the French were doing on the upper waters of the Ohio.
Christopher Gist, a famous frontiersman, was secured as guide, and we can have no doubt that he and Washington formed a team, ready to meet Frenchmen, red men, and the dangers of river and forest.
They made up their little party where the city of Cumberland, Maryland, now stands.
At this place a large stream called Wills creek cuts through one of the mountain ridges by a deep gorge and enters the Potomac.
On a hill, where these streams come together, was Fort Cumberland, the great outpost of Virginia and Maryland.
A fine church now stands on the ground of the old fort, in the heart of the busy city of Cumberland.
This was the starting point for Washington’s expedition and for many later ones into the western wilderness.
Washington made his dangerous journey with success.
He brought back a letter from the 90 French commander, but of much greater value was the story of all that he had seen.
The colonists now knew just what they would have to do to keep possession of the Ohio lands.
It was not long before Washington went again as commanding officer of a small army, and in 1755 he served under General Braddock in the famous battle which resulted in the defeat of the English and the death of their general.
Washington, as we know, brought off the troops with honor to himself.
On the line of Braddock’s road, a dozen miles west of Cumberland, is a milestone, set up about a hundred and fifty years ago.
A photograph of it is shown above.
The stone was once taken away and broken, but it has since been set up again and cemented into a base of 91 concrete.
The view shows how it has been split up and down.
On one side are directions, and on the other are the words, “Our Country’s Rights We Will Defend.” Braddock’s journey from Alexandria to Fort Duquesne was an uncomfortable one, to say nothing of its disastrous end.
He bought a carriage to ride in, but the road was not suited to a coach, as were the roads he knew in old England.
Beyond Cumberland, especially, in spite of all the work his men could do upon it, it was so bad that he was forced to take Washington’s advice and change the baggage from wagons to pack horses.
Gradually, as time went on, these rough paths were beaten down into smoother thoroughfares.
The same causes that led to the development of the North were working also at the South.
Along the Potomac, as in New York and in Pennsylvania, the stream of colonial life flowed westward.
When the woods were cleared and towns and states grew up on the Ohio, there was frequent occasion to cross the mountains for trade, for travel, and to reach the seat of government, which in 1801 was moved to Washington on the Potomac.
About one hundred years ago the government began to take a great interest in opening 92 roads, especially across the Appalachian mountains, to Ohio, Kentucky, and other parts of the Mississippi valley.
Washington, who died in 1799, had said much about this work, for he not only wanted western trade to come to Virginia instead of going to New Orleans, but he also felt that so long as the mountains kept the East and the West apart we should never have one common country, held together by friendly feelings.
The people of Baltimore, like those of New York and Philadelphia, were eager to have the best road to the West, that their business might be benefited.
A number of good roads had been built in Maryland, among them a famous one leading out 93 westward to Frederick.
This was in the direction of Hagerstown, and still farther west was Cumberland.
The United States government decided to build a great road to Ohio, beginning at Cumberland.
To get the benefit of this, the men of Baltimore went to work to push the Frederick pike westward to the beginning of the National Road.
We remember that the Erie canal was not started until six years later.
The act of Congress which ordered the making of the road provided that a strip four rods wide should be cleared of trees, that it should be built up in the middle with broken stone, gravel, or other material good for roads, and that all steep slopes should be avoided.
The road was opened to the public in 1818, one year after the Erie canal was begun.
The Maryland roads, as we have seen, ran west from Baltimore and Washington to Frederick, east of the Blue Ridge; to Hagerstown, in the Great Valley; and to Cumberland, in the mountains.
Cumberland is a stirring town of about twenty thousand people, and with its great business in coal, iron, and railroads it seems like a larger city.
Coal is mined here, and boats were running in those early days, as 94 coal barges and steamboats run to-day, down to the great iron city.
It then passes on through Ohio, touching Columbus, the capital, on the way to Indiana and the Mississippi.
We sometimes admire the cars marked with the sign of the United States post office, which we see drawn by a swift locomotive at a speed of sixty miles an hour; but when the government put its mail coaches on the National Road from Washington to Wheeling, no doubt they seemed quite as wonderful to the people of that time.
And it was only twenty-five years since the people of Utica had thought it so remarkable that six letters had come to them in one mail!
Soon passenger coaches were rushing along at ten miles an hour, and sometimes even faster.
There were canvas-covered freight wagons, each of which carried ten tons, had rear wheels ten feet high, and was drawn by twelve horses.
In those days life was full of stirring interest on the National Road.
The toll was higher for hogs than for sheep, and more was charged for cattle than for hogs.
If the wagons had very wide tires, no toll was demanded.
The stages were not owned by the drivers but by companies, which bid for travelers and freight, as railways do now.
There were penalties for injuring milestones or defacing bridges, showing that some people then were like some people now.
The companies had interesting names.
There must have been dust enough, for twenty coaches with their many horses sometimes followed one another in a close line.
It is a few miles east of Wheeling.
At Brownsville a small stream called Dunlap’s creek flows into the Monongahela from the east.
Over it is an iron bridge on the line of the National Road.
According to a story told in Brownsville, Henry Clay was once overturned as he was riding through the creek before the bridge was built.
As he gathered 97 himself up he was heard to say, “Clay and mud shall not be mixed here again.” The story goes that he went on immediately to Washington and got an order for the building of the bridge.
Whether this be true or not, it is certain that he and many other statesmen traveled over the National Road.
They could not have private cars, nor did they go in drawing-room coaches, as we can if we choose.
Anybody might chance to sit beside these men of national fame, as day after day they rode through the valleys and over the mountains, stopping at the wayside hotels for food and rest.
The road itself was long ago given up to the different states and counties through which it runs, but it still tells to the traveler who goes over it many a story of the life of a hundred years ago.
CHAPTER IX 98 THE BALTIMORE AND OHIO RAILROAD Even after the Erie canal was built and long lines of boats were carrying the grain and other products of the West to New York, the men of Virginia and Maryland did not give up the notion of still making the trade of the western country come their way.
A canal along the Potomac valley had been talked of several years before the Revolution, when Richard Henry Lee laid a plan for it before the Assembly of Virginia.
Doubtless others thought of it too, as of the Erie canal, long before it was made.
At the end of the War of the Revolution Washington made a long journey into the wild woods of New York.
But he had a natural love for his own Virginia, and he did not intend to let New York go ahead of his native state.
His journeys 99 across the mountains as a surveyor and as a soldier gave him a knowledge of the Ohio country, and as he had himself taken up much good land there, he wished to have an easy way, by land or water, from the sea to the rich Ohio valley.
So he thought much about a canal to run by the side of the Potomac, and he joined with others who felt as he did to form the Potomac Company.
They started a canal, but they found so much in the way that they were not able to go far with it.
New York had then been six years at work on the Erie canal and would finish it in two years more.
If the Virginia and Maryland people had known that most of them would be dead before their canal was half done, and that it would never 100 be really finished, they would not have undertaken it.
Then a great crowd came together at Georgetown, now a part of Washington, on the Potomac, to see the first earth thrown out.
President John Quincy Adams made the principal speech and then took a spade to begin the digging.
The spade hit a root and would not go into the soil.
The President set down his foot more firmly, but still the spade would not move.
At last, determined to succeed, he pulled off his coat for the job.
The crowd liked this and cheered loudly, while Mr. Adams accomplished what he had set out to do.
On this very day something else was going on at Baltimore, forty miles away.
Baltimore was 101 not on the Potomac, but her people did not propose to be left out of the western trade on that account.
They did not have the President of the United States to help them, but they fared very well.
They had great faith in what they were doing, and doubtless would have shouted even louder had they known what a great railroad they were starting and what a hard time the canal people would have.
There was only one man remaining of all the patriots who had signed the Declaration of Independence almost fifty years before.
This was Charles Carroll of Carrollton, and he was the guest of Baltimore on that day.
A prayer was offered, the Declaration was read, and after an officer of the railway company had spoken Mr. Carroll removed the first earth.
As if nature would be kind to an old man, no root made his work hard; and the superstitious may say that the President’s toilsome digging over in Georgetown was a bad omen for that enterprise.
It is easier to look back than to see into the future.
Both canal and railway went on building, but as they needed nearly the same route in some places, they did not get on well together.
The canal was located in the state of Maryland, along the north bank of the Potomac.
This was done in some measure because a large part of the water which 102 would be needed for the canal came down from the uplands on the north side.
It took twenty-three years to dig the trench as far as Cumberland, so that it was 1851 before boats could run between Cumberland and tide water.
The original plan of carrying the canal beyond Cumberland and across the mountains was never carried out.
Much traffic has passed up and down the canal, but, on the whole, it has not paid for the cost of building and repairing.
Sometimes it has been out of use, and a few months ago the state of Maryland sold it for a small sum to the Wabash Railway Company.
The North American Review has been published for a long time.
At least seventy-five years ago this magazine printed two articles on the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad.
By reading them we can see how the intelligent people of that time felt about building it.
In favor of the proposed railroad they said, first, that it would not be closed by ice for several months each year, as the Erie canal and the rivers were.
Secondly, they reminded the public that Baltimore is two hundred miles nearer the Ohio navigation than New York is, and one hundred miles nearer than Philadelphia.
Thirdly, they argued that New Orleans was a long way off, and its climate hot and unhealthful.
Provisions sent by that route would be likely to spoil, and the traders taking the goods down the river might fall sick.
Further, the rivers in a dry summer would be too low for navigation.
There was no port south of them that was so good as theirs; in short, they showed a very proper pride in their own home and a conviction that Baltimore was as good as any other American city, if not, perhaps, a little better.
There was coal also, in seams so thick and wide that it could never be used up, but there was no way of getting it down to the sea where it would run factories, smelt iron, and propel the new steamships that so soon would make the ocean a well-traveled highway.
Slate also was to be had, and marble, and gypsum, and timber, but these could not be brought to the towns where they might be used.
There was, moreover, much iron ore all along the proposed route, and we all know that iron is the most important of the metals.
Better even than this, there were then, as there are now, places under the shallow waters where countless oysters lived and multiplied.
It was said, even in 1827, that if there could be a railroad to carry things quickly, oysters might be sent to people living far from the sea.
Baltimore’s notion of swift carrying was much like that of the Erie canal packet owners.
Some hopeful people thought that the speed might even be raised to eight miles an hour.
When cars run at that rate in these days we begin to talk about getting out and pushing the engine.
The builders of the railroad had what seem to us curious ideas of laying a foundation for the track.
They dug a trench in some places, putting into it broken stone, and on this they laid long slabs of stone, or “stone rails.” On these, in their turn, the iron rails were riveted down.
Even when the track was finished no decision had been made as to how the cars were to be moved.
The method did not have much praise in the papers.
This car, with its mast and other ship-like rigging, made much talk, but that was all.
And no one could quite see how it would ever be possible to draw a car on a curved track.
This meant much, for it was out of the question to 106 build a railway through the mountains without many curves, and some of them rather short ones.
But there were those who thought that if a curved road were possible, it would be a good thing because the engineer could occasionally look back along the line and see how his train was coming on.
It is a rugged old town, built near the spot where the Shenandoah joins the Potomac, and both together have cut a fine gorge through the Blue Ridge.
Eastward the main line runs to Philadelphia and stops at the Whitehall terminal in New York City.
These long lines, with many spurs and side lines, make up the Baltimore and Ohio Railway system, which, like the Pennsylvania and the New York Central, joins the seaports of the Atlantic coast with the fields and cities of the Mississippi, and carries in either direction the rich mineral products of the intervening mountains.
Like her neighbors on the Atlantic, Baltimore stretches out her hands to sea and land.
The city was begun in 1730, at which time a Mr. Carroll sold the land for it at forty shillings an acre.
When Washington first went to the Ohio there were only twenty-five houses in Baltimore, but in 1770 there were twenty thousand people, and the new city was drawing trade from Philadelphia.
In 1826, 108 when the Erie canal was building, Baltimore had become a city of sixty thousand inhabitants.
Now it has more than half a million people, and is the sixth American city.
In foreign trade, however, it stands third, and its docks are busy places.
The Hamburg-American, the North-German Lloyd, and the Red Star lines all send regular steamers between Baltimore and Europe, and hundreds of others sail to ports on our own coast, to the West Indies, and to South America.
Baltimore builds ships as well as sails them, to carry the corn, flour, and meat of the prairies and the great plains to foreign lands, and to bring back their products in exchange.
Out of the gains of trade a Baltimore merchant built one of the most famous of our schools, the Johns Hopkins University.
Washington’s dreams of his country’s future are already overtopped by her actual achievements, and the most hopeful among those who first saw the advantages of steam engines could hardly have looked forward to the swift transportation of to-day.
In the year 1901 an American ship and American railway trains ran a great race to London over land and sea.
The start was from Australia and the distance was more than thirteen thousand miles.
The race was not against other ships and other trains, but against time.
It happened on August 13, in the morning, that three hundred and sixty-seven sacks of important mail for London were piled on the dock, beside which lay a new American ship, the Ventura.
Because no good British ship was at hand that morning, the post-office authorities thought that they would let the vessel with the Stars and Stripes carry the mail.
She did carry it, and on the evening of September 2 she laid down the bags on the pier at San Francisco.
The American railroads tried their hand at carrying the British mail.
The Southern Pacific took it swiftly across to Ogden, in Utah.
The Union Pacific seized it, two hours late, and said that the time should be made up.
Then it was off for Chicago, where the Lake Shore road had a “special” ready to 110 overtake the Fast Mail.
It ran two hundred and forty-four miles in two hundred and sixty-five and a half minutes, and did overtake it.
Then came Buffalo, New York, Queenstown, and London.
The carriers in that great city started out with the mail early in the morning of September 14.
If the bags had come by the shorter route under the British flag, they would not have reached London until September 16.
The Monongahela river, rising among the rough highlands of West Virginia, sends its waters toward the north, and the two great streams join to form the Ohio, which flows on far to the southwest.
All together they are like wide-spreading branches of an apple tree uniting with the gnarled old trunk.
A narrow point of flat land lies between the rivers just before they come together to make the Ohio, and back of this point, to the east, rise steep hills.
Across the Allegheny and across the Monongahela the banks rise sharply for several hundred feet, and there too, wherever the slope is not too steep for houses to stand, tens of thousands of busy people have their homes.
Up and down for miles their banks are smoky and noisy with furnaces, and at night the iron mills light up the valley with wonderful torches of flame leaping into the black sky.
Only a hundred years ago she 112 was, like many other cities in the New World, a humble village between two rivers.
As early as 1730 white men journeyed here to trade with the Indians, who could come from any part of the western country in their canoes.
Washington stood here November 24, 1753, and in his description of the place wrote, “I think it extremely well situated for a fort, as it has absolute command of both rivers.” Men were to need forts for a long time in that country, and the one which was soon built on this site had a stirring history.
The old blockhouse of brick, which is still standing, was built in 1764.
Washington came back to the spot in 1770, and found here about twenty houses, used by men who were trading with the Indians.
Arthur Lee, in 1784, thought that the place would “never be very considerable,” but he was not a good prophet.
Many years ago it was called “the gate of the West,” and through it has gone much of the trade between the East and the lands beyond the mountains.
Even from New York the pioneers came by land and water to the head of the Ohio, an undertaking by no means easy in those days.
Improvements in methods of transportation caused an increase in business activity.
Once there a boat would take them over thousands of miles of river, or to New Orleans and the open sea.
The captain handed his papers to the officer of the customhouse, who did not credit them.
These could sail in almost any water, but they were easily broken and could carry only light loads.
When white men began to throng the river and wanted to carry their families, household furniture, tools, grain, and 116 all the produce of the land, they needed something larger and stronger.
These they loaded and steered down the stream as best they could.
They did not expect to bring them back, for such boats could not be pushed against the current.
Later men began to make keel boats, in which they could not only go downstream but could also, by poling, make a return voyage.
These boats were about fifty feet long and could carry twenty tons or more.
Along the sides were “running boards,” where the men went up and down with their setting poles to drive the boat against the current.
The space between the running boards was covered over to form a kind of cabin.
It was not an easy task to pole one of these boats up a rapid, and the life on the river was a life of toil.
During the last twenty years before 1800, or while Washington was President, a wealthy merchant of Philadelphia took up traffic on the Ohio.
It took time to trade in this way.
A summer was needed to go down to New Orleans and back again with a keel boat or a barge.
The people celebrated this remarkable achievement and gave the captain a public dinner.
No doubt they made as much ado as we should now make if a ship should go from New York to Liverpool in three days.
They were quite right to make a feast in honor of the occasion, for the time commonly allowed for the journey had been three months.
The flatboat, which for years was used in river traffic, was about forty feet long, twelve feet wide, and eight feet deep.
It had a flat bottom and was handled by means of three oars on each side.
Two of these were called sweeps, and were almost as long as the boat itself.
At the stern was a still longer steering oar.
When the water rose in the autumn these boats carried loads of produce and bore thousands of families who were seeking homes farther west.
It was in a boat like these that the tall and awkward young man, Abraham Lincoln, made a voyage to New Orleans and first saw something of the outside world.
Redstone was an old name for Brownsville, where the National Road crossed the Monongahela, and many boats started from here in early days.
It is said that an old boatman was 118 once hailed by a seeker after information.
“Where are you from?” was the first question.
“Redstone,” was the answer.
“What is your lading?” “Millstones.” “What is your captain’s name?” “Whetstone.” “Where are you bound?” “For Limestone.” The interesting part of the story is that these answers were all true.
Large as the traffic was by the flatboats, it was greatly increased when steamboats began to run on the rivers.
No other craft could hope to compete with these.
The boatmen owed a grudge to the steamboat, just as the pack-horse men had hated the Conestoga wagon, for they saw that their trade was lost, and it was hard to try to make a living in some other way.
For many years the great passenger boats reigned supreme on the rivers of the West, but at last they in turn were forced to give way to the railroads.
Such boats still run on the Ohio and the Mississippi, but men do not travel on them when they wish to go quickly.
Railroad cars, however, do not take the place of some boats on the Ohio.
They are of great size and are sometimes made of steel.
The coal, taken from the hill out of which it is dug, is run on a trestle along the river and dumped into one of these boats.
The water often comes up suddenly, and the coal must be rushed to market while the high water lasts.
This lies flat under the hilltops and is mined from the edges where the rivers have cut down through the coal, far into the beds of rock that lie below.
The dams change the river into a series of long, still ponds, which are deep enough to float the coal barges.
There is no coal to send down the Allegheny, but there are logs to be rafted, and there is much oil, for the river flows through the petroleum region around Oil City.
Much natural gas is obtained by boring and is used in the city for warming houses and for cooking.
The train is likely to whirl him past long rows of fiery ovens in which coal is being made into coke.
Instead of carrying the coal to the ore, the ore is thus brought to the coal, without which it could not be worked.
If the coal of Pennsylvania were taken to the iron mines of Minnesota and the furnaces built there, much of the iron and steel would have to be carried back a long way to Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and other parts of the East.
Glass mills form an important part of the city’s industries and have been in operation for a long time.
Bottle glass is manufactured here, besides three fourths of all the plate glass of the United States.
Indeed, the tonnage is greater than that of New York and Chicago taken together.
The old “point” between the rivers is filled with tall buildings.
Inclined railways run up the steep bluffs on the further side of each river and lead to the beautiful streets and the homes where many of the people live.
But it is mostly because of the coal and the rivers that we find here a splendid city.
The business streets lie close to the Ohio, and the houses extend up the steep slope to the 123 east, while over a high ridge comes the old National Road from the valley of Wheeling creek.
It was settled in 1770 and is one of the oldest towns on the river.
On the north bank of the great stream, in the southwest corner of Ohio, is the largest city on the river.
Business hours over, the well-to-do merchants climb out of the grimy town to the top of the bluffs, and there find, in a clearer air and along open and beautiful avenues, their comfortable homes.
Down town the turbulent river sometimes comes up forty or fifty feet beyond its usual level and makes trouble in the busy city, but Mt.
Auburn and Walnut Hills are disturbed neither by smoke nor by floods.
Rivers do not often flow in straight lines, and it is very common for them to change their courses along their flood plains.
This habit of shifting belongs alike to great and small streams, whether the Mississippi or the brook in the meadow.
The Ohio, like other rivers, often writes the letter S, and in so doing at this point has swung off from its old north bank, leaving a low plain with room enough for a hundred thousand people to carry on their business.
There is always some 124 good reason which has led to the settlement and growth of a town, and the history of Cincinnati shows no exception.
It was in early winter, 1788, when cakes of ice were already floating on the river, that a number of men sailing downstream stopped here and began a settlement.
The place was not readily named.
It is said that the matter was left to a frontier schoolmaster, and he did not lose the chance to show how much he knew.
He saw that the Licking river comes into the Ohio on the Kentucky side just opposite.
It did not have to try, for it was not long before General St. Clair, who had come there, made fun of the name and insisted upon a new one.
He and other officers of the American army had formed a society commemorating their experience in the Revolution, and in honor of the Roman patriot Cincinnatus had called themselves the Order of Cincinnati.
The place has its nickname also, and its people like to call it the Queen City, which seems to go very well with Beautiful River.
This shows how new some of our large business centers are, though it would be a great mistake to suppose that pigs and cows now run loose in western cities.
In those days such places were teaching the country how to “pack fifteen bushels of corn into a pig,” and how to send the produce of the farms to distant cities or other lands in such a way as to get the most money for the least freight.
When Charles Dickens visited this country many years ago he went to Cincinnati, and spoke well of the place.
If he could come back to Cincinnati now, he might find even more to please and surprise him.
Cincinnati has always made much use of the river.
There were little boats in which the owners carried notions and such things as a country store sells, peddling them from one settlement to another along the banks.
There were barges and flatboats bearing families and farm produce.
We can imagine the excitement among the small boys of a river town when the circus boat told of its arrival by the fierce blast of a loud steam whistle.
A vast business is done.
There are many schools, and to-day Cincinnati can boast of her music, of her pictures and museums, and of the fine pottery that she makes.
She has thrown off the schoolmaster’s clumsy name, she has many better things than pork, and she is widely known as one of America’s great cities.
An early writer says that the Ohio is “by far the noblest river in the universe.” He writes this in the beginning of a history of Louisville, a book which was printed in 1819.
This in itself shows that Louisville is one of the old cities of the Ohio valley.
The old boatmen, finding that the current was rapid at a certain point, called it the “falls of the Ohio.” A ledge of hard rocks in the bed of the river caused the rapids and made it no easy task to navigate boats.
It was this ledge in the river that started the town and finally made a city out of Louisville, for boats going in either direction naturally stopped at the falls.
There was another reason, too, as we shall see when we learn something of the “Wilderness Road,” which crossed Kentucky from the eastern mountains and came out on the river at Louisville.
Back from the river also lay the rich and fertile Blue Grass country for which Kentucky is famous.
Some of these boats had 128 interesting names, such as the Enterprise, the Vesuvius, the Comet, the Volcano, the New Orleans, the Cincinnati, the Experiment, the Rifleman, and the Rising States.
It was a wonderful life on the river, and Louisville got her share of the gain of it, as she now shares the traffic of the railroads.
To-day she is a rich and beautiful city of two hundred thousand people.
He was of Scottish parentage, but he was born in Morocco, where his father was a surgeon.
In 1710 the king sent him to Virginia to be governor, an office which he filled for twelve years.
The people liked him, though he made some enemies because he kept his soldierly ways and did not always speak in gentle phrases.
He was a kind, warm-hearted man, nevertheless, loving his family and friends.
His energy, too, was well known, and he was always ready to further a new scheme.
Nothing was more important to the colonists than iron, for they could not always bring tools and kettles and nails and gun metal from England.
The governor showed his practical ability in other ways.
He brought over Germans who knew how to raise grapes and make wine.
He was interested in teaching the Indians, and at one time he sent out ships and caught “Blackbeard,” who, with his fellow-pirates, 130 was prowling about the coast.
When the young Benjamin Franklin, in Boston, heard of the capture he wrote a poem about it.
He made up his mind to go and see this region, and brought together a party to make the journey.
They took their servants and pack horses and carried provisions and many bottles of the wine which the Germans had made.
Looking along the range to the southwest, we shall find, about eighty miles away, Swift Run Gap, not so low a pass, but one which made it easy to cross the mountains and go down into the lowlands along the Shenandoah river.
George, after the king.
Another peak was named Alexander for the governor.
Down by the Shenandoah they buried a bottle (the historian of Virginia thinks that by this time they must have had several that were empty), and in the bottle was a paper stating that they took possession in the name of the king.
They called the river the Euphrates, but the name did not cling to it.
We may be glad of that, for the Indian name of Shenandoah is much more musical.
Between the two ranges is the valley of the Shenandoah, or, as it is quite as often called, the valley of Virginia.
The land is flat and the soil deep and rich.
The place was wild and lonely when this band of explorers visited it, but to-day it is a country rich in interest and associations.
If we go northeast we shall pass Winchester, which became famous in the Civil War.
On our right also, after we cross the river, is Antietam, where a severe battle was fought between Lee and McClellan.
A little farther on is Hagerstown, Colonel Rochester’s old home, in the state of Maryland.
The next move would take us over into Pennsylvania, through Chambersburg and Carlisle, about which we already know, and across the Susquehanna to Harrisburg.
On our right, as we go up into Pennsylvania, is the low South mountain, which is the Blue Ridge continued.
All this time we are in the Great Valley.
The valley of Virginia is but a part of the whole, which reaches through several states and everywhere has the Blue Ridge on the southeast and other ridges of the Appalachian mountains on the northwest.
Every part of the valley is thickly settled and has fine 133 houses and homes, because its soil produces good crops and makes the people prosperous.
It was easy for the people of the Great Valley in Pennsylvania, where the land was earlier taken up, to push to the southwest along the same valley.
They found smoother traveling and better farms than if they had gone up into the mountains on the west.
So we see that the valley, leading southwest, guided the stream of emigrants in that direction.
It was thirty years later, when most of the land was still a wilderness, that we find George Washington crossing these same mountains to survey for Lord Fairfax.
In this valley, during the Civil War, “Stonewall” Jackson, Sheridan, and other well-known generals took their armies up and down, and fought a number of battles.
The rich farms and full barns of the valley played no small part in the strife by furnishing food for the soldiers.
One branch flows southwest and another northeast.
These come together and go out to the southeast by a gap in the Blue Ridge.
Before long we reach Roanoke, a flourishing city just inside the Blue Ridge.
Then follows the crossing of the New river, which flows northwest across the valley on its long course to the Ohio.
The Great Valley in this southwestern part of Virginia is really divided into several valleys by long and rather high ridges that separate these rivers.
On the northwest the Cumberland plateau and the Cumberland mountains rise above it.
Great Smoky is only another name for the Blue Ridge, for it is the 135 same range, only higher and wider than it is farther north.
Although this valley is a part of the Great Valley, it is commonly called the valley of east Tennessee, its people using the home name as they do in Virginia.
This lesson in geography we must learn well, with the help of a map, and we shall then see what the pioneers did as they followed the rivers between the mountains.
It is an old road that runs from Pennsylvania to Tennessee by the valley.
It took the pioneer across the Potomac through Winchester and Staunton in Virginia.
In a pleasant spot on the banks of this stream the first settlement of white men in Tennessee was made.
Many of these men and women had come from the north of Ireland.
They were not of Irish but of Scotch blood, their ancestors having originally come from Scotland to make the north of Ireland their home.
For this reason they are often called Scotch-Irish, but whatever we name them, we are to remember that they were sturdy and intelligent people.
Conscientious and loyal Presbyterians they were in faith, and by nature brave and full of endurance.
Their fathers had shed their blood for freedom on Scottish fields, and the sons were not likely to be frightened by a wilderness full of red savages.
There was no Tennessee in those days.
Many of the settlers had followed down the valleys from earlier homes in Virginia, and it never 137 occurred to them that they were not still living in Virginia, and able to call on the colony for help.
But after a time a man came to the settlement who was a surveyor, and for some reason he thought that he would run the boundary line of Virginia farther west.
If they belonged to any colony, it was to North Carolina.
It would be interesting to see a copy of the constitution that was drawn up by these backwoodsmen, but it has been lost, with little hope that it will ever be recovered.
It is known, however, that there was a committee of thirteen, really a legislature.
This committee chose five of their own number to form a court, which had a clerk and a sheriff and made laws for all the settlers.
Roosevelt, in his Winning of the West, says that these pioneers were the first to build a “free and independent community” in America.
The two most important men of this little state in the wild forest show us that the settlers came from widely different places.
James Robertson was one, and he came over the mountains from 138 North Carolina.
We shall need to know what sort of men these were.
James Robertson belonged to the Scotch-Irish people.
He had no early education, and his wife, an intelligent woman, taught him to read.
He went alone over the mountains, with only his horse and gun, in search of a place for a home.
He found the settlers and admired the place which they had chosen, but on his way back in the fall he lost his horse and got his powder wet.
He wandered about, almost starved, until he met some hunters, who helped him home.
He built a log house, went to work on the land, and by his wisdom and energy soon came to be a leader of the new colony.
His father had been a settler in the Shenandoah valley, and John followed the streams, as we have traced them, to the Great Valley.
He was by birth a gentleman, using that word to mean a man born of cultivated parents and familiar with the world.
Both he and Robertson were good fighters, as we shall see.
It was not long before seven hundred Indian warriors, angry because the white people had made homes on their hunting grounds, stole in upon the settlement.
An Indian woman, Nancy Ward 139 by name, who felt kindly toward the whites, secretly warned them of the attack, so that when the savages came they found all the men, women, and children in the fort.
It was not much of a fort, but it saved their lives.
When nearly a week had passed the red men, tired of the siege, went off through the forest.
Robertson, thinking that he could soften their anger, went alone among the fierce Cherokees.
Frequently a big slab served for a table, three-legged stools for chairs, and a row of pegs for a wardrobe.
Roosevelt says that the dress of the men was largely copied from that of the Indians, and included a fur cap, leggings of buckskin or elk hide, and a fringed hunting shirt.
A heavy rifle was carried, which was usually fired from a rest.
Garments and bed clothing were made of wool, which was spun at home by the wives and daughters.
The women worked hard from morning till night, and the men had many things to do.
There were lands to be cleared, crops to be raised, and game to be hunted and dressed.
Besides all these occupations it was necessary to keep a constant lookout for hostile savages and to have all means of defense ready in case of a sudden attack.
The Indians were so crafty and deceitful that only the closest watchfulness saved the palefaces from danger and death.
Sometimes an unwary hunter, hearing the gobbling of a turkey or the call of an owl, would come out into an open place only to be laid low by the red man’s bullet.
These experiences developed a strong and brave people.
The settlers often bartered things because they had no money, and they were ignorant of many of the ways of civilized life.
When a boy was twelve years old he had to begin to take a man’s part.
A gun was given to him, and he was placed at a loophole in the fort to help keep off the savage foe.
As the agent of a land company which had a grant of new lands in Kentucky, he, with several companions, made a hard journey of six months into the wilderness.
They started at Charlottesville in Virginia, went through the Blue Ridge into the Great Valley, and then followed the valley southwest.
One of Walker’s companions bore the name of Ambrose Powell, and as they followed one of the long streams that flow to the southwest to form the Tennessee, they named it Powell’s river.
His son afterwards was an officer in the Revolution, and it is said that A. P. Hill, a well-known Confederate general in the Civil War, was his great-grandson.
These were, in fact, no common men who, in the year 1750, ventured out into the forest, over the roughest trails we can imagine, among wild animals and savage men.
Following down Powell’s river, the travelers saw rugged mountains on their right, the Cumberland range.
They had to climb up about five hundred feet through a wooded ravine in order to reach the top of the pass, and there was a similar slope on the other side.
This brought them to an open valley and to a river, which they followed through a gap in another mountain range, the Pineville mountains.
Dr. Walker called the first pass the Cumberland Gap, in honor of a well-known Englishman, and the name has survived even to the present day.
In like manner we have the Cumberland mountains.
After wandering about in the high, rough country of eastern Kentucky, he finally reached his Virginia home without having accomplished much in the service of his company.
But he had found and named what has become one of the most famous historical places in 144 America, the Cumberland Gap.
He was not the first man to go through it, for the Indians had long been familiar with it.
Their trail had traversed it for no one knows how many generations.
We must now follow the fortunes of the most famous of Kentucky hunters and pioneers, who, while he did not find or name the Cumberland Gap, often went through it, and is remembered by most people in connection with it.
This man was Daniel Boone.
We could not find a better example of the movement along the Great Valley to the southwest than the life of Boone; for his childhood was spent on what was then the frontier, and his experience was like that of hundreds of others similarly reared.
This part of Pennsylvania was still on the edge of the wilderness, and from his early boyhood Boone knew all about the Indians.
His family were Quakers, and he himself was quiet and 145 thoughtful, learning to read from the Quaker wife of his eldest brother, but getting most of his education in the fields and woods.
Boone had some experience as a blacksmith, which, his biographer says, taught him how to mend his traps and guns.
He used to hunt in the woods in winter, helping thus to feed the family, and with the skins which he took to Philadelphia he bought powder, lead, and hunting 146 knives.
When Boone was about sixteen years old his family decided to move.
They went along the Great Valley, as many were doing in those days, crossed the Potomac, and traveled far through the valley of Virginia.
Then they turned east, crossed the Blue Ridge, and made a home in the valley of the Yadkin river in North Carolina.
While his home was in North Carolina Boone had an experience which helped him to be a rugged pioneer, for he went up to Virginia and across the mountains with General Braddock, serving as wagoner and blacksmith.
He found himself in dangerous quarters in the battle, where many of the teamsters were shot, but he managed to cut his horses loose, mounted one of them, and escaped.
At home Boone lived, like all others in those valleys, in a small log cabin chinked with clay and warmed by a large fireplace, in which, says his biographer, “the young wife (for Boone was now married) cooked simple meals of corn mush, pumpkins, squashes, beans, potatoes, and pork, or wild meat of many kinds.” Boone spent his time in farming, working at the forge, and hunting; but he liked hunting best, and was never so happy as in the thick forest alone with his gun.
He often went on long hunting 147 trips, returning with bear’s meat, venison, bear’s oil, and furs, the last to be sold for other things needed at home.
As they were kept there by heavy snows, they camped at a “salt lick” and lived by shooting the buffaloes and other animals that came to get the salt.
The hunters returned to their homes in the spring and did not go out until 1769.
Meantime John Finley was peddling in that south land, and one day surprised Boone, and himself, too, by knocking at the door of Boone’s cabin.
He made the hardy pioneer a long visit, and in the spring, having 148 talked it all over many times, they set out for Kentucky.
They crossed the Blue Ridge and the Great Valley and came to Cumberland Gap.
This was Boone’s first journey to the great pass.
It is pleasant now to stand in the gap at the top of the pass and think of the time when Boone with his hunting friends made their way up from the east and went happily down through the woods to the strange country on the west.
At one time they were taken by Indians, who plundered their camp and stole all their furs.
Most of the party were discouraged and went back to the settlements, but Boone and one companion were angry at their loss and determined to stay and make it good.
This was like Boone, who knew nothing of fear, and who did not easily give up what he wanted to do.
He made several trips to Kentucky and greatly liked the new country.
At length, having decided to take his family with him and make his home there, he became the leader of the pioneers that went out under the Transylvania Company, as it was called.
Houses and forts were built, forests were cleared, and crops were raised.
Such was the beginning of the state of Kentucky.
It was not all simple and pleasant work, however.
Cabins were burnt, and settlers were slain with gun and tomahawk, but Boone and many others with him would admit no failure.
People began to pour in through the Cumberland Gap, until more forests were cleared, the towns grew larger, and the Indians, who do not like to fight in the open country, drew back to the woods and the mountains.
Boone marked out the trail which was afterwards known as the Wilderness road.
One of these was Abraham Hanks, who was Abraham Lincoln’s grandfather.
It was no easy journey that these men made to Kentucky, and no easy life that they found when they got there, but they planted the first American state beyond the mountains, and the rough pioneers who lived in cabins and ate pork, pumpkins, and corn bread were the ancestors of some of our most famous men.
The Wilderness road has never been a good one, and is no more than any other byroad through 150 a rough country to-day.
Sometimes the early travelers, who always went in companies for safety, would be too tired to go on until they had stopped to rest and to get cheer by singing hymns and saying prayers.
But they made the best of it, for they knew that they were going to a fine country, which would repay them for their sufferings.
One of the young men, who had been hearing the book read by the camp fire, came in one night bearing a couple of scalps that he had taken from a pair of savages.
They were not spoiled by having too many luxuries, and they did not think that the world owed them a living without any effort on their part.
Beginning about the time of the Declaration of Independence, many people found the way to Kentucky by the Great Valley, the Cumberland Gap, and the Wilderness road.
Not all had come by the gap, for some had sailed down the river; but they all helped to plant the new state.
The “blue grass,” as it is called, grows luxuriantly here, as do grain and tobacco, for the soils, made by the wasting of limestone, are rich and fertile.
Wherever the soil and climate are good, crops are large and the people thrive.
They have enough to eat and plenty to sell, and thus they can have good homes, many comforts, books, and education.
Even before the coming of the white man there were open lands which, perhaps by Indian fires, had lost their cover of trees.
Such lands are often called prairies.
These prairies, however, were not so flat as those of Illinois, and they were bordered by groves and forests.
In this region we find the state capital, and here, along the roads, may be seen old mansions belonging to well-to-do descendants of the plucky men who came in by the Wilderness road or steered their flatboats down the Ohio.
If we go back to Cumberland Gap, we shall see that many things have happened since Boone’s time.
In the pass and on the Pinnacle, a thousand feet above on the north, are ridges of earth, which show where busy shovels threw up defenses in the Civil War; for armies passed this way between 153 Kentucky and the valley of Tennessee, and made the gap an important point to be seized and held.
The road through the gap is still about as bad a path as one could find.
Near it on the east side of the mountains is yet to be seen a furnace of rough stones, built in those early days for smelting iron.
But there is little else to remind us of that far-off time.
To-day you may, if you choose, pass the mountains without climbing through the gap, for trains go roaring through a tunnel a mile long, while the echo of the screaming whistles rolls along the mountain sides.
Only a few miles away are coal mines from which thousands of tons of coal are dug, and this is one reason why the railroads are here.
There are endless stores of fuel under these highlands, and men are breaking into the wilderness as fast as they can.
But if we climb through the gap as Boone did, or ride a horse to the Pinnacle, we may look out upon the wonderful valley below, stretching off to the foot of the Great Smoky 154 mountains, whose rugged tops carry our eyes far over into North Carolina.
Or we may turn the other way and follow Boone’s trail to the Blue Grass.
CHAPTER XIII 155 FRONTIER SOLDIERS AND STATESMEN Not long before the Revolution began some treacherous whites in the western country had murdered the whole family of the friendly Indian chief, Logan.
This aroused the tribes and led to war.
These backwoods soldiers were attacked by a thousand of the bravest Indian warriors, commanded by Cornstalk, a Shawnee chief.
It was a fierce struggle and both sides lost many men, but the pioneers held their ground, and the red men, when they had had enough fighting, went away.
This battle at Point Pleasant finished what is sometimes known as Lord Dunmore’s War, so called because it was carried on under Lord Dunmore, the last governor that the English king sent out to Virginia.
We are to hear again about all 156 these, for they were men likely to be found whenever something important was to be done.
We are learning how many great rivers help to make up the Ohio, and what an important region the Ohio valley was to the young country east of the mountains.
This means that the country which now makes up the states of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois was in foreign hands.
The people were largely French and Indians, but they were governed by the British.
In order to defeat the Americans, the British, in all the years of the Revolutionary War, were stirring up the Indian tribes against the patriots.
George Rogers Clark was a young Virginian who had gone out to Kentucky, which then belonged to the mother state.
He heard that Colonel Henry Hamilton, who commanded the British at Detroit, was persuading the Indians of that region to attack the frontier.
He set out for Virginia, saw Patrick Henry, the governor, Thomas Jefferson, and other leading men, and gained permission to gather an army.
Late the next spring they went in boats down the Ohio to the point where the muddy waters of 157 the Mississippi come in from the north.
This alone was a journey of a thousand miles.
In the 158 time of the Revolution it was governed by the British, although most of the people were French.
Clark and his little army soon seized the place and made the people promise obedience to the new government.
It took them more than two months to make the journey.
Clark sent some of his men with boats and provisions and cannon down the Mississippi, up the Ohio, and up the Wabash.
He, with most of his little force, went across the prairie.
He found the food and the guns and soon captured Hamilton and his army.
At the close of the war the American messengers, who were in Paris arranging for peace, could say that they already had possession of all the land this side of the Mississippi, so no excuse was left for the British to claim it.
In this way one frontier soldier saved several great states for his country.
Clark had won the prairie country five years later; and the next year, 1780, saw the great victory of Kings Mountain.
Lord Cornwallis was now chief general of the British.
Ferguson gathered together many American Tories and drilled them to march and fight.
Ferguson heard of them and sent them a stormy message.
Almost everybody was there, women and children as well as men.
Four hundred sturdy men came from Virginia under William and Arthur Campbell.
He had as much fight in him as any of them, and as they stood in their rough hunter’s garb he called upon God for help, preaching to them from the words, “The sword of the Lord and of Gideon.” They set out at once through the mountains, driving beef cattle for part of their food supply, and every man armed with rifle, tomahawk, and scalping knife.
Roosevelt says there was not a bayonet or a tent in their army.
The trail was stony and steep, and in the higher mountains they found snow.
They marched as quickly as they could, for they wanted to catch Ferguson before Cornwallis could send more soldiers to help him.
On the way several hundred men from North Carolina, under Benjamin Cleveland, joined them.
When Ferguson found that they were pursuing him and that he must fight, he took up a strong position on Kings Mountain, in the northwest corner of South Carolina.
He felt sure of success, however, and thought that Heaven itself could hardly drive him off that hill.
As the patriot leaders drew near the British camp they saw that many of their men were too weary to overtake the swift and wary Ferguson, should he try to get away.
So they picked out about half of the force, nearly a thousand mounted men.
These men rode all night, and the next day approached the hill.
Those who had lost their horses on the way hurried on afoot and arrived in time to fight.
When close at hand the riders tied their horses in the woods, and the little army advanced to the attack on foot.
They moved up the three sides of the hill.
Ferguson was famous for his bayonet charges, and the patriots had no bayonets.
Then the backwoodsmen on the flanks rushed in and poured shot into the backs of the British.
Turning to meet these new foes, the regulars were again chased up the hill and shot by the men who had fled from their bayonets.
At length the gallant Ferguson was killed, the white flag was hoisted, and the firing stopped.
Many British were slain, and all the rest, save a very few who escaped in the confusion, were made prisoners.
They had come from a region of which Cornwallis had hardly dreamed, and they had destroyed one of his armies and killed one of his best commanders.
The battle turned the tide of the Revolution in the South, but the victors hurried back as quickly as they had come.
They were not fitted for a long campaign, and, besides, they had left their homes dangerously open to attacks from savages.
It was, however, the one battle of the Revolution against white foes alone that was planned, fought, and won by the men of the frontier.
He burned their villages, destroyed their corn, killed and captured some of their warriors, and got away before they could gather their greater numbers to crush him.
We must not forget James Robertson, who all this time was doing his part of the farming and the fighting and the planning for the new settlements.
Five years later it became Nashville, and now we do not need to explain where it was.
Robertson went out by the Cumberland Gap, but soon left Boone’s road and went toward the west, following the trails.
When he and his followers reached the place and decided upon it as suitable for settlement, they planted a field of corn, to have something to depend on for food later.
Robertson’s family went with them.
Their course led them along the Tennessee to the Ohio, then up the Ohio a few miles to the mouth 164 of the Cumberland, and up the Cumberland to their new home.
One of the boats, carrying twenty-eight grown people and children, had a number of cases of smallpox on board.
The Indians attacked this boat and killed or captured the four sick travelers.
For their deed the savages were badly punished, for they took the disease, which soon spread widely among the tribes.
For a long time after Nashville was begun the pioneers had fierce encounters with the Indians, and in spite of all their care many lives were lost.
Robertson was the strong man of the place, and was rewarded with the confidence of the people.
When Tennessee became a state he helped to make its constitution.
He died in 1814.
He was brave, and willing to endure hardship, discomfort, and suffering in a good cause.
He went alone over the snows to Kentucky to get powder, and returned in time to save the little town from 165 destruction.
The Indians killed his own son, but he would not give up the settlement.
Plain man though he was, he gained honor from the men of his time, and wrote his name on the pages of American history.
We must learn a little more of Isaac Shelby, whom we have seen fighting hard at Point Pleasant and Kings Mountain.
He was born in the Great Valley, at Hagerstown.
When he was twenty-one years old he moved to Tennessee and then across to Kentucky.
It is rather strange to read that Kentucky was made a “county” of Virginia.
This was in 1776.
In 1792, largely through Shelby’s efforts, Kentucky was separated from Virginia and became a state by itself.
It was the first state beyond the mountains, being four years older than Tennessee and eleven years ahead of Ohio.
Isaac Shelby was the first governor of Kentucky, from 1792 to 1796, and years later he was governor again.
He fought in the War of 1812, and his name is preserved in Shelbyville, a town of Kentucky.
64), and down a side street is an old dwelling, said to be an early statehouse of the commonwealth which is still associated with his name.
In 1785 the state of “Franklin” was organized and named in honor of the illustrious Benjamin; but North Carolina, being heartily opposed to the whole proceeding, put an end to it without delay.
They sent him to Congress in a few years and in 1796 made him the first governor of Tennessee.
He enjoyed many honors until his death in 1815, which came soon after that of his more quiet friend, James Robertson.
He might camp in the woods, living on the few provisions he could carry and on what he could shoot in the forest, or he might share the humble homes of chance settlers on the way.
If the traveler wishes to see the land and learn what men have done in a hundred years, he will leave the train at Knoxville.
A carriage or an electric car will carry him between blocks of fine buildings to a modern hotel, where he will find food and bed and places to read, write, rest, or do business, as he likes.
Around him is a busy city stretching up and down its many hills.
The old soldier will point across to where Fort Sanders stood, and will describe those days in 1863 when Longstreet came up and laid siege to the town, which was garrisoned by Burnside and his army.
The colors often run into each other in curious and fantastic ways, and the slabs and blocks when polished are beautiful indeed.
These marbles have been used to adorn some of the finest buildings in America, including the National Capitol.
52) is taken near Knoxville and shows sloping fields always ready to bear good crops.
The soils have been made by the wasting of the top parts of these same beds of marble and of other rocks found along with it.
In Knoxville, on the edge of the city, is the University of Tennessee, with many buildings upon 170 its campus.
It is an excellent school and an old one as well, having been founded in 1794.
Only seven years before that date two old Revolutionary soldiers rode through the woods and picked out these lands, which were given to them as a reward for their service in the war.
Here they built as a defense against the savages a wooden fort, with log cabins at the corners and a stockade with a stout barred gate.
Such a fort was greatly needed in those days whenever a new settlement was made.
After the two soldiers had planted corn they went back to North Carolina to bring their families over the mountains.
This was the beginning of Knoxville, which grew up around the fort and soon spread over the hills and down to the river.
The settlement was named in honor of Henry Knox, who was an able general in the Revolution and a good friend of George Washington.
Now the railroads reach out in every direction.
They bring in the iron ore and the limestones of the valley.
They also run up into the Cumberland Gap, and to Harriman, Tennessee, and bring back stores of coal, thus making Knoxville a place for working iron.
In the great bend of the Cumberland, on its south bank, in northern Tennessee, stands Nashville, as we have already seen.
If we visit a large city in one of the countries of Europe, we are quite likely to be told, or to read in our guidebook, that its history goes back hundreds of years, and any town that was started only a hundred years ago would there seem young.
But we measure age differently in America, and 172 a town like Nashville, founded in 1780, we think is old indeed.
It is not easy to remember, as we ride along the streets and see the shops and mansions of Nashville to-day, that this was once a place of log cabins, and that the first settlers had to sleep always with one ear open for the Indian’s war cry.
That James Robertson had to learn to read from his wife did not keep Nashville from becoming one of the centers of education and refinement in the South.
It would take several lines to record the names of all the colleges and universities that now have their seat in this city.
Besides these, there are fertile valleys, fine rivers and mountains, productive forests, beds of iron ore and coal, comfortable farms, and thriving towns.
The state is rich, too, in historical associations.
Every part of Tennessee saw the dark days of the Civil War, and in the fields south of Nashville a great battle was fought.
We can take the train now at Knoxville, and a ride of a little 173 more than a hundred miles will bring us to this place.
Let us go up to the top and look around.
Stretching away at our feet on the east is Chattanooga.
Beyond is the Tennessee, and we are looking up the river to the northeast.
The bridge which we see is the only bridge across the river at Chattanooga, even though it is now a large and busy city.
In the distance is high ground, a part of Missionary Ridge, famous in the story of the Civil War.
If we turn around and look southward, we shall see Lookout Mountain, rising fifteen hundred feet above the river.
On the edge of the city, kept with care, is the National Cemetery, where rest the bodies of more than twelve thousand soldiers, northern and southern, who perished in the neighborhood of Chattanooga.
Now all the region is peaceful, and only the tablets of iron and bronze, set up by the government on every battlefield in the neighborhood, tell the story of the conflict as it raged about the city.
Like Knoxville, Chattanooga has much coal and iron, is the center of a number of railways, and does much business.
The railways run up the valley to Virginia, and south to Atlanta and elsewhere in Georgia.
They stretch even further southward to Mobile and New Orleans, while the lines to the west reach Memphis and Nashville.
The place, originally called Ross’s Landing, was not settled until 1836, when Knoxville and Nashville were about fifty years old.
It has a noble site and may well become a great city.
Here passed the boats that bore the first settlers to Robertson’s colony on the Cumberland.
There are no Indians now to shoot from the banks, and you will see on the river only rafts of logs floating down from the forests in the mountains.
It stands more than a thousand feet above the sea, in northern Georgia, where the Appalachian mountain range is tapering down toward 176 the southern plains.
Because Atlanta is so high it is cooler in summer than most southern cities, and is always free from the scourge of yellow fever and cholera.
Other railways reach Atlanta from Chattanooga and Knoxville in the Great Valley, and still others lead the way to Savannah and the Atlantic coast.
Let us take a map of the United States and draw a line through Richmond, Louisville, Nashville, and New Orleans.
Notice how many states lie southeast of this line, and remember that of all the towns which they contain Atlanta is the largest and most important.
Indeed, in trade and influence it surpasses many northern cities which are much larger.
It was small then, having but about ten thousand people.
In 1864 most of it was burned to the ground, and we may truly say that it has grown to its present size in the short period since that time.
To-day its population numbers more than one hundred thousand.
During the recent Spanish War the Department of the Gulf made its headquarters here, so that Atlanta appears to be sought both in war and in peace.
The city was used as the capital of Georgia soon after the Civil War, and in 1877 the people of the state voted that it 178 should always be the seat of government.
Since that time they have erected a capitol costing a million dollars, adorning the interior with marbles from their own quarries.
Everybody knew that the South raised cotton, but Atlanta wished to prove that the South could also spin and weave her famous product.
Mr. W. G. Atkinson was the governor of Georgia at that time.
During the exposition a day was chosen in which something unusual should be done.
Men went out into a field in the morning and picked some cotton.
It was ginned and spun and woven in double-quick time.
Governor Atkinson put on the suit and visited the grounds of the exposition.
In the morning the cotton was in the field, in the evening it was on the governor.
Suits are not made 179 so quickly as that on ordinary days, but the South spins and weaves millions of dollars’ worth of cotton, turning the mill wheels with southern coal or with the waters of swift southern streams.
On the one hand, not far away, is the Ocmulgee, flowing to the ocean, while westward, and distant but a few miles, the Chattahoochee flows toward the gulf.
The mills not only spin the cotton of the gulf plains but also turn out 180 fertilizers, work up the timber of the region, and make a multitude of other things to swell the city’s trade with her neighbors.
Here are shops and departments of engineering, and, not least, instruction in making textiles, so that the cotton of southern fields need no longer go to Massachusetts or to England to be spun and woven.
The youngest great town of the southern mountain region was started on an old cotton plantation in 1871, thirty-four years before the writing of these lines.
The people knew that in 181 Alabama as well as in Tennessee coal and iron are found close together.
So men built an iron town and called it, after one of the greatest furnace towns in the world, Birmingham.
It is a noisy, busy place, with wide streets, swift electric cars, and blazing furnaces.
No longer does the mountain wall cut off the products of the West from the markets of the East.
Yet hardly a hundred years ago the eastern strip of country was practically shut off from the whole territory drained by the Ohio and Mississippi rivers.
Indian trails and rough roads were the only means of communication between the two sections.
Great as are the natural resources of both regions, their prosperity has been bound up in the development of roads and railways, and is due in large measure to the energy, foresight, and self-sacrifice of those who crossed the barrier and made it easy for others to follow them.
Simple typographical errors were corrected; unbalanced quotation marks were remedied when the change was obvious, and otherwise left unbalanced.
Portions of the captions of some illustrations were taken from the List of Illustrations.
The index was not checked for proper alphabetization or correct page references.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!)
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement.
If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession.
“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.
It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.
There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.
There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.
Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States.
If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed.
Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work.
You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.
The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work.
Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change.
If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges.
Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that: • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.
The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.
Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns.
You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from.
If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund.
If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.
If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come.
In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.
Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.
To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States.
U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses.
Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.
A larger, higher-resolution copy of the map may be seen by clicking (Larger) beneath it.
THE STORY OF OUR LORD.
THE STORY OF THE EXODUS.
Being Part II.
With a Map and 29 Illustrations.
WORKS BY PROFESSOR C. WITT.
MYTHS OF HELLAS.
THE TROJAN WAR.
With a Preface by the Rev.
THE WANDERINGS OF ULYSSES.
THE RETREAT OF THE TEN THOUSAND.
And I agree with the translator in hoping that some of those who read the story for the first time in English will be led to study Greek sufficiently to read it again and again in the language of Xenophon himself.
That remarkable personage, who in spite of his Spartan leanings was a thorough Athenian at vi heart—found himself on a sudden called upon to play the part of a leader: and played it to perfection.
I do not think there is a dull page in the book.
The incidents, albeit they took place in the broad noonday of Grecian history, are as thrilling as any tale told by the poets in the divine dawn of the highly gifted Hellenic race.
The men themselves who play so noble a part are evidently true descendants of the Homeric heroes.
If they have fits of black despondency—the cloud is soon dispelled when there is need for action, and by a sense of their own dignity.
They enter the lists of battle with the same gaiety.
They confront death with similar equanimity.
But there is another side to the matter.
They bear the impress of their own half century markedly: and it was an age not by any means entirely heroic.
It had its painful and prosaic side.
And what of Xenophon himself?
There is much to be said on that topic.
But it is ‘another story.’ In this he must speak for himself.
The illustrations are mostly taken (by permission) from MM.
The two views are from x photographs kindly lent for the purpose by Mr. Cecil Smith, of the British Museum.
And I hope that many readers of this little book may be stimulated to the effort of studying for themselves the works of the great historian in the original Greek.
We speak, for example, of Alexander the Great, and amongst English kings, of Alfred the Great.
There was however one empire, that of Persia, in which the title of Great carried with it no distinction, for in this country every king was called the Great King, not because it was supposed that his nature was more noble or his actions more splendid than those of other men, but because he was lord of a vast empire, greater than had ever yet been seen upon the face of the earth.
The Persian empire had been founded about a hundred and fifty years before the time of this story, by Cyrus the Great, who, having succeeded by inheritance to the double throne of Persia and 2 Media, had conquered many of the surrounding nations.
The kings who came after him extended their sway farther and farther, until at last, in the time of Darius I., there were no less than fifty-six countries subject to the Great King of Persia.
The Great King was looked upon as little less than a god.
Every one who entered his presence threw himself flat upon the ground, as if in the presence of a divine being.
It was supposed that a mere subject must of necessity be struck to the earth with sudden blindness on meeting the dazzling rays of such exalted majesty.
At each of these places there was an immense palace, adorned with every conceivable magnificence, and from the discoveries recently made among the ruins of Persepolis we can form some idea of what the palace of the Great King of Persia must have been like.
There must, in all, have been about fifteen thousand of them, including the ten thousand soldiers of the royal body-guard.1 1 See illustration, p. 103.
RUINS OF THE PALACE OF PERSEPOLIS.
The gate of the palace was approached by two superb flights of marble stairs, which joined in 3 front of the entrance, and were so wide that ten horsemen could ride abreast up each side.2 Within the gate was a square building with a front of more than two hundred feet.3 The entrance-hall was a magnificent room, with a roof supported by a hundred pillars of richly carved stone,4 and on either side of it were other rooms with beautiful pillars.
The walls were covered with gigantic sculptures, representing the Great Kings Darius I. and Xerxes, who had built the palace, with attendants, both in time of peace, and at war with monsters and wild beasts.5 Together with the sculptures were inscriptions which can be read even now.
This is a translation of the beginning of one of them: ‘I am Darius, the Great King, the King of kings, the King of these many countries.’ Among the sculptures is one that represents Darius seated on his throne, with a slave standing behind him, holding in his hand a fan with which to keep off the flies.
The mouth of the slave is covered with a bandage, for it would have been considered a profanation to allow the air breathed by so august a sovereign to be polluted by the breath of a slave.6 Another sculpture represents an audience given to an ambassador, who, for the same reason, holds his hand before his mouth in the presence of the King.
2 See illustration facing p. 26.
38, 47, 62.
(From the Darius Vase at Naples.)
When the Great King gave an audience he sat upon a golden throne with a canopy above him which was held in its place by four slender pillars of gold adorned with precious stones.
The whole 4 effect was so dazzling that it would be hard to imagine anything more splendid, even in a fairy tale.
On his head was the tiara, a sort 5 of pointed cap worn by the Persians.
Only the King might wear his tiara standing upright, all subjects were obliged to press down the point, or arrange the cap in some other way.
The full value of the gala costume was reckoned at nearly 300,000l.
It was only on rare occasions that the King walked, and then only within the precincts of the palace; on these occasions carpets were spread before him, on which no foot but his might tread.
More frequently, however, the King preferred to drive in his chariot, and at these times the road he intended to take was specially cleansed, and strewn with myrtle as if for a festival, and filled with clouds of incense.
It was lined, moreover, with armed men on both sides; and guards with whips prevented any approach to the royal chariot.
At a distance of about two miles from Persepolis was a great pile of marble rock, and here Darius I. caused his tomb to be made whilst he was yet alive.
So steep and inaccessible was the cliff that the only way of placing the body in the tomb prepared for it was by raising it from below with ropes.
Yet only one of these was the Queen; all the rest were so far beneath her that, when she approached, they had to bow themselves to the ground before her.
Like all Persians, the King only ate once a day, but the meal lasted a very long time.
At his right hand was the Queen-Mother; at his left, the Queen-Consort.
The princes and intimate friends of the King, who were called his ‘table-companions,’ usually took their meal in an adjoining room.
On feast days, however, they were permitted to dine in the royal presence, and on these occasions, seats made of cushions or carpets were placed for them upon the floor.
The power of the Great King was bounded by no law; from his will there was no appeal.
He was a despot in the strictest sense of the word, and his subjects were all alike his slaves, from the lowest to the highest, not even excepting his nearest relations.
In the whole world there was only one person whom he was required to treat with any kind of respect; this was his mother.
But from this moment it gradually declined in power and in extent.
For the wisest head and the strongest arm it would have been no easy task to govern such a dominion, and the successors of Darius were neither wise nor strong.
Neither was the Persian nation what it had been in the time of the great Cyrus, when even the nobles were simple in their habits, and when every Persian made it his pride to ride well, to shoot well, and always to speak the truth.
Now, nobles and people alike had become luxurious and pleasure-loving, caring for nothing but to increase their own power and wealth, no matter at what cost to the subject nations.
The various nations of which it was composed differed in language, in manners, and in habits of life.
In order to provide for the government of the empire, it was subdivided into provinces, and each province, or group of two or more provinces, was placed under the charge of one of the great lords.
It was the duty of these governors—or Satraps, as they were called—to act as the representative of the sovereign, to maintain law and order, and to take care that the people had no opportunity of revolting from their subjection to the Great King.
The King was, indeed, accustomed to make a journey of inspection every year into one or other of his provinces, but in each province such visits were of rare occurrence, and a Satrap who wished to seek his own advantage, instead of studying the interests of the King and of the empire, had every opportunity of doing so.
Upon the smallest suspicion, and without any sort of trial, a man who was accused of plotting treason against the King might be removed from his post, and either openly or 9 secretly put to death.
A story is told of Darius I., who was one of the best of the Great Kings, that once, when he was about to engage in an expedition against the Scythians, a Persian noble prostrated himself before him, and craved as a boon that of his three sons he might be allowed to keep one at home with him.
The King answered that he should keep them all at home, and gave command to put them to death immediately.
Not only criminals, but even persons merely suspected of having committed crimes, were put to death in the most horrible manner.
Some were crushed between stones, others were torn limb from limb, and others, again, suffered painful imprisonment in troughs.
There is a Persian proverb that ‘the King has many eyes and ears.’ In every state the king must have means of knowing through his trusted officers, who see and hear for him, what is going on among the people.
But in Persia the arrangements for obtaining information of this kind were reduced to a science.
Satraps and people alike were constantly watched by a body of spies, and so 10 secretly was this done that it was not even known who were the officers employed.
Sometimes the spy would denounce an innocent man for no other reason than to bring himself into notice as active in the King’s service.
Another plan was to take note of every one who passed along the roads which led from the various Residences of the Great King to the other principal towns of the empire.
This was intended to check the free passage of suspicious persons, and to prevent the sending of letters not approved by the government; but it must often have been easy to find means of evading the King’s officers.
In order that the King might be informed as quickly as possible of any risings or disturbances in the provinces, a very complete system of postal communication had been arranged.
It must not be supposed, however, that ordinary letters were carried so fast.
But, in spite of all these precautions, the King, like his subjects, lived in constant fear.
He never showed himself to the people, except surrounded by his ten thousand guards.
If he gave an audience, the person admitted to the royal presence was compelled, on pain of death, to present himself dressed in a robe with long sleeves falling over the hands, so that he should not be able to use his hands against his sovereign.
If he entertained guests at his table, those among them who were considered the most faithful were placed at his right hand, and the less trusted at his left, because, in case of need, he would be better able to defend himself with the right hand than with the left.
Under such a system of mutual fear and distrust, the seeds of ruin and decay were sown throughout the Persian empire, and each succeeding century saw it tottering more helplessly 12 towards its final overthrow.
In many respects Hellas was a complete contrast to Persia.
The country was a very small one, and it was further divided into a number of tiny states, each with a free government of its own, and independent of all the rest.
To the Hellene citizen, the one supreme necessity of life was freedom, and consequently in almost all the states the government was in the hands of men chosen by the people.
Now and again a monarchy would be established in one or other of the states, but it never lasted long, and in their horror of tyrants, the Hellenes were apt to overlook the advantages of a firm, stable government.
It is true that in Hellas there were many slaves, but they formed a class apart and were in no sense citizens.
It was their greatest pride to 14 recall the battles fought by their countrymen in former days against the Barbarians of Persia, when, although outnumbered by ten to one, a handful of free men had put to flight a host of slaves.
See p. 3.
The elder was called Artaxerxes; the younger, Cyrus.
She loved Cyrus far better than Artaxerxes, and desired nothing more ardently than that he should succeed to the throne after the death of Darius, rather than his elder brother.
The Queen was beautiful, and wise and clever, and she had great influence over her husband, and seldom failed in persuading him to do as she wished.
But a much stronger argument was the difference in character between the two men.
Artaxerxes was weak and indolent, and lived constantly at the King’s court, hating exertion of any kind.
Cyrus, on the contrary, was active and energetic, and had already given striking proofs of ability, both as a soldier and ruler of men, for at the age of eighteen, he had been appointed satrap of the provinces of Lydia, Greater Phrygia and Cappadocia.
Cyrus had many friends.
He also excited the admiration of the Persians by his power of drinking an enormous quantity of wine without becoming intoxicated.
This was looked upon as a sign of manliness, and a great distinction.
In the pleasant and peaceful occupation of gardening, Cyrus also took great delight.
A BEAR HUNT.
The palace of Cyrus stood in such a park, called by the Persians a ‘paradise.’ Here he might often be seen, attending to the trees with the utmost diligence.
One day when Cyrus was out hunting he was attacked by a she-bear, who dragged him from his horse, and gave him several wounds before he could kill her.
One of his companions came to his help, and for this service Cyrus rewarded him in so princely a manner as to make him an envied man.
As a friend, Cyrus was always generous and open-handed, and he delighted in making small presents as well as great.
According to an old custom, every subject who came to his court brought 18 with him gifts, and these Cyrus always accepted, but not for himself; he took them in order that he might divide them among his friends.
Sometimes, at a banquet, if he observed that the wine set before him was better than usual, he would send away part of it to one of his friends with some such message as this: ‘Drink this good wine to-day with your dearest friend.’ Or perhaps the gift would consist of half a goose or part of a loaf of bread, which would be taken to the friend with the message, ‘Cyrus has enjoyed this, and desires that you should taste it also.’ If he gave a promise, or entered into an agreement, it was certain that he would keep his word.
A friendship once formed he ever afterwards regarded as sacred.
He is said to have once prayed to the gods to grant that he might live until he had repaid all his friends and all his enemies.
Well-doers were encouraged and rewarded, but evil-doers met with immediate punishment; and as a warning to others, criminals who had been deprived of hands, legs or eyes, were exposed to view in the most frequented streets.
In the whole empire there were no provinces in which natives and strangers alike were so secure from robbery and murder as in those governed by Cyrus.
If the choice of their future sovereign had been left to the people, they would probably have chosen Cyrus.
But in Persia, the naming of the successor was the right of the reigning king, and the hopes of Cyrus were doomed to disappointment.
Cyrus was vexed and angry at the failure of his hopes, and probably took little pains to conceal his feelings, for he was of a very passionate nature.
The beginning of a new reign had often in Persia been signalled by bloody deeds, and the murder of a brother was by no means an unheard-of crime.
Artaxerxes was therefore ready enough to believe the accusation, and immediately gave orders for his brother’s arrest, for he was resolved to defeat his ambitious schemes by the most effectual of all methods, namely by putting him to 20 death.
Artaxerxes was far from being a great man, but he was at least easy-going and good-natured, and now his mother so far prevailed upon him, that he not only set Cyrus at liberty, but also reinstated him in his former dignities, and allowed him to depart to his own province.
This much however is at least certain, that after having been treated as guilty of high treason, and condemned to death in consequence, Cyrus had but one object in life, and that to further this object, he did not hesitate to employ the power entrusted to him for a very different purpose.
From this time forward his whole mind was set upon obtaining by conquest the throne of Persia.
How could a mere governor of a province hope to unseat from his throne the Great King with all the resources of the empire at his command?
At the most, Cyrus could only reckon upon some 100,000 soldiers, whereas Artaxerxes was able to bring more than a million of men into the field.
On the other hand however, it might be urged that the Great King could not at once assemble his whole force.
So immense were the distances in this huge empire, that a whole year of preparation would be required, in order to bring up the army to its full strength.
And Cyrus intended, if possible, to take his brother by surprise.
He believed moreover that his disadvantage in point of numbers would be more than counterbalanced by the infinitely superior quality of at least a part of his army.
It was from among the Hellenes that he hoped to enlist such troops as could not fail to ensure his success.
Some years before this, he had visited Hellas as his father’s ambassador at the time of the Peloponnesian war, and had observed the unusual talent displayed by the Hellenes for military 22 enterprise.
He had made many friends among them, whose friendship he still retained, and he was anxious to induce as many Hellene soldiers as possible to enter his service.
The Hellenes had always been fond of adventure, and just at this time there were numbers of them willing and eager to engage themselves to a foreign master who promised good wages, especially when this master was a prince well known to be generous and open-handed, and above all, a lover of Hellas and the Hellenes.
During the long Peloponnesian war they had become accustomed to an unsettled, adventurous camp-life, and now that the war was over, they did not care to return to peaceful pursuits.
But Cyrus could not, without betraying his plans, begin openly to enlist foreign troops.
It was necessary to find a pretext for employing them, and in this he was helped by fortune.
For several hundred years there had been established along the west coast of Asia, numerous flourishing colonies of Ionian Hellenes.
He had removed the garrison, put to death the leaders of the opposition, and banished all suspected persons.
It may seem strange that one satrap should have been able to wage war against another, whilst all the time both continued to be subjects of the Great King.
Other opportunities also offered themselves to Cyrus for increasing the number of Hellene soldiers in his pay.
Shortly afterwards there came to him a Hellene from Thessaly, with a similar request.
In his country, the party of which he was leader found itself hard pushed by the opposing faction, and he also desired to raise an army by means of which he and his friends might again have the upper hand.
He asked Cyrus to let him have as much money as would enable him to hire 2,000 men for three months.
‘I will give you gold enough,’ said Cyrus, ‘to hire 4,000 men for six months, on condition that you prolong the quarrel with your enemies until I send for you.’ Other requests of a similar kind were also granted by Cyrus, always with an intimation that he might require the troops later on for his own service.
And thus he secretly collected a force of 25 Hellenes which he kept employed in other undertakings, but ready to come to him when he should want them.
No feeling of impatience was allowed to urge him on to any rash or premature action.
At last, three years after his return from the court, he judged that the preparations were sufficiently advanced, and that the time had come when he might venture to call in the companies of Hellene mercenaries from their various services, and also assemble his Persian troops.
Even now however he took care not to disclose the real object of the campaign.
These tribes must, he said, be exterminated, in order to maintain the safety of the empire.
But there was one whose sharp eyes had followed all the doings of Cyrus with the close watchfulness of hatred, and who saw clearly through the veil with which he sought to conceal his real purpose.
RUINS OF PERSEPOLIS: BALUSTRADE OF GREAT STAIRCASE.
See page 3, and illustration facing page 2.
Cyrus was commander-in-chief of the whole army, but the two divisions were kept entirely separate, each under its own officers.
The Hellene force, which consisted of 13,000 men, and was afterwards increased by another thousand, was composed of a number of different companies, each commanded by the general who had raised it, and smaller or larger according to his success in getting recruits.
Under the generals were captains, who each had command of a hundred men, and whose numbers consequently varied in each company with the number of the soldiers.
Of the Persian troops, the most brilliant and useful were the cavalry.
The Persians had long been famous for their skill and activity as horsemen; they were also excellent archers, and could draw their long bows at full gallop with as accurate an aim as if they were standing still and undisturbed on solid ground.
There were no cavalry, and in the whole army only forty mounted men, nearly all of whom were officers.
On its inner side the shield had a handle for holding it, and a strap wide enough for a shoulder-belt was attached to it at each end, so that it could be carried over the back.
29 The light infantry were armed quite differently.
And now the great host is well on its way.
Try to imagine the dense, suffocating clouds of dust that must have been raised by the progress of such an army!
Supposing the troops to have marched ten abreast, leaving one pace between each rank, the Barbarian army would have formed a procession more than three miles long, and the Hellene army would have covered about a third of a mile more.
ATHENIAN Even in the Hellene army, which in comparison with the Barbarian force HELMETS.
The tents and utensils were packed with the other luggage in wagons which the slaves drove, or piled on the backs of transport animals which the slaves led.
Still further in the rear were trumpeters, heralds, sacrificing priests, soothsayers and surgeons.
But the Hellene camp-followers were outnumbered a hundred times by the followers of the Barbarian army.
For in addition to the other slaves, the luxurious Persian lords had brought with them their cooks, their bakers, and all manner of personal attendants, besides enormous tents in which to house the many members of their households who accompanied them to the war.
The complete length of the procession formed by the army and its retinue was nothing short of six miles.
This immense multitude, great enough to people a good-sized town, required every day to be fed, either by buying such provisions as could be obtained on the spot, when the country through which they were marching was fruitful and well-peopled, or, when the country was waste and desolate, by falling back upon the stores which they had brought with them.
These stores they were 31 careful to renew whenever there was an opportunity of doing so.
In the Barbarian army, the officers were entrusted with the duty of providing food for the troops, and seeing that each man received every day his due portion of bread, meat and wine.
The captains received twice as much as the private soldiers, and the generals four times as much.
To us such a sum appears a very miserable pittance, but it must be remembered that in those days the value of money was far greater than it is now.
For a time the soldiers had been content to wait, for they had mostly some money of their own to fall back upon.
But gradually their savings were becoming exhausted, and they were obliged to remind Cyrus of his debt.
From this unpleasant position Cyrus was rescued by help that came to him from an unexpected quarter.
The princess had made a long journey in order to meet Cyrus at this point, and she had not come empty-handed.
The large sum of money that she brought with her could not have arrived at a more welcome moment, and it was sufficient to enable Cyrus to distribute four months’ pay to the Hellene soldiers, and yet reserve a considerable sum for the next time of necessity.
One day she expressed a wish that he would draw up his whole army before her, so that she might see it at its full strength.
Accordingly, when they came to some open country suitable for the purpose, Cyrus proceeded to gratify her wish, and ordered the troops to be drawn up in battle array, that he might review them in the company of the princess.
Side by side they passed along the ranks, the princess in a woman’s chariot shaded by curtains that could be drawn close or opened wide at pleasure, Cyrus in a man’s chariot.
First they reviewed the Barbarian army with its endless ranks of cavalry and foot-soldiers.
Then they came to the Hellene troops, who were stationed opposite.
In point of numbers the Hellenes could not compare with the Barbarians, but their appearance was far more imposing, so noble and spirited was their bearing, so proud and firm their step.
The Barbarians were seized with panic, for 35 the charge had every appearance of being in earnest; the princess sprang from her chariot and ran away as fast as she was able; the merchants left their wares, and, like the rest, sought refuge in flight; and meanwhile the Hellenes returned, laughing, to their tents.
When the princess had recovered from her fright, she could not sufficiently praise the gallant bearing of the Hellene troops, and as for Cyrus, his heart bounded with joy at the thought of the impression they would make upon his enemies when they should confront them in the field of battle.
Cyrus desired the Hellenes to plunder their country, and thus gained a double advantage.
As a subject of Artaxerxes the Great King, it would be his duty to prevent Cyrus the rebel from advancing through his country.
It happened however that the presence of the fleet was sufficient, and that it was not necessary to land the soldiers.
The prince had indeed taken possession of the heights commanding the road by which Cyrus must enter, but when he found that not only were the mountains behind him occupied by the Hellene soldiers who had accompanied his wife to her home, but that moreover the troops who were preparing to disembark from the fleet would also be in his rear, he abandoned all idea of defending it.
And thus Cyrus was able to pass over the mountains unhindered, and enter the city of Tarsus without further difficulty.
Cyrus now invited the prince to visit him as a friend.
It seemed indeed, at one time, that at this point the expedition would break down altogether.
For the Hellene troops, on whom Cyrus based all his hopes of conquest, became restive and dissatisfied.
His resistance had certainly been of the feeblest, but still he had made an attempt to stop their passage through his mountains, and had thus declared himself the enemy of Cyrus.
What reason could he have had for taking such a course, were it not that he had received instructions from the Great King to bar the passage of Cyrus, because he was a rebel and was advancing to unseat him from his throne?
HALL OF THE HUNDRED COLUMNS AT PERSEPOLIS—RESTORED.
See page 3, and illustrations facing pages 47 and 62.
For such a mad 39 enterprise as this, they had not been engaged, they said, and they would never have agreed to enter upon it.
The Hellene mercenaries were no mere collection of soldiers of fortune, picked up anywhere, and ready to undertake any service.
On the contrary, they were, for the most part, respectable citizens of Hellas, who had taken service under Cyrus, with the expectation of soon returning to their families laden with spoil.
Every day their murmurs became louder, as their suspicions received additional confirmation, and at Tarsus they made a formal protest, declaring to the officers who had enlisted them, that they were betrayed, and that nothing would induce them to go a step farther.
Almost all the officers were of the same mind, but there was one who thought otherwise.
To Cyrus the ultimate decision of the Hellene troops was of the gravest consequence; in his mind there was no question that the success of his plans depended on his being able to reckon upon their help.
He was a man born to be a soldier.
He personally supervised the provisioning of his men, and this was only one instance of the extreme care with which he attended to every detail.
Nothing that could contribute to the efficiency of his company was too insignificant for his notice.
He had nearly all the qualifications of a great general, but in one respect he failed signally.
For whilst he could always command the admiration and respect of his men, he was quite incapable of gaining their affection.
He had not indeed any desire to do so, for he believed in discipline, and in nothing else.
His orders were strict and severe, and he required instant obedience to the most minute particular.
Yet although he was so careful to exact obedience from others, he himself was but a poor hand at rendering obedience.9 9 See p. 75.
His face was always stern, his brow contracted, his eye restless.
He punished his men constantly, and severely, and often in moments of passion did things that he afterwards sincerely regretted.
The consequence was that 41 when there was no immediate danger impending, his men were often tempted to leave him and take service under a less strict officer.
Nothing ever disturbed his presence of mind.
However threatening the danger, he always met it with perfect calm and self-possession.
He thought he had sufficient influence over them to compel them to do as he wished, but in this he was mistaken.
For when he sternly ordered them to continue the march, and placed himself at their head to lead them on whether they would or no, they took up stones to throw at him, and if he had not quickly made his escape, they would have stoned him to death.
After allowing a little time for the excitement of the soldiers to subside, he sent to summon them to a meeting.
Instead of the stern officer with angry brow and flashing eyes, there stood before 43 them a silent, downcast man, who wept like a child.
Never had they seen him so deeply moved.
I have every cause to be grateful to Cyrus, who has been to me the best of friends, and for this reason it was my earnest hope that with your assistance I might be able to repay his kindness by helping him in his present undertaking.
But you are not willing, and it shall never be said of me that I took the part of a Barbarian against my own countrymen.
We are no longer his mercenaries, and he is no longer our paymaster.
Naturally he is angry with us for deserting him, and as for me, I dare not show myself in his presence, for although he is the best of friends, he is at the same time a relentless enemy, and his power is great.
We shall do well therefore to lose no time in considering how we may return in safety, and above all, how it will be possible, without the help of Cyrus, to obtain food for the march.
Or, if he refuses that, we must ask him to supply us with a guide, who knows the country, to take us back by land.
But immediately another of those who had been previously told what to say, rose to reply.
How can we expect to get food, when the only market is in the camp of the Barbarians?
Do you suppose that after we have broken with Cyrus, he is likely to be so pleasant and obliging as to allow us to take provisions out of his camp for our journey?
And the ships that he has brought here for his own use, is it likely that he will part with them in order that we may get home comfortably?
Even if he were to supply us with ships, I, for one, should expect the ships to be sunk in mid-sea in order that we might be drowned, or if he gave us a guide, I should fear that the guide would lead us into some place where we could not fail to perish.
If he proposes some such enterprise as those on which our countrymen have been employed before, then let us follow him.
If on the other hand it appears likely that his plans will involve us in great toils and dangers, we must 46 ask him either to give us good reasons for advancing, or else consent to our going back.
The members of the deputation were therefore chosen at once, and sent away on their errand.
Cyrus granted the messengers an interview, and agreed to answer their questions.
If he held his ground, he should be punished; but if on the other hand he should save himself by flight, then in that case, it would be necessary to consider further what would have to be done.
38 and 62.
With this answer the messengers returned to their comrades, and the Hellenes declared themselves ready to remain in the service of Cyrus, on condition that he would increase their pay.
10 See p. 31.
The Hellenes were in the position of a man whose path lies through a bog.
So to the Hellenes it seemed that to return promised to be no less dangerous than to advance.
The more clear-sighted were by this time perfectly aware that whatever Cyrus might say, or refrain from saying, his ultimate design was to proclaim war against the Great King.
But the great mass of the soldiers, although they knew in their hearts that this was his real intention, preferred not to think too much about it, and persisted in hoping that after all it might turn out to be something else.
They were at about six hundred yards apart, and stood one behind the other on each side of a little river which flowed from the mountains into the sea, and formed the boundary between the two provinces.
The mountains at this place approached so close to the sea that the walls of the fortresses stretched the whole distance, and the only passage was through gates which opened to admit friends, but remained fast shut when enemies approached.
He had desired the fleet to follow him from Tarsus, and 50 had arranged that it should land two divisions of troops on the coast of Syria, one in the space between the river and the Syrian fortress, the other on the further side of it, so that the fortresses might be attacked on both sides at the same time.
As before however, it proved unnecessary to carry out the plan.
The only harm that he did to Cyrus was to burn the ferry-boats employed for crossing the Euphrates, after making use of them himself.
If the Great King should conquer, he could urge that he had burnt the boats and guarded the walls for a time.
If, on the other hand, Cyrus should prevail, he could say that he had given way at his approach, and had yielded him free passage.
He afterwards carried out this policy by bringing an army to the aid of the Great King five days after the decisive battle between the two brothers had been fought, with a plausible excuse for not having been able to arrive sooner.
In consequence of this, the two officers were so much annoyed that they determined to abandon the expedition.
When their flight became known, the soldiers all expected that Cyrus would send some ships of war in pursuit of them, and that having been overtaken and brought back, they would be severely punished.
But in this they were mistaken, for instead of acting in any such way, Cyrus called together the remaining Hellene officers, and addressed them in an altogether different strain.
I am fully informed as to the route they have taken, and my ships are swifter than theirs.
But for all that, I will not pursue them.
No one shall be able to say of me that I know how to make use of a man as long as he is with me, but that when he wishes to leave me, I lay hands upon him and seize his goods.
Let them go.
They will have to confess that they have treated me worse than I have treated them.
I 52 might detain their wives and children who have been left at home under my protection, but they shall not be deprived of them.
It was now the hot season, which in Syria is infinitely more trying than anything that is ever experienced in our northern climates.
And as the troops were marching southwards, the heat continued to increase in intensity with every day’s march.
To the Hellenes, everything in these tropical regions was new and strange; the vegetation, the animals, the people, the customs, the ways of thinking, all were very different from anything to which they were accustomed at home.
One day they came to a river swarming with great fish.
Here Cyrus called together the Hellene officers, and told them plainly that he was 54 marching towards Babylon to make war upon the Great King, and that they must communicate this information to the soldiers under them, and persuade them to follow him as before.
The news was received by the men, not indeed with surprise, for they had long had their misgivings, but with considerable irritation, and many of them cried out that nothing would induce them to go any farther.
Their anger was directed, not so much against Cyrus, as against their own officers, whom they accused of having known from the first what was intended, and they said that by keeping the matter secret, the officers had involved them in an undertaking which, so far at all events, appeared absolutely hopeless.
What could they do?
Ever since leaving Tarsus they had been marching farther and farther away from their homes, and the reasons which had then decided them to cast in their lot with Cyrus were now even more urgent than before.
Again therefore they allowed themselves to be persuaded, and once more demanded an increase of pay, which was promised by Cyrus to an extent that exceeded their highest hopes.
It was now necessary to find some means of crossing the great river Euphrates, and at first it 55 seemed probable that this would be a task of no small difficulty.
Happily this proved to be a far more simple matter than could have been expected, for when the soldiers stepped into the water, it only reached as far as their breasts, although at this season of the year it was usually very much deeper.
Before it had been decided whether the Hellenes should continue to follow Cyrus or not, an advance party had been sent out to see if the river could be forded, and had reported that it was possible.
His highest aim in life was to amass wealth, and to obtain power.
The tract of country that now lay before them was so waste and barren as to be entirely uninhabited; the most they could expect was to meet from time to time with some stranger journeying through it.
It was necessary therefore to lay in a good store of provisions, and happily the villages on the border of the desert were thriving and well supplied with corn and wine, so that the soldiers were able to load the baggage animals with as much as they could possibly carry.
After this they journeyed for eighteen days through a waste of sand, which lay all around them in broad, low waves, like the sea when it is stirred by a gentle wind.
There were no trees in this desert, but occasional shrubs and plants, which gave forth a delicious scent.
Never in their lives before had many of them seen such a creature as a Hellene soldier.
The wild asses were very different beasts from our donkeys, who are justly accused of being both slow and stupid.
They were remarkable both for swiftness and intelligence, and could not be run down by a single horse, however fleet.
When they found that they were being hunted, they would stand quite still until their pursuer was almost within spear range, and then dash away out of reach, and again stop to rest.
The only way in which the Hellenes could succeed in capturing them was by arranging for several horsemen to take part in the chase.
Having placed themselves at suitable distances apart, the first horseman would drive the wild ass as fast as possible towards the next, who would then take up the chase with his fresh horse, and by the time that two or three horses had been tired out, the wild ass would himself become so exhausted that he was easily caught and killed.
As for the ostriches, it was quite useless to pursue them, for, as is well known, they run very swiftly, and moreover add to their speed by the movement of their wings, which they use like sails.
They furnished moreover the best eating, although the flesh of the wild ass, which resembled venison, was also excellent.
In this desert region, long forced marches were sometimes necessary, in order to reach either a spring of water, or a place where the horses and beasts of burden could find pasture, but even so, many of them died of hunger.
The men also suffered considerably.
59 One day they came in sight of a city where they felt sure that they would be able to obtain abundance of food.
But there was neither boat nor bridge nor any other means of crossing the river, and the stream, at this place, was far too deep for the men to wade through it.
They overcame the difficulty however by means of a contrivance that is still common in the East.
The soldiers then rowed themselves over to the opposite shore in these rafts, and bought in the town supplies of wheat, millet-bread, and palm-wine.
Another time it happened that they had to march along a narrow way, where the wagons sank so deep in the soft clay soil, that the transport animals were unable to drag them through it.
Cyrus commanded his Barbarian soldiers to pull the wagons along.
But they set to work in a surly, lazy manner, and he became so impatient that he drove them away, and turning to his suite, ordered them to put their shoulders to the wheel.
These proud nobles were little accustomed to any kind of exertion, but with the implicit obedience of the Persian subject, they hastened to do the bidding of Cyrus.
Laying aside their gorgeous cloaks, but still dressed in their silk vests and trousers, many of them adorned moreover with golden chains and bracelets, they ran to the place, as if each were eager to prove himself more 60 active and zealous than all the rest, and seizing the dirty wagons, dragged them along until they were well beyond the bad part of the road.
As surely as my Barbarians see you fighting among yourselves, my ruin will be sealed, and yours also.
He was filled with remorse, and both sides laid down their arms and made friends again.
This was a troop of cavalry sent out by the Great King to reconnoitre.
He had however promised so faithfully on the last occasion to be true for the future, that in spite of his previous history, Cyrus did not now feel suspicious, but agreed to let him take with him the thousand horsemen that he asked for.
See page 3, and illustrations facing pages 38 and 47.
It is probable that according to a practice common in Persia, he was buried alive beneath the tent to which he had been taken.
Cyrus had now reached the rich province of Babylonia, where the fruitful soil brought forth food in abundance, being watered by the two great rivers Tigris and Euphrates, which in this part of the country flow at a distance of only a few miles apart.
Sculpture found at Persepolis.
See p. 3.
When the news of the King’s approach reached Cyrus, it was already past midnight, but nevertheless he at once held a review of his whole force, for he thought that a battle might now take place at any time.
After the review, Cyrus addressed the Hellene officers.
See that you prove yourselves worthy of 67 the freedom that you enjoy.
Believe me when I say that I envy you this, and would willingly part with all my treasures to purchase it, and even with far more precious possessions.
Bear yourselves bravely, and if I conquer, I will send you back to your homes with such treasures as will make you envied by all your friends.
If we conquer, I will set my friends over all that land.
I have less fear that I shall not have enough gifts with which to reward my friends, than that I shall not have enough friends on whom to bestow my gifts.
At the same time the officers were anxious that Cyrus should not expose himself, for everything depended on his escaping unhurt, and they urged him to take up a safe position behind the cavalry.
But Cyrus would not hear of such a thing, and in this he was perfectly right.
In our days the general is regarded as the head of the army who has to think for all, and he would be blamed if he were to risk his life without actual necessity.
The Hellenes believed that by examining the entrails, that is to say, the heart, the lungs and the liver of an animal that had been offered in sacrifice, the soothsayer could discover the will of the gods, and foretell the fate of the person for whom the animal had been sacrificed.
11 See note on p. 24.
Another circumstance seemed also to indicate that the King had abandoned all idea of fighting.
In the middle of the day, the army came to a newly made trench of enormous size, twenty feet only from the bank of the Euphrates, whose course they were still following.
The trench was thirty feet wide and eighteen feet deep, and was said to extend for more than forty miles.
It had been recently dug by the command of the Great King, and must have required the toil, night and day, for months, of many thousands of workmen.
To his extreme surprise however, when he reached the dreaded spot not a soul was to be seen behind the trench, and the army was able to pass it unharmed.
There were indeed tracks of men and horses, as if troops had been stationed there, but had retreated.
Cyrus now became convinced that his brother must have given up all intention of fighting, and he began to look forward to obtaining possession of the throne without a struggle.
Hitherto he had 70 been riding on horseback, but now he dismounted and seated himself in his chariot.
The army also took its ease, and marched carelessly.
It was almost time to halt and prepare the midday meal when a scout came riding up at a furious gallop, his horse all covered with foam and heat.
The King was said to be approaching with a vast army, prepared for battle, and it was thought that the battle would take place without delay.
Cyrus was armed in like manner, but on his head he had placed, instead of a helmet, the upright tiara, worn only by the Great King.
It was still some time however before the enemy came in sight.
Not till the afternoon was their approach announced by immense clouds of white dust, soon displaced by a blackness that overspread the horizon.
Presently, as the host came nearer, the long, never-ending lines of spear- 72 points began to flash in the sunlight, and by degrees the different groups could be distinguished, advancing nation by nation.
In front of all came a hundred and fifty scythe-chariots.
These were two-wheeled cars with a number of sharp scythes projecting from the axle-trees on both sides.
They were drawn by a pair of swift horses, and driven as fast as possible into the midst of the enemy’s ranks, that they might cut to pieces everything that crossed their path.
Behind the scythe-chariots came the royal troops, drawn up in the order in which they were to fight.
It was easy enough to see how infinitely greater was the army of the King than that of his brother.
Cyrus had twenty scythe-chariots, but the King had a hundred and fifty.
The army of Cyrus numbered a hundred thousand, besides the Hellene force of thirteen thousand, but the King was said to have with him a million two hundred thousand soldiers.
See p. 4.
As the enemy approached, Cyrus rode a little forward, and surveyed his own troops and those of his brother.
As he approached, he heard a sort of murmur passing through the ranks.
It was thus passed from man to man through all the ranks, and then, for greater safety, it was returned in like manner from the last to the first.
‘What is the watch-word?’ asked Cyrus.
But, judging from the result, he would have done better to follow the instructions of Cyrus.
Contrary to the expectation of 76 Cyrus, they advanced, behind their scythe-chariots, in silence, and with a firm, even step.
At the mere sight of them, the Barbarians turned and fled.
The drivers of the scythe-chariots sprang from their seats and left the horses to go where they pleased.
The horses rushed pell-mell over the plain, some to the right, some to the left; many of them ran back into their own ranks adding to the confusion there; only a few went in the direction of the Hellenes, and these did no harm.
These troops rode rapidly forward against the light-armed Hellene archers.
But they, at the approach of the cavalry, opened their ranks and let them pass through, and then hurled javelins and arrows at them as they went by.
It was only at the end of several hours that the Hellenes returned from the pursuit of the flying Barbarians.
On their way back they met with another detachment of the enemy’s troops, but these 77 they defeated, if possible, even more easily than the first.
But Cyrus had arranged that all the food should be stored in the Barbarian camp, which had been plundered by a body of the enemy’s troops.
The Hellenes were consequently obliged to go supperless to bed, only a few of them having been able to find something to eat.
Yet they were cheered by the thought of the victory they had won, and by the hope that Cyrus had in like manner triumphed over the cowardly Barbarians opposed to him.
They had not indeed heard anything of him, but supposed that he had gone far in pursuit of his foes, and was therefore at a distance from the camp.
(From the Darius Vase at Naples.)
There they found great quantities of arrows, and shields both of wood and wicker-work, as well as empty wagons and overturned chariots.
All of these they piled up in heaps, and kindled therewith several fires in which they cooked the food, holding it in the flame on their spear-points, and so appeased 78 their hunger for that day.
They wondered however that Cyrus neither came, nor sent them word of what had happened since they had left him to pursue the Barbarians, and resolved to set out in search of him.
All those around him shared his expectation, and the officers of the body-guard sprang from their horses and threw themselves in the dust before him, as if he were already the Great King.
For a moment he waited to see what the enemy would do.
Then, observing that the troops of Artaxerxes were making a movement as if to wheel round and attack him in the rear, he hesitated no longer, but dashed forward with his six hundred chosen companions towards the place where the King was stationed with his guard of six thousand horse.
With his own hand Cyrus killed the leader of the guard, and so irresistible was the charge, that the ranks of the enemy were broken through in a moment, and driven right and left before the cavalry of Cyrus, who pursued them eagerly.
At the same moment he caught sight of his 79 hated brother, the troops in front of the King having been put to flight, and on seeing him, lost all command of himself.
Mad with passion he galloped up to him, crying out, ‘I see the man!’ and hurling his javelin, hit him in the breast, inflicting a wound which however was but slight, the course of the javelin having been checked by the coat of mail worn by the King.
It was a mortal wound, and falling from his horse to the ground, he died immediately.
All his table-companions fell around him; the most faithful of all leaped from his horse and threw himself upon the corpse, where he was either killed by the enemy, or, as some say, fell upon his own sword.
The head and right hand of Cyrus were cut off by command of Artaxerxes, and carried through the ranks on the point of a long spear.
But for the javelin thrust which ended the life of Cyrus, the future history of Persia might have been very different.
Artaxerxes, the indolent, was not the man to save his country.
But had Cyrus, the brave, wise, and generous Cyrus, become King, he might have been able, not only to arrest the ruin, but even to restore the empire to 80 something of its former greatness.
For since the time of Cyrus I., the throne of Persia had never been occupied by a man so worthy and so able to govern a great nation as was his young namesake.
TOMB OF DARIUS I.
See page 5.
Hitherto Cyrus, who had studied in advance every mile of the road, had been their leader, and had always brought them by the best way.
Now they found themselves a thousand miles distant from their home, without the slightest knowledge of the countries through which they would have to pass.
Hitherto they had been free from all care with regard to their daily food, for the liberal pay which they had received from Cyrus had enabled them to supply their wants without difficulty.
Now they had nothing to fall back upon but their savings, and when these were spent, they would be reduced to the most extreme distress.
They were, in fact, like men lost in some primeval forest, surrounded by every kind of danger, 82 with no human being to help them, no landmark to point out the way, but nevertheless struggling to escape from among its gloomy shades.
Fortunately for the Hellenes, there was among them one man at least, who, even in the most sudden reverses of fortune, never lost his presence of mind.
To him therefore the Hellenes sent messengers to say that if he would like to fight for the throne on his own account, they would be willing to help him, as they had helped Cyrus.
They asked to see the generals, and demanded, in the name of the Great King, that the Hellenes should give up their arms, and throw themselves upon his mercy.
The generals decided to do so, and although it was already dark, they set out at once for the place where he was encamped, and reached it about midnight.
According to the Persian custom, a bull, a wolf, a wild boar, and a ram were slaughtered, and their blood was mingled in the hollow of a shield, into which the Hellene officers dipped their swords and the Barbarian officers their lances.
Then they swore on both sides to help one another in every difficulty.
Neither party was to desert the other, the Barbarians were to act as guides to the Hellenes, according to the best of their knowledge, and in all emergencies they were to stand by one another as true friends.
I think I can show you a better way, which though longer, goes through fruitful districts.
The enemy did not however appear in sight, and the Hellenes reached the villages for which they were bound, without any fighting.
But on arriving at the place, they found that the King’s soldiers had been there, and had destroyed everything; they had not even stopped short of burning down the houses.
The first-comers were able to make themselves fairly comfortable, but the rear, who did not get in till after dark, were obliged to lie down upon the bare ground, without food or shelter.
The discomfort gave rise to quarrels among the soldiers, and there was so much noise and confusion that those at a distance were seized with panic, thinking that the enemy had surprised them in the darkness.
12 A talent was equal to 243l.
He did not now attempt to demand that they should give up their arms, but proposed to make a treaty with them.
This done, he went forward with the other generals to receive the heralds, and asked, rather curtly, what they wanted.
They brought with them guides, and said that in case the Hellenes were willing to agree to a truce, they were to conduct them to a place where food could be obtained.
But nevertheless they again kept the heralds waiting for some time, so that it might appear as if it had been a good while before they could make up their minds to agree to the King’s proposals.
See page 3.
At last the decision was communicated to the heralds, and the two armies set out under the direction of the King’s guides, marching by a road which was one of the very worst that the 89 Hellenes had ever seen.
The district through which they were passing was part of the province of Babylonia, and was crossed in all directions by an infinite number of canals and ditches which kept the country well watered, and made it abundantly fruitful.
At this time of year they were not usually full of water, but in order to make the march as difficult as possible for the Hellenes, the Persians had opened all the sluices.
The Barbarians had been anxious to give the Hellenes a practical example of the endless difficulties that they might expect to meet with in the course of their retreat.
In many places fallen trunks of date-palms lay ready to hand, and where these did not suffice, others were quickly felled.
All soldiers under the age of thirty years were ordered to the work, in order that it might be carried through as fast as possible.
At last the toil was over, and the Hellenes reached some villages where a little money could 90 buy food in abundance.
The food, moreover, was as good as it was plentiful.
Delicious too was the sweet juice of the date-palm, but unhappily it was apt to give head-ache.
In this district the Hellene army encamped, together with their Barbarian allies.
By so doing I hope not only to gain your gratitude, but also that of all Hellas.
The King knows and values the services I have rendered him.
I was the first to bring him news of the revolt of Cyrus, and the only one who did not fly before you in the battle.
He has promised me therefore to grant my request on your behalf, but at the same time he desires me to ask you for what reason you have taken the field against him.
But when he who had shown us much kindness was in need of our help, we should have been shamed before gods and men had we then deserted him.
Cyrus is now dead, and we have no further quarrel with the King, nor any wish to injure his subjects.
If we are allowed to go on our way in peace, we will return quietly to our home, and for any kindness that we may receive we shall prove ourselves grateful.
The King’s party were anxious to sow dissension between the allies, in order that the Hellenes might be utterly without friends.
‘Why do we remain here?’ they asked him.
Who will then give us guides to lead us through this unknown land?
What other rivers may lie before us, I know not, but in any case there is the broad Euphrates, which it would be impossible to cross if an enemy were to dispute our way.
The double camp was broken up, and in five days they reached the Tigris, which was crossed by a bridge of boats.
It gave additional zest to his revenge that her villages should be plundered by the Hellenes for whom Cyrus had always shown such marked partiality.
They found them well-stocked with food, and were able to take away a great number of sheep, and a quantity of barley.
It was one of the provisions of the treaty that the Hellenes should be supplied with food; this they were able to procure by buying it in the market established in the Barbarian camp.
At night the two camps were pitched at a distance of two or three miles apart.
The mutual distrust resulted in constant quarrels, and if the soldiers from both armies were cutting wood in the same forest, or gathering grass from the same fields, there was sure to be a fight.
He sent word therefore that he wished to speak with him.
These mutual suspicions may easily lead to actual war, and therefore I am anxious to convince you that you have no reason to doubt us.
In what darkness could he hide himself from them?
What fortress would protect him, were it ever so strong?
For to the gods all things are subject, and they have power over all, everywhere alike.
Without you our way is shrouded in shades of night, for we know not your land.
But with your good-will every way is open to us, every river can be crossed, we shall be among friends, and food will not fail.
If we were mad enough to think of taking your life, we should be destroying our best friend, and should expose ourselves to the fury of the Great King who would hasten to avenge your death.
But if we Hellenes are your friends, and fight as comrades by your side, what people can hope to withstand you?
Of such a plan the selfish Menon13 was certainly capable, and it afterwards appeared that he was not entirely innocent of intrigues with the Persians.
But now, on the other hand, have we not long since given you proofs of our sincerity?
Could I not seize the mountains to block your way?
Or prevent you from crossing a river?
Why have I not done this?
Because I love the Hellenes, and hope, by means of their friendship, to attain my highest wish.
‘The Great King,’ he added, ‘is the only one who may wear the tiara upright upon his head, but with your help, another may wear it upright in his heart.’ By these mysterious words he meant to signify that he aspired to fight himself for the throne, 99 as Cyrus had done.
All difficulties appeared now to have been smoothed away.
They were accompanied by two hundred soldiers who wished to buy provisions in the Barbarian camp, but all were unarmed, for it was to be a friendly meeting.
Some hours passed by, and the Hellenes did not return.
Those who were left behind began to look out anxiously for their comrades, but they could see nothing but a number of Persian horsemen galloping about separately in all directions upon the heath, which lay between the two camps.
They did not understand what this could mean, but soon the horrible explanation was 101 brought to them by a badly-wounded Hellene, who made his way back to the camp as fast as he was able, and told them what had happened.
Presently a blood-red flag was hoisted above the tent, and at this signal, the Barbarians fell upon the captains and the two hundred soldiers who were all unarmed, and massacred them.
Of the fate of the generals who had gone within the tent, the wounded man knew nothing.
On hearing this terrible news, the Hellenes rushed to seize their arms, for they naturally expected an immediate attack.
But one of the generals answered with spirit befitting the occasion.
102 The night that followed was a terrible one for the Hellenes.
If the treacherous Barbarians were bent upon their destruction, what was to hinder them from taking them by surprise again and again, until at last they were reduced to the choice of death or slavery?
Throughout the whole camp reigned discouragement, despondency, even despair.
Only a few of the soldiers could rouse themselves to take food or kindle a fire.
Wherever they chanced to be, they threw themselves down upon the ground, and passed a sleepless night, kept awake by brooding care for what the next day might bring forth, and for sick longing for their country, their parents, their wives, their children, whom they feared they should never see again.
See p. 2.
Through the medium of her physician, she was able to supply him with many comforts in his prison, and she even hoped that her influence with 104 Artaxerxes would prevail to save his life.
Mother-in-law and daughter-in-law had long been consumed by mutual jealousy and hatred, and this last struggle filled the cup to overflowing.
As a punishment for the murder, she was banished for a time from Babylon.
And his subsequent death shows that, cunning as he was, he was not cunning enough to provide against all contingencies.
As he was unable to overcome it by fair fighting, he determined to have recourse to treachery, and in order to carry out his purpose, sent his son to the city.
The townsmen let him in, and after having seen him, time after time, fighting bravely in their ranks, they gave him their full confidence, and finally chose him to be their general-in-chief.
So far he had succeeded, but he did not know what was the next thing to be done, and therefore sent a trusted slave to ask his father’s advice.
The king took the slave into his garden, where there was a bed of poppies in full bloom, and walking up and down beside the bed, he struck off the heads of the tallest poppies, one by one.
Then he said to the slave, ‘Go back and tell my son what 106 you have seen.’ The slave did not know how this could be an answer to the question that had been asked, but when he had carefully described to his master what he had seen, the son understood very well what it meant.
One after another, he impeached in turn all the chief men of the city upon some frivolous pretext or other, and he did it so cleverly that their fellow-townsmen believed them to be traitors, and condemned them either to death or banishment.
When the city had been deprived of all its best men, it was easy enough for him to give it up into the hands of his father.
Xenophon was at this time in the full prime of life, being about forty years old.
He had been born and brought up at Athens, and in his youth astonished every one by his remarkable beauty, which was of such a kind that it seemed to indicate rare qualities of heart and mind.
The wise Socrates met him one day by chance, and was so much attracted by his appearance that he invited 107 him to join the company of his friends.
Socrates had a great number of friends, both young and old, with whom he used every day to discuss all manner of questions, in order that he might inspire them with a love of everything that was true and noble and good.
It is said that some years afterwards, when Xenophon was about thirty years of age, Socrates had once the opportunity of saving him from a great danger.
In the bustle and confusion, Xenophon fell wounded from his horse, and must either have been trodden to death by his countrymen, or else killed by the enemy, had not Socrates perceived his danger, and rushed to help him, carrying him in his strong arms until he was far away from the place of battle.
But his fate led him in another direction.
This commission he agreed to accept.
He considered it sufficient if the superior officer praised those who did their duty, and simply withheld his praise from those who shirked it.
And so it came to pass, that he had more fear of being irksome to his men than they had of incurring his displeasure, and that he took more pains to avoid annoying them than they took to do their duty.
The good soldiers were devoted to him, but the bad ones did not scruple to be inattentive to his orders, because they knew that he was easy-going.
He said that he would introduce him to Cyrus, and that Xenophon would never repent of accepting the invitation, and he added that he himself loved Cyrus even more than he loved his home.
Socrates doubted whether it would be well for Xenophon to do as his friend wished, for some years before, in the time of the Peloponnesian war between the Athenians and the Spartans, Cyrus had taken the part of the Spartans against the Athenians, and had 109 helped them with large sums of money.
He thought therefore that the Athenians might take it ill if Xenophon were to ally himself with their former enemy.
It would be best, he said, to go to the oracle at Delphi, and ask counsel of the god.
During the night that followed that ill-fated day, he could not sleep.
He had thrown himself upon the ground, overcome with grief and anxiety, but could get no rest.
At last however he fell into a troubled slumber, and dreamt that it was thundering and lightning, and that his father’s house was struck by the lightning and burst into flames.
He started up in horror, but found that it was a dream.
Then, being a pious man who believed that every event was brought about by the direct intervention of the gods, he began to consider what the dream could mean, for he doubted not that it was sent to him as a sign from Zeus, the Ruler of all.
But whether it betokened good or evil fortune, he could not tell.
Shaking off his despondency, he began to reason with himself.
The night creeps on apace.
All are lying prone, as if this were a time for inaction and giving way to despair.
For what should I wait, or for whom?
From the Great King we can look for nothing but fury and vengeance, for we came hither to unseat him from his throne.
The gods will therefore be on our side.
Let us therefore not delay, but at once put our hands to the work.
On us everything depends, for the soldiers will follow our lead.
This man said that it was 112 madness to dream of any other deliverance than that which they might hope to gain by throwing themselves upon the mercy of the Great King, and began to reckon up all the hardships that lay before them.
But Xenophon cut him short.
When the King demanded our arms, and we refused to give them up and began to march away, was he not then most anxious to enter into a treaty with us?
And is it not in consequence of having trusted in his promises that we have fallen into this present distress?
Ye captains, this man has not the mind of a Hellene, he is a disgrace to our brave Hellas.
This he did, and then went on to propose immediate action.
For through order and discipline an army is strong; slackness and disorder are the harbingers of defeat.
Let us first agree among ourselves who are the best men to fill the vacant places, and then call together the soldiers to confirm our decision.
It will be well also to speak to them some words of encouragement, for it is not numbers that ensure victory, but confidence and courage.
He who in war thinks only of saving his life is the most likely to lose it, and his death is the death of a coward.
By this time it was almost daybreak, and a herald was sent round the camp to summon all the soldiers to a general meeting, the precaution being meanwhile taken of placing outposts at regular intervals outside the camp, with instructions to bring in news at once, if they should perceive any sign of the enemy’s approach.
When he was asked to speak, he addressed them in a clear, penetrating voice that all could hear.
From henceforth we must regard them, not as allies, but as enemies, and fight to avenge the murder of our comrades.
At this moment it chanced that one of the soldiers sneezed loudly.
Nothing could have been more fortunate, for the Hellenes believed that a sneeze was a sign sent by the gods to confirm the word that had just been spoken.
The proposal was accepted with acclamation, and all prayed together, and sang a hymn of praise.
115 After this, Xenophon continued to speak.
We have been true to the oath sworn in the name of the gods, while the Barbarians have perjured themselves.
The gods will not allow them to go unpunished; their anger will be turned against our enemies, and their help will be with us.
They can humble the mighty and exalt the weak, and can, if they will, save us out of our distress.
In the midst of his empire they live as free men, and have many large and flourishing cities.
Think of our forefathers, and of the world-famed victories which they won.
The Persians came with a mighty army to lay Athens in the dust, but the little band of Athenians met them with undaunted courage, and drove them back in disgraceful flight.
After that came Xerxes with an army, countless as the sand of the sea.
And what happened to him?
Our forefathers overcame that army by sea and by land, and the glorious results of their victories continue to this very day.
It is but a short time since you confronted the descendants of those same Barbarians.
And at that time you were fighting for Cyrus, a stranger, to set him upon the throne.
With how much greater zeal will you fight now, when the battle is for your own salvation!
Our new chiefs must be even more vigilant and cautious than those we have lost; the soldiers must be more strictly obedient than hitherto.
The Barbarians will pursue us like cowardly curs, who run after a man, snapping at his heels.
If he turns round upon them, they 117 immediately run away, but as soon as he continues to go forward, they are after him again as before.
If after a time we wish to make any alteration, it will always be easy to change.
All were silent.
‘Hold up hands then, those who agree to my plan,’ cried Xenophon.
Every hand was raised, and the proposal was accordingly carried.
There was another matter to which Xenophon was anxious to call the attention of his comrades.
He knew how serious a disadvantage it is to an army in the field to be encumbered with a quantity of baggage, and advised that everything not absolutely needed for the march should be burnt.
Only conquerors can hold their own, and take the spoil of the vanquished.
If any of them had possessions which they themselves did not need, but which others lacked, they gave them to their comrades.
Then a great bonfire was lighted, and into it were cast all the rest of the things, together with the tents and the wagons.
Having arrived within speaking distance, Mithridates called out to the generals to come forward and hear what he had to say.
Then he proceeded to address them in an apparently friendly manner.
They refused therefore to listen to him any longer, and Mithridates was obliged to ride away without having succeeded in his mission.
And as some Persians had already succeeded in making their way into the camp, and had induced one of the captains to desert with twenty of his men, they proceeded to pass a resolution, that in future there was to be open war with the Persians, and that they would receive no more ambassadors coming in the name of the Great King.
They then returned to their interrupted meal, and when this was over, set out upon the march, forming themselves, as already agreed upon, in a hollow square.
As soon however as they had come within arrow range, they opened fire, and the Hellenes found themselves suddenly beset with a storm of arrows and darts, which wounded many of them.
For a time Xenophon pursued his way without taking any notice, for he was anxious not to delay the progress of the march, but finding that the shots came thicker and thicker, he called a halt, 121 and commanded the rear-guard to charge the enemy.
This occurred so often that it was late in the day before they reached the villages where they were to halt, although the distance was little more than three miles.
Under such circumstances the struggle must always be unequal, with the disadvantage on our side.
Their shots carry moreover twice as far as those of the Persians, for instead of great stones the size of a fist, they use little bullets of lead.
I propose that we find out if any of these men possess slings, or know how to make new slings.
Fortunately we have horses.
The Hellenes remained one more day in the villages, and then, on the third morning, set out at earliest dawn to continue their march.
There lay before them a wooded ravine which it would be difficult to go through in fighting order, and they were anxious to get as far beyond it as possible, 123 before they should be overtaken by the Persians.
The early start met with its due reward, for the Hellenes were already a good distance beyond the ravine when Mithridates again appeared, this time with a much larger force than before.
But now they were prepared for him.
Then the trumpets sounded, and the newly formed cavalry and light infantry charged forward upon the advancing foe.
At this wholly unexpected attack, the Barbarians were seized with panic, and fled precipitately.
But on reaching the ravine, their flight was impeded by the trees and bushes, and many of them were killed by the Hellene cavalry who came after them in full pursuit.
From this time they saw no more of Mithridates.
His place was now to be taken by a still more powerful enemy.
Keeping the main body of his army in the background, he brought to the front his numerous companies of light infantry, and commanded them to make use of their slings and bows.
Before retiring from the ground where the skirmish had taken place, the Hellenes were careful to collect all the bows and arrows that had belonged to the dead Persians.
They were so fortunate moreover as to find in these same villages a store of excellent bow-strings, and a quantity of lead, which they at once set to work to make into bullets.
After resting for one whole day, they continued their march, and now the road lay through a flat plain.
Sometimes for instance the road would narrow considerably, or a bridge would have to be crossed, and then it was found that the plan of marching in the form of a square had many drawbacks for a retreating army with the enemy in pursuit.
The generals agreed that some new plan must be devised to meet the difficulty, and they decided to form six small companies, each consisting of a hundred men, and subdivided into half and quarter companies, each with its own officer.
When the square had to be compressed for passing over a bridge or narrow road, these companies fell out of their places in the wings, and 126 wheeled round to the back of the rear, returning again to the wings when the square widened out again.
By this means disorder was prevented, and for the next four days the Hellenes continued their way with very little loss.
On the fifth day they came to the end of the flat country.
They had now to cross a range of hills, and at this they rejoiced, thinking that the hilly ground would be disadvantageous for the Persian cavalry.
But this day was destined to be the most disastrous of any they had yet known.
Seeing in the distance a palace with several villages clustering round it, they decided to make for it.
The road lay over hilly ground, and they had already climbed the first hill when they received an unexpected check.
As they descended the farther side, the enemy appeared upon the height they had just left, and discharged a volley of stones and arrows upon the light-armed infantry, killing and wounding many of them.
At the second hill, the same thing happened again, and now the Persian cavalry were also brought into play, and directed to chase the Hellenes at full speed down the steep descent.
This they 127 did, but only when they had been driven to their work with whips.
Calling a short halt, the generals rapidly took counsel together, and formed a plan by which the light infantry could be placed beyond the reach of danger, and at the same time give assistance to their comrades.
Parallel with the range of hills over which the Hellenes were making their way, was a range of mountains, from whence the road along the hills could be overlooked.
As soon as the Persians perceived this device, they gave up the pursuit.
The disadvantage was now on their side, and they were afraid of being cut off from the main body of their army.
They were carefully tended by the eight surgeons who accompanied the Hellene force, and for three days the army rested quietly in the villages.
This was chiefly on account of the sick, but partly also because they found there great stores of wheat, 128 barley, and wine, of which they took possession without paying for them, because they were now at war, and in the enemy’s country.
The wagons in which the sick might have journeyed had been burnt when they had declared war against the Great King.
The generals were of opinion that in this crippled condition they were no match for the enemy in the open field, and that it would be useless to attempt to march and fight at the same time, as hitherto.
So when they found that the Persians were coming against them, they determined to halt at the first village they should reach, and place the wounded in safety, while the able-bodied could easily put the Persians to flight from under the cover of the huts.
Once routed, they knew that the Persians would give them no more trouble that night, for they were so terribly afraid of being surprised by the Hellenes that they always pitched their camp at least six miles away from them.
130 This plan was carried out, and the Persians were driven back from the village.
Then, as soon as they were out of sight, the Hellenes made a fresh start, and marched on for another six miles before encamping for the night, so that the next day when they began their march, they had twelve miles start of the enemy.
The Satrap had the great advantage of being able to get every information as to the districts through which they were marching, and knowing that the flat plain that they had been traversing ever since the last skirmish would now be succeeded by mountainous country, he sent forward a detachment of his troops to get in advance of the Hellenes by taking another road, and seize a hill overlooking the way by which they must pass.
Xenophon looked long and carefully at the height occupied by the Persians, and saw that from the very top of the mountain above it there was a road leading down to the place.
There is not a moment to lose.
‘Very well then,’ answered Xenophon, ‘I will climb the mountain, for I am the younger.’ He set off at once with the troops assigned to him, and for a time they were concealed from the enemy by the trees and bushes which clothed the hillside.
But as soon as the Persians perceived their intention, they also made for the higher peak, hoping to reach it before the Hellenes.
And now began a race, Hellenes and Persians climbing each by a different road, and watching eagerly the progress of the other party.
Now one side would seem to have the advantage and now the other, while all the time incessant shouts from below stimulated their efforts, for on both sides it was well known how much depended on the issue.
Xenophon rode on horseback beside his men, urging them to do their utmost.
To this Xenophon consented, and remounting his horse, he rode as long as it was possible to do so, but soon the road became so bad that he was obliged to dismount and climb on foot for the rest of the way.
The Persians were but a very little distance from the crest of the mountain when the first Hellenes reached it.
The advantage was now with them, and they at once charged.
Back fled the Persians by any path they could find, and soon there was no longer a trace either of the detachment that had been posted on the hill, or of the main army advancing along the plain.
The road was free, and a short march brought the Hellenes to some villages where they could rest after the fatigues of the day.
There they found abundance of food, and were able moreover to take as spoil a number of cows and other animals, for it happened, fortunately for the Hellenes, that a great number were just then collected at that place in order to be ferried across the Tigris.
Since his shameful betrayal of their generals, he had for twenty days been following in their track, as a pack of hounds pursues a noble stag, who 133 nevertheless saves himself by his courage and endurance.
Taking into consideration the enormous difference in point of numbers, the loss sustained by the Hellenes during these twenty days was very slight.
XXVIII 134 THE RIVER OR THE MOUNTAINS?
Difficulties of another and more serious kind still lay before them, and the question of their further route caused the generals great anxiety.
The limit of this mountain district was the river Tigris, and the only way of avoiding it was by crossing the Tigris.
But the river was far too deep and broad to be forded, and they had no other means of crossing.
When they tried to measure its depth with their long spears, they could not reach the bottom, even close to the shore.
Then he went on to explain his plan.
All these animals must give me their skins, for I shall want two thousand leather bags.
I shall also want all the straps used for the baggage animals.
The skins must be inflated, and tied up securely.
I shall then attach one of the straps to either end of each skin so that it can be fastened to the next one, and steady it in the water with large stones let down from the under side to serve as anchors.
When the skins are all in their places and fastened together, I shall cover them thoroughly with earth and brushwood to prevent them from being slippery, and the bridge will be complete.
The crossing of the river was thus out of the question, and there remained nothing but the road over the mountains, although they knew not whither it led.
They were like mariners driven out of their course by violent storms, who neither know where they are, nor what is before, or behind, or on either side of them.
But in those days no such thing had ever been heard of.
Once the Great King had sent into their country an army of 120,000 men, to subdue them, but of all that great host not one had ever seen his home again.
They seldom risked coming to close quarters with their enemies, but contented themselves with shooting from a distance at any intruders who might be rash enough to enter their country.
This method of warfare was the more effective as they had considerable skill as marksmen, and were beyond the possibility of pursuit.
Their bows and arrows were unusually large, the bow measuring nearly three cubits in length, and the arrows more than two cubits.
In order to shoot, they rested the lower end of the bow on the ground, and placed one foot upon it; then, drawing back the string as far as it would go, they 138 discharged the arrow with such force that it was able to pierce right through a leather jerkin, and penetrate deep into the flesh beneath.
With this barbarous people the Hellenes were most anxious to remain at peace, and they desired nothing better than to be allowed to pass quietly through the country, paying for everything that they might be obliged to take, in order to supply themselves with food.
Great was the 139 astonishment of the inhabitants at the unexpected appearance of the Hellene soldiers.
They came pouring out of their houses, and although the Hellenes made signs of friendliness, and called out that they had no wish to injure them, they would not stop to listen, but fled away into the mountains with their wives and children.
The road was narrow, and the long line of combatants and camp-followers could make but slow progress.
Some of them were killed, and others wounded, with stones and arrows.
There was no one from whom to buy, and so they were obliged to help themselves.
During the night they were left undisturbed, but great bonfires could be seen flaming away upon the tops of the mountains.
As on the occasion when they had declared war against the Great King, they determined to leave behind everything that could possibly be spared.
All prisoners were set free, and of the transport animals they retained only such of the strongest as were quite indispensable.
By this means it became possible to reduce the quantity of provisions to be carried, and moreover the men who had been formerly employed in attending to the discarded animals could now be added to the fighting force.
The soldiers were informed of the decision arrived at, and desired to be ready for a fresh start immediately after the morning meal.
Then the generals placed themselves at a narrow part of the road, and as the army marched past, took away from the men anything that they might have tried to carry off in defiance of the order.
In consequence of this, several of them, he said, had fallen, amongst whom were two of the best, and moreover it had been impossible to rescue their bodies.
If nothing else could be done, the corpse must at least be solemnly sprinkled with earth in the name of the gods, or the shade of the dead man would find no rest in the Lower World.
I hoped that by hurrying we might be able to seize this pass before the enemy should occupy it, but unhappily they have reached it first.
This gave us the opportunity of doing them an injury, and also of resting ourselves for a moment, for we were 143 quite out of breath.
Although it was evident that he could, if he chose, give the information of which the Hellenes were in such pressing need, he persisted in saying that there was no other road.
It was absolutely essential to find another road, the fate of the whole army depended on it, and in order to strike terror into the heart of the second man, they hanged his comrade before his eyes.
My country-man would not betray the secret, because his daughter lives near it, with her husband.
For the sake of the general good it is often necessary to be cruel.
But still we cannot help regretting the fate of the brave man who for the love of his daughter gave 144 himself over to death.
About two thousand men at once offered their services, of whom some were officers and others private soldiers.
On hearing the signal, a part of the army left below was to ascend as rapidly as possible by the first road, and join them at the pass.
Had the Hellenes entered the ravine, not one of them would have escaped alive.
But they had taken good care to keep well beyond the range of the deadly hail, only, from time to time, one or other of the captains would show himself from among the bushes on either side of the ravine, as if he were looking for some other way of getting past.
Then they sat down and spent the remainder of the night in front of the fires that had been kindled by the enemy, which, as it was excessively cold, they looked upon as a piece of great good 146 fortune.
Then the trumpets gave the signal that had been agreed upon, and the Hellenes charged.
The enemy saw that it was of no use to attempt to maintain their position, and fled without a struggle, only a few of them being killed.
It was excessively steep and narrow, and in their eagerness to reach the top, many of the men climbed as best they could over places where there was no path, drawing one another up with the help of their spears.
Two-thirds of the army had now reached the pass.
But for the rest there was still in store a long day of toil and fighting before they could arrive at the same spot.
The rear had not proceeded far when they came in sight of a peak overlooking the road, and discovered that it was occupied by the enemy.
The volunteers had indeed thought that they had freed the road by driving the enemy from their camp-fires on the previous evening, but this proved not to be the case.
He did not want them to be forced to make a desperate stand, for he was anxious not to be delayed by having to stop and fight.
A new difficulty however now presented itself, for from this peak a second came into sight, occupied just in the same manner.
This would have to be fought for as the first had been, and moreover it would be necessary to leave a guard on the first peak to prevent the enemy from returning to it.
This was captured with the same toil and the same success as the first, but now a third came into view which had to be taken in like manner.
Xenophon accordingly set forward to attack it, but in this case the task was easier than before, for the enemy abandoned the peak before the Hellenes arrived at it, so that it could be climbed without hindrance or danger.
So far all had gone well, but now from the rear came disastrous news.
The men left in charge of the first peak had been surprised and defeated by the enemy, who had killed almost all of them, 149 including two out of the three captains.
A few only had saved their lives by making a desperate leap from the rocks into the road below.
Xenophon himself was at one time in great peril.
In climbing one of the mountains, his shield-bearer became so frightened at the shower of stones and arrows pouring down from above, that he turned and fled, taking the shield with him.
Their loss that day had been very severe, and unhappily it had been impossible to carry off the dead.
To this they agreed, and the Hellenes had the satisfaction of burying their comrades with the customary rites.
It was however at no small cost that they had effected this exchange, for by so doing they had 150 lost the services of the only man who could pilot them through this wild and unknown land.
They were now without a guide, and from the nature of the country, no extensive view could anywhere be gained.
They could but direct their course by the sun and stars, and they decided to continue marching northwards towards the source of the Tigris.
The news that the Hellenes were approaching had reached them, and on the further side of the river, Persian cavalry were already keeping guard along the shore.
Infantry also were posted beyond, in the more hilly part of the country.
Notwithstanding this, however, since there was no way of getting round the river, the Hellenes were determined, if possible, to wade through it, in defiance of the Persian troops.
But on stepping into the river, they found that the water was breast deep, and that the stream had a very rapid current, which swept to one side the great shields they carried to protect them in front, so that they were exposed to the arrows and darts of the enemy.
They could indeed, by lifting the shields out of the water and holding them above their heads, protect themselves to some extent, 152 but not sufficiently to be out of danger.
Besides this, the ground at the bottom of the river was strewn with great stones, so slippery that they could not get any certain footing, and were in constant danger of falling.
The position was most embarrassing, and they could not tell what to do for the best.
Being urgently in need of rest, they resolved to remain where they were for that day, and encamp at night in the same place as on the previous evening.
That night Xenophon had a dream.
He thought that he was bound with fetters, but suddenly the fetters fell off, and he could move his limbs freely.
They had not however long to wait, for whilst they were still eating their breakfast, two young soldiers came running into the camp to tell the generals of a discovery that they had made.
In token of thankfulness they at once offered as a libation the wine of which they had been drinking, pouring it out upon the ground.
And for each of the two youths they filled also a cup of wine, that they too might pour it out to the gods, and be thankful.
The other generals were summoned, and all took counsel together as to the arrangements to be made for crossing the river with the least possible loss, in spite of the enemy in front and the enemy in the rear.
After some consideration the generals decided upon a plan.
Guided by the two youths, the whole Hellene army marched up the river bank towards the ford, which was about half a mile from the place where they had pitched their camp.
But meanwhile Xenophon and his men hurried back as fast as possible to the former place, as if they intended crossing there; and this movement had the effect that had been aimed at by the generals in making their plan.
The infantry however made no better stand than the other troops, for when they saw that the cavalry had fled, they followed the example of their comrades, and ran away also.
To enable these remaining troops to cross in safety was the last, and by no means the easiest task of the day.
Until the greater part of the men were in the water, they did not venture down from their mountains, but as soon as they saw that comparatively few of them were left on the bank, they dashed forward, as if they wished to teach the Hellenes the truth of the proverb that the last man is bitten by the dog.
But Xenophon was prepared to receive them.
Before taking any notice, he allowed them to come almost within close quarters.
Their arrows were even whirring already through the air when he gave a signal with the trumpet.
In this country there were no dangerous mountains, such as those they had just left, but here they had to contend against difficulties of another kind.
The greater part of the country was 5,000 feet above the sea level, and in consequence of this, the winters were very long and cold, and the summers very short.
In June the corn began to sprout.
In September the harvest was gathered, and then the winter set in.
It was now December, and the Hellenes were soon to experience the intense cold of an Armenian winter.
These marches occupied six days, and it mostly chanced that in the evening they found themselves near villages where they could shelter for the night.
He rode forward towards the Hellene army, and demanded speech of the generals, announcing 158 that he was desirous of entering into a treaty with them.
They were to promise that they would neither burn the villages nor do violence to the inhabitants, but they were at liberty to take any provisions that they might require; and he, for his part, would undertake not to molest them in any way.
A SATRAP RECEIVING DEPUTIES.
This was all that could be desired, and the generals agreed to conclude the treaty on the terms proposed.
But their previous experience of the Persians had not been such as to induce them to place much confidence in any promises they might make, and they judged that it was best, notwithstanding the treaty, to remain on their guard.
During the night that followed, the Hellenes were encamped beneath the open sky, when they were overtaken by the first fall of snow.
The generals decided therefore that it was too unsafe to break up the army by allowing the soldiers to scatter themselves over various villages, and on the next night again camped out in the open, where all could be together.
The frost too was very severe, and the transport horses were so benumbed that they could hardly raise their limbs from the ground.
The soldiers remained lying beneath the snow, for they found it warmer to be thus covered up, as if with a soft blanket, but Xenophon roused himself, and taking an axe, began to cut wood, partly for the sake of getting warm, partly in order to make a fire.
After a night of such severity, the generals were afraid to risk spending another in the open air, and decided that at all hazards they must take shelter the next evening in the villages.
They determined however to send out a small band of men, under cover of the darkness, to search in the direction in which the soldiers had stated that they had seen the fires burning.
Then they questioned him further as to the size of the army, and the purpose for which it had been assembled, and ascertained from his answers that the satrap was keeping a little in advance of the Hellenes in order to seize a pass in the mountains that they were now approaching, before they should reach it.
There could be no doubt that the Barbarians were intending to play the same treacherous game as before.
It was well for the Hellenes that they had not trusted them.
The soldiers returned, taking with them the Persian they had captured, and brought him into the presence of the generals, who again questioned him.
Few of the Barbarians were killed, but the Hellenes captured twenty horses, and the 161 magnificent tent of the satrap, in which were found richly wrought drinking vessels, and couches with silver feet.
The bakers and cup-bearers of the satrap were also taken prisoners.
After this, the Hellenes returned with all speed to their comrades, and the whole army hastened forward to secure the pass before the enemy should have time to recover from their alarm.
This they accomplished successfully on the following day.
Three more marches brought them to the Euphrates, but as the river was in this part of the country near its source they were able to ford it without difficulty, for the water did not reach higher than the middle of their bodies.
The winter had by this time set in, and the whole country was buried in snow.
All around in every direction, as far as the eye could reach, was one vast stretch of snow, many feet in depth, and through this the Hellenes had to make their way.
Many of the slaves and horses perished, and also thirty of the soldiers.
On the third day after crossing the Euphrates, their sufferings were still further increased by a north-wind, whose bitter blast was torture, even to the stalwart Hellenes.
One of the soothsayers suggested that a sacrifice should be offered to Boreas, the god of the north-wind, and when this had been accomplished, it seemed to them all that his fury abated to some extent.
When night came on, the Hellenes had to encamp in the snow.
Those who first reached the camping-place found plenty of food, and soon had some big fires burning, round which the stragglers were glad enough to press as soon as they arrived; but the first-comers would only make 163 room for them on condition of their giving them some of their bread, or anything else that they might have to eat, for food was now getting scarce.
As the snow melted beneath the fires, the soldiers could measure its depth, and they found that it was no less than six feet.
When Xenophon, with the rear-guard, came up to the place, and saw them lying there in such misery, he asked his men if there was nothing that could be done for them.
One of the older soldiers answered that the poor fellows were merely suffering from exhaustion caused by fatigue and want of food, and that if they could get something to eat, they would be able to march on again.
Xenophon went himself to the transport to get what he could for them, and when the sick soldiers had taken some food, they revived, and were able to keep up with their comrades.
He answered that he was on his way from the King to the satrap; and they told him that the satrap was not in the village, but at a place about four miles off.
The women then went home, and the Hellenes of the van went with them through the gate, and took up their quarters in the village for the night.
But the other soldiers, who were a long way behind, had to spend the night in the open air, with 164 little or nothing to eat, and several of them died of cold and hunger.
When, on the next day, they continued their march, some of those who had suffered most discovered a sheltered place where there was a warm spring, that had not been frozen over, nor covered up with snow.
In a moment they threw themselves upon the warm black earth round the spring, and there they lay enjoying the hot steam that rose from it, when Xenophon, who always brought up the rear, came to the place and found them there.
He told the men that they must not linger, as the enemy were close behind; and finding that mild words were of no avail, he spoke more and more sharply, and even beat some of them.
But the men would not move.
They said that if they must be killed they were ready to die, but they could not go a step farther.
They had not failed to profit by the distress of the Hellenes, and had captured the fallen baggage animals, who had been left lying in the snow.
The enemy were soon routed, and fled as fast as they could, but were hindered by the snow.
Xenophon then marched on, but before leaving the sick men, he promised that as soon 165 as possible, he would send some of their comrades to fetch them.
That night, he again had to encamp with his men in the open, without either food or fire.
When it was nearly morning, he sent some of his youngest soldiers back to the spring to fetch the sick men who had been left there the day before, and bring them on their way.
Many had died during the night, and for these there was nothing to be done but to bury them where they lay; but others who were still living, though unable to walk, had to be carried by their comrades.
Going to see whether the men were performing their task faithfully, Xenophon was just in time to prevent a most barbarous action.
Up to this time, the Hellenes had preserved their courage through all the difficulties and privations to which they had been exposed, or if for a moment their spirits had flagged, they had quickly recovered themselves.
But now the trial of excessive cold seemed to have robbed many of them of all manliness.
But in this case, the sons of a country where frost and snow are unknown except in the mildest form, found themselves suddenly exposed to the terrible cold of the high 166 Asiatic table-land in the month of December.
Near it were other villages, and the various companies drew lots for their respective quarters.
Here they were able to rest in comfort after the privations of the last few days.
The dwellings in this part of the country were made in a fashion that was quite new to the Hellenes.
Instead of being built upon the ground, they were dug out of it, and had, for entrance, an opening like the mouth of a well, which widened out below into a large room, inhabited by the owner and his whole family, together with his goats, his sheep, his cattle, and his fowls.
There were two ways of reaching it, a ladder for the human beings, and a slope of earth for the animals.
Such dwellings are still common in Armenia, among the poorer classes, and like the cellars in which we keep our wine, they are cooler in summer and warmer in winter than the air outside.
The houses in which the Hellenes took up their quarters were well stocked with food, and the hospitable villagers set before them maize and barley and other kinds of corn, as much as they 168 desired.
They had also a kind of barley beer, made with whole corns floating in it, which they drank through hollow reeds, so that the corns should not choke them.
When they wished to drink a toast to the health of one of their guests, they filled a great bowl with wine, and bending over it, lapped it up, as an ox drinks out of a pail.
Then it was the turn of the guest, and he was expected to answer the toast by drinking to his host in the same manner.
On the day after his arrival, Xenophon visited in turn all the villages, and found the soldiers everywhere feasting and enjoying themselves.
The friendly villagers had made them most welcome, and when Xenophon arrived, they loaded the tables with flesh of lambs, kids, calves and swine, besides fowls, and bread both of maize and barley.
It happened that this was the season for sending the yearly tribute of horses required by the Great King from the province of Armenia, where the horses were smaller than those of Persia, but far more spirited.
Finding in the villages a number of horses destined for this purpose, Xenophon did not hesitate to take one for his own use, and he advised the other officers to follow his example.
RUINS OF PERSEPOLIS: GATE OF XERXES.
Xenophon was on very friendly terms with the head-man, and always invited him to dine with him at the same table.
He had assured him that no harm would come to him, and that the Hellenes 169 would pay for whatever they took, if he, for his part, would help them on their way, by acting as their guide till they came to the next country.
The man agreed to this, and as further proof of friendship, showed the Hellenes the place where a great store of wine had been buried.
The conversation between Xenophon and the head-man was carried on through an interpreter, but the soldiers had to make themselves understood as best they could by means of signs and gestures.
For eight days the Hellenes rested in the villages in order that they might thoroughly recover themselves before going farther.
The next morning the guide was nowhere to be found.
In consequence of this misadventure, there arose a quarrel between the two generals, the first 170 and last in the whole course of the march.
On approaching the border of Armenia, the Hellenes saw before them, at a distance of about three miles, a mountain range stretching away both to the left and right.
The mountains stretch away to a distance of more than six miles, and no part of the range appears to be guarded except the road leading to the pass.
We can steal a way for ourselves under cover of the darkness at such a distance from the enemy that they will not hear us, especially if some of us divert their attention by advancing towards the pass as if we were going to attack it.
Now you can give proof of the excellent training you have received.
The prisoners had already been questioned, and had said that the mountains were not impassable, but were used as grazing ground for both goats and cattle, and that if the Hellenes had command of any part of the ridge, they would be able to take the baggage animals over it without difficulty.
When it was dark, the troops who were to climb over the heights, marched away in the utmost silence.
All went well, the soldiers met with no hindrance, and having reached the top of the ridge, kindled a fire according to agreement, as a signal to those below that they had accomplished their task.
But now provisions again began to fail.
The Hellenes did not think it prudent to attack these castles, and in spite of their hunger, were forced to pass them by.
On the sixth day however they came to a fortress which they were obliged to attack, for they were quite without food.
It was built upon the edge of an overhanging cliff and beneath it was a 175 river, and a road running beside the river.
As usual, Xenophon had something to suggest.
He did this so often that at last there was quite a heap of stones lying in front of him, but he himself was untouched.
The other men followed his example, and made it a sort of game, enjoying the sensation, pleasant alike to old and young, of courting danger for a moment, and then quickly escaping it.
When the stones were almost exhausted, the soldiers raced one another over the exposed part of the road, each eager to be the first to reach the fortress.
The Hellenes took few prisoners, but much spoil, cattle and asses in abundance, and whole flocks of sheep.
XXXVII 177 THE SEA!
In their country were iron mines which they had worked from the most ancient times, and they knew how to smelt the iron and make it into steel.
These they carried about, singing and dancing, and displayed them to the foe with horrible delight.
It was the first city the Hellenes had seen for many long weeks, and here they met with the agreeable surprise of being received as friends.
The governor paid them, unasked, the most welcome of all attentions in sending them a guide, who undertook to bring them, within five days, to a mountain from whence they could look down upon the Black Sea.
The Hellenes rendered him the service he required, and ravaged the country, taking abundance of spoil.
179 Soon afterwards they came to the mountain of which the guide had spoken, and began to ascend it.
Thinking that there must be some unexpected attack, Xenophon urged on his horse, and galloped forward to see what was the matter.
But as he came nearer, he perceived that it was no war-cry, but a shout of joy.
The soldiers burst into tears of joy, poured forth congratulations one to the other, threw themselves into the arms of their comrades and their officers.
These they piled one upon another, and covered them with skins of animals for decoration, and with shields which they had taken as spoil from the enemy.
He begged moreover for some of the rings that the soldiers wore on their fingers, and a good many were given to him.
The Hellenes loved the sea as the Swiss love their Alps.
Hardly anywhere is there a country so 180 sea-girt as Hellas.
A glance at the map will show the numberless bays and inlets by which the sea makes its way to all parts of the country.
Almost every Hellene had been born within reach of the fresh salt breeze, had been familiar with the sea from his childhood, had sailed over it in all directions, and was accustomed to cherish for it the same sort of feeling as for that which he regarded as the greatest of all blessings, namely freedom.
Now the sea was actually in sight, and a few more marches would bring the weary soldiers to the Hellene colonies which lay scattered all along its coast.
There they would hear once more their own mother-tongue, and be again among friends, among men of their own race, whose help they could count upon in case of need.
Now they saw before them the end of all their toils.
Then he took leave of them, and returned to his own people.
But now I hear the tongue which I remember to have spoken as a child.
These must be my countrymen.
The mountains were not too steep to be scaled, and the Hellenes halted and took counsel as to how they could best make the attack.
It was at first proposed to advance in the form of a phalanx, that is to say in long lines, each close behind the next, but Xenophon thought there were many objections to this plan.
And on the other hand, if we extend our lines far enough to obviate that danger, the phalanx will be shallow, and easily broken through.
The bravest man in each company must head the column, and lead it up the mountain by the best path he can find.
Before advancing to the battle, Xenophon addressed the troops in a soldier-like speech, short, and to the point.
The Hellenes then crossed the mountain-range, and came, on the further side, to some villages where they could rest and enjoy themselves at the expense of the enemy.
In this district there were great quantities of bees, but the honey which they made was of a peculiar kind, and very poisonous.
After eating it, the Hellenes were overcome with sickness, their senses left them, and they were unable to stand.
Those who had eaten but little of the honey were like men intoxicated, while those who had eaten much became quite mad, and some of them appeared to be at the point of death.
Hundreds lay on the ground unable to move, a prey to despair, just as if some great defeat had recently taken place.
No one died however, and at the end of twenty-four hours they all recovered their senses.
In three or four days afterwards they were nearly, if not quite, well again.
Now at last they had arrived at the sea, now they could rest awhile among their own countrymen, and forget all the miseries they had endured since taking service under the ill-fated Cyrus.
They also opened a market for them, and brought abundance of goods for sale.
It was now February, and since December all the other trials of the retreat had been aggravated by the intense cold which had cost many of them their lives.
Of those who were 186 missing, some had been killed by the enemy, and others had perished in the snow or had been cut off by sickness.
It would have been a thing unknown for the Hellenes to celebrate any great event without including among the ceremonies some contests of physical strength and skill, which always attracted the presence of a great crowd of spectators.
Since he could not command a fine level course strewn with sand, he chose instead a rugged hill with a steep slope down to the sea, and when they asked him how it would be possible to have a wrestling match on such rough ground, he answered laughing, ‘Those who are thrown will get the hardest knocks.’ 187 In accordance with the ancient custom, the first race was for boys, but as among the soldiers there were no boys, this race was contested by such of the prisoners as were still youths.
All these games were watched with great enthusiasm by a crowd of spectators, both men and women.
Numbers of people had come out from the town, dressed in their gayest apparel, and mingled with the soldiers, lining both sides of the course.
The successful combatants were greeted with tremendous applause, and those who were defeated with shouts of laughter.
Best as well as last of all, was the horse-race.
The riders had to race from the altar at the top of the hill down the slope to the sea, and then turn and climb the hill again.
They started off at full gallop, but many of the horses tripped in the uneven ground, and rolled over and over, while others who had gone down well enough, came toiling back, unable to get beyond a walk.
All this called forth peals of laughter from the spectators, together with many shouts and cheers.
The prizes given to the winners were the skins of the animals that had been slaughtered for the sacrifices.
Not far from the place chosen for the games was the spot where the Argonauts were said to have landed long ago to win the Golden Fleece.
If that old story was remembered by the Hellene soldiers as they took part in the games, they might have reflected with pride that although there was nothing superhuman in the task which they had just brought to a successful issue, yet it had nevertheless demanded courage and endurance, and by the help of the gods they had triumphed.
Many a time there had seemed no possibility of escape, many a time they had been within a hair’s-breadth of utter destruction, but at last they had reached the goal.
They could not get ships enough to take so large a number by sea, and were obliged, for the most part, to make their way on foot all along the Black Sea coast, getting food, as best they could, by plundering any enemies within reach.
Xenophon had been anxious to return to Hellas as quickly as possible, but he would not forsake his comrades, and determined to remain with them as long as they needed his help and counsel.
There were groves, moreover, and forests abounding in game, besides hilly ground, and pastures for cattle, sheep and horses.
The temple was like the temple at Ephesus, only far smaller, and the image was like the image at Ephesus, but instead of being made of gold, it was of cypress-wood.
He who lives here and enjoys the fruits of the ground must every year offer the tenth part of the produce to the goddess, and out of the residue keep the temple in repair.
The first guardian of the temple was Xenophon himself.
In this beautiful place he settled down on retiring from the cares of public life, and here he spent many happy years with his wife and two brave sons, living to the age of ninety.
In his old age Xenophon had the grief of losing one of his dearly loved sons, who fell in battle.
The news was brought to him as he was standing, crowned with a garland, before the image of the goddess, about to offer a sacrifice.
Simple typographical errors were corrected; unbalanced quotation marks were remedied when the change was obvious, and otherwise left unbalanced.
Several illustrations had footnotes that just referenced text or illustrations on other pages relevant to those illustrations.
Those footnotes have been simplified to “See page” references and combined with the captions of their illustrations.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!)
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement.
If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession.
“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.
It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.
There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.
There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.
Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States.
If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed.
Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work.
You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.
The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work.
Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change.
If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges.
Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that: • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.
The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.
Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns.
You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark.
Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from.
If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund.
If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.
If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™ Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.
It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come.
In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.
Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.
To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States.
U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.
[iii] NIGERIA ITS PEOPLES AND ITS PROBLEMS BY E. D. MOREL EDITOR OF “THE AFRICAN MAIL” AUTHOR OF “AFFAIRS OF WEST AFRICA,” “THE BRITISH CASE IN FRENCH CONGO,” “KING LEOPOLD’S RULE IN AFRICA,” “RED RUBBER,” “GREAT BRITAIN AND THE CONGO,” “THE FUTURE OF THE CONGO,” ETC.
My travels in the country were facilitated in every way possible, and the kindness everywhere shown me in both Protectorates far transcended any claim which ordinary courtesy to a stranger might have suggested.
I am similarly indebted.
My special thanks are due to my friends Mr. and Mrs. William A. Cadbury and Mr. John Holt and his sons, for much personal kindness in connection with my journey.
I have also to express my sense of obligation to the Native Community of Lagos— Christian, Mohammedan and Pagan—for the cordial public reception they accorded to me in that place; and for the address with which they were good enough to present me.
West Africa is a land of controversy.
There is not, I think, any question of public interest concerned with it that does not give rise to acute differences of opinion into which some influence—the climate, perhaps—and the fact that the country is going through a difficult transition stage, seems not infrequently to infuse a measure of bitterness.
I can only ask those who may be affected in the latter sense to believe that the writer has really had no other object in view than that of setting forth the facts as he saw them, and to draw from those facts the inferences which commended themselves to a judgment no doubt full of imperfections, but able, at any rate, to claim sincerity as its guiding motive.
Parts II., III., and IV.
Part I. consists of a mere series of pen and ink sketches, so to speak; impressions jotted down in varying moods.
The value, if, indeed, they have any value at all, of these disjointed ramblings lies in the glimpse they may afford of native character and the nature of the country, thus helping, perhaps, to bring Nigeria a little nearer to us.
I ought, perhaps, to apologize for not having incorporated a history of the British occupation of Nigeria.
But, apart from the circumstance that Captain Orr, now Colonial Secretary for Cyprus, and for many years Resident in Northern Nigeria, is, I understand, about to publish a volume on that subject written with the inside knowledge which he so [x] peculiarly possesses: the thing has already been done by others.
It seemed to me that if any public utility at all were to be attached to my own modest effort, it could more fittingly be sought in the direction of handling, from an independent outsider’s point of view, problems of actuality in their setting of existing circumstances and conditions; and in emphasizing a fact sometimes apt to be forgotten.
I mean that in these Dependencies the Native is the important person to be considered, quite as much from the Imperial as from any other standpoint, interpreting Imperialism as personally I interpret it, to signify a good deal more than painting the map red and indulging in tall talk about “possessions” and about “inferior races.” In Nigeria, the Nigerian is not, as some persons appear to regard him, merely an incidental factor but the paramount factor.
Nigeria is not a Colony; it is a Dependency.
The West African native has two classes of enemies, one positive, the other unconscious.
The ranks of both are not only recruited from members of the white race: they are to be found among members of the West African’s own household.
That is a temperamental affair which does not touch the essence of the deeper issue.
The second class is to be met with among the ranks of those who, by striking at slavery and abuse, have rendered enormous benefit to the West African, but who were also unwittingly responsible for fastening upon his neck a heavy yoke, and who, not only with no motive of self-interest, but, on the contrary, with the most generous desire to minister to his welfare, are to-day in danger of ministering to his undoing.
It is not easy to affix any particular label to those influences which, in the political field, contributed so powerfully in handing over the Congo to Leopold II.
They are partly educational, partly philanthropic, partly religious.
The basis of sentiment animating them appears to be that a kindness is being done to the West African by the bestowal upon him of European culture, law, religion and dress, and that, having thus unmade him as an African, those responsible are in duty bound to support the product of their own creation in its automatic and inevitable revolt against authority, whether represented by the Native Ruler or by the European Administrator.
In the form it at present takes, and in the circumstances too often accompanying it, this is not a kindness but a cruel wrong.
Let me try to make my meaning perfectly clear in regard to this latter case.
I make no attack upon any organization or body.
Neither do I suggest that education can, or should be, arrested.
I simply lay down this double proposition.
First, that educational and allied influences, whose combined effect is to cause the West African to lose his racial identity, must produce unhappiness and unrest of a kind which is not susceptible of evolving a compensating constructive side.
Secondly, that in no period of time which can be forecast, will the condition of West African society permit of the supreme governing power being shared by both races, although short of the casting vote, so to speak, policy should everywhere be directed towards consolidating and strengthening Native authority.
Still less do I make any reflection upon the educated West African as such.
Among these Westernized Natives are men to be regarded with the utmost respect, for they have achieved the well-nigh insuperable.
They have succeeded, despite all, in remaining African in heart and sentiment; and in retaining their dignity in the midst of difficulties which only the most sympathetic alien mind can appreciate, and, even so, not wholly.
To Mary Kingsley alone, perhaps, was it given to probe right down to the painful complexities of their position as only a woman, and a gifted woman, specially endowed, could do.
One could name others.
Perchance their numbers are greater than is usually supposed, and are not confined to men of social distinction and learning.
And these men wring their hands.
They appreciate the depth of the abyss.
But they lack the power of combination, and their position is delicate to a degree which Europeans, who do [xiii] not realize the innumerable undercurrents and intrigues of denationalized West African society are unable to grasp.
Between these two schools of thought, the “damned nigger” school and the denationalizing school (that, without appreciating it, plays into the hands of the first), which threaten the West African in his freedom, his property and his manhood, there is room for a third.
A school of thought whose aim it is to see Nigeria, at least, become in time the home of highly-trained African peoples, protected in their property and in their rights by the paramount Power, proud of their institutions, proud of their race, proud of their own fertile and beautiful land.
For it has a philosophy of its own, and with each day that passes you become an apter pupil.
You learn many things, or you hope you do, things internally evolved.
But when you come to the point of giving external shape to them by those inefficient means the human species is as yet virtually confined to—speech and writing— you become painfully conscious of inadequate powers.
Every day brings its own panorama of nature unfolding before your advance; its own special series of human incidents—serious, humorous, irritating, soothing—its own thought waves.
And it is not my experience that these long silent hours—for conversation with one’s African companions is necessarily limited and sporadic—induce, by what one would imagine natural re-action, descriptive expansiveness when, pen in hand, one seeks to give substance to one’s impressions.
Rather the reverse, alack!
Silent communing doth seem to cut off communication between brain and pen.
You are driven in upon yourself, and the channel of outward expression dries up.
For a scribbler, against whom much has been imputed, well-nigh all the crimes, indeed, save paucity of output, the phenomenon is not without its alarming side, at least to one’s self.
In one’s friends it may well inspire a sense of blessed relief.
One day holds much—so much of time, so much of space, so much of change.
The [4] paling stars or the waning moon greet your first swing into the saddle, and the air strikes crisp and chill.
You are still there as the orange globe mounts the skies, silhouetting, perchance, a group of palms, flooding the crumbling walls of some African village, to whose inhabitants peace has ceased to make walls necessary—a sacrifice of the picturesque which, artistically, saddens—or lighting some fantastic peak of granite boulders piled up as though by Titan’s hand.
You are still there when the rays pour downwards from on high, strike upwards from dusty track and burning rock, and all the countryside quivers and simmers in the glow.
Sometimes you may still be there—it has happened, to me—when the shadows fall swiftly, and the cry of the crown-birds, seeking shelter for the night on some marshy spot to their liking, heralds the dying of the day.
From cold, cold great enough to numb hands and feet, to gentle warmth, as on a June morning at home; from fierce and stunning heat, wherein, rocked by the “triple” of your mount, you drowse and nod, to cooling evening breeze.
So much of time and change—each day seems composed of many days.
Ushered in on level plain, furrowed by the agriculturist’s hoe, dotted with colossal trees, smiling with farm and hamlet; it carries you onward through many miles of thick young forest, where saplings of but a few years’ growth dispute their life with rank and yellow grasses, and thence in gradual ascent through rock-strewn paths until your eye sees naught but a network of hills; to leave you at its close skirting a valley thickly overgrown with [5] bamboo and semi-tropical vegetation, where the flies do congregate, and seek, unwelcomed, a resting-place inside your helmet.
The motive and the immediate results differed not at all.
What the ultimate end may be here lies in the womb of the future, for at this point the roads diverge.
With us those dark hours vanished through the slow growth of indigenous evolution.
And what a weird thing it is when you come to worry it out, that this alien hand should have descended and compelled peace!
Viewed in the abstract, one feels it may be discussed as a problem of theory, for a second.
One feels it permissible to ask, will the people, or rather will the Governors of the people which has brought peace to this land, which has enabled the peasant to till the soil and reap his harvest in quietness, which has allowed the weaver to pursue and profit by his industry in safety, which has established [6] such security throughout the land, that you may see a woman and her child travelling alone and unprotected in the highways, carrying all their worldly possessions between them; will this people’s ultimate action be as equally beneficial as the early stages have been, or will its interference be the medium through which evils, not of violence, but economic, and as great as the old, will slowly, but certainly and subtly, eat into the hearts of these Nigerian homes and destroy their happiness, not of set purpose, but automatically, inevitably so?
But I confess that when one studies what is being done out here in the concrete, from the point of view of the men who are doing it, then it is no longer permissible to doubt.
The peasant fled to the hills, or hurried at nightfall within the sheltering walls of the town.
Now he is descending from the hills and abandoning the towns.
But elsewhere it merits its appellation, and it glimmers ghostly in the moonlight as it cuts the plain, cultivated to its very edge with guinea-corn and millet, cassava and cotton, beans and pepper.
And you might add the adjective, dusty, to it.
For dusty at this season of the year it certainly is.
Dusty beyond imagination.
Surely there is no dust like this dust as it sweeps up at you, impelled by the harmattan blowing from the north, into your eyes and mouth and nose and hair?
Dust composed of unutterable things.
Dust which countless bare human feet have tramped for months.
Dust mingled with the manure of thousands of oxen, horses, sheep and goats.
Dust which converts the glossy skin of the African into an unattractive drab, but which cannot impair his cheerfulness withal.
Dust which gets between you and the sun, and spoils your view of the country, wrapping everything in a milky haze which distorts distances and lies thick upon the foliage.
The morning up to nine, say, will be glorious and clear and crisp, and then, sure enough, as you halt for breakfast and with sharpened appetite await the looked-for [9] “chop,” a puff of wind will spring up from nowhere and in its train will come the dust.
The haze descends and for the rest of the day King Dust will reign supreme.
You may see the turbaned members of the party draw the lower end of that useful article of apparel right across the face up to the eyes when the wind begins to blow.
In every town and village in the Northern Hausa States, you will see various diseases of the eye lamentably rife, and here, I am inclined to think, King Dust also plays an active and discreditable part.
A GROUP OF TUAREGS.
The Great White Road.
It is there not only a great white road but a very fine one, bordered on either side by a species of eucalyptus, and easily capable, so far as breadth is concerned, of allowing the passage of two large automobiles abreast.
I, personally, should not care to own the automobile which undertook the journey, because the road is not exactly what we would call up-to-date.
And what magnificent specimens of the vegetable kingdom the fertile soil of Kano Province does carry—our New Forest giants, though holding their own for beauty and shape and, of course, clinging about our hearts with all their wealth of historical memories and inherited familiarity, would look puny in comparison.
With one exception I do not think anything on the adverse side of trivialities has struck me more forcibly out here than the insane passion for destroying trees which seems to animate humanity, White and Black.
In many parts of the country I have passed through the African does appear to appreciate his trees, both as shade for his ordinary crops and special crops (such as pepper, for instance, which you generally find planted under a great tree) and cattle.
In Kano Province, for instance, this is very noticeable.
But in other parts he will burn down his trees, or rather let them burn down, with absolute equanimity, making no effort to protect them (which on many occasions he could easily do) when he fires the grasses (which, pace many learned persons, it seems to me, he is compelled by his agricultural needs to do—I speak now of the regions I have seen).
I have noticed quantities of splendid and valuable timber ruined in this way.
The European—I should say some Europeans— appears to suffer from the same complaint.
In the eyes of some, trees or plants of any kind in the vicinity of a European station are ruthlessly condemned.
Others are specially incensed against low shrubs.
In another place destruction hangs over a magnificent row of mango trees—and for beauty and luxuriousness of foliage the mango tree is hard to beat—planted many years ago by the Roman Catholic Fathers near one of their mission stations; and in still another, an official, recently returned on leave, found to his disgust that a group of trees he especially valued had been cut down during his absence by a zealous reformer of the medical world.
In very many rest-camps, and mining camps one comes across, the ground is cleared of every particle of shade-giving tree—cleared as flat as a billiard table.
There is no shade for man or beast.
Now a grass-house is not the coolest place in the world with an African noon-day sun beating down upon it—I mean an all-grass-house, not the cool native house with clay walls and thatched roof, be it noted—and ... well, I content myself with the remark that it would be much cooler than it is with the shade of a tree falling athwart it.
I will say nothing about it except that it is, without exception, the hottest road and the one more abounding in flies that I have struck in this part of the world.
And I assign a proper proportion of both phenomena to the—to me—inexplicable mania of the builders thereof to hew down the trees on the side of the road.
What a history it might not tell!
For how many centuries have not Black and Brown men pursued upon it the goal of their trade and their ambitions; have not fled in frantic terror from the pursuer, ankle deep in dust.
What tragedies have not been hurried along its dusty whiteness.
To-day you will meet upon it objects of interest almost every hour.
These will be loaded with potash and tobacco.
And even as you pass this one going south, another convoy of donkeys, going north, loaded with salt and kolas, will be trudging along behind you.
The African is credited with utter callousness to human suffering.
Like most generalities concerning him, it is exaggerated.
Life in primitive communities (and to get a proper mental grasp of this country, and its people, you must turn up your Old Testament and read Exodus and Leviticus) is much cheaper and of less account than in more highly civilized ones.
That is a commonplace too often forgotten by people who accuse the African of ingrained callousness.
As a matter of fact, I have noticed many sights on the Great White Road which show how rash such generalities can be.
I have seen water handed from one party to another under circumstances which spoke of kindly appreciation of a want.
I have frequently seen fathers, or elder brothers, carrying small children on their backs.
The Residents have known cases of men found injured on the road who have been tended and taken home by utter strangers; the Good Samaritan over again, and in his old-world setting.
I refer to the carrier.
To-morrow I part with my carriers.
We have trekked together for exactly four weeks— one little man, indeed, with a goatee beard and a comical grin, has been with me six weeks, having rejoined from my original lot.
And at the end of four weeks one gets to know something of one’s carriers.
Presumably, by that time they have their own opinions of you.
Whence do they come, and whither do they go, these vagrants of the road, flotsam and jetsam that we create?
Reckless, improvident, gamblers, wastrels; they are altogether delightful people.
As an ecclesiastical friend invariably winds up with a description of the man (or woman) he is interested in, who has broken most of the commandments, and would have broken the others had circumstances allowed: “X—— [15] is the very best of creatures really, and I love him (or her)”—so it is impossible not to like the carrier.
For with all his faults, he attracts.
His spirit of independence appeals somehow.
Here to-day, gone to-morrow.
And, like the sailor, with a sweetheart at every port, somebody else’s sweetheart will do quite as well at a pinch.
Then consider his cheeriness.
Be the load heavy or light, be the march long or short, he has always a smile and a salute for you as you pass along the line.
I speak as I have found, and many men will bear me out.
Some men may have a different tale to tell, sometimes with justification, sometimes, I think, without.
For if there is the bad type of carrier—and there is: I have found two in my crowd, but their “little games” have fallen foul of the views of the majority—there is also the type of European who, shall we say, forgets.
He gets into camp a long way ahead of his men, tired and hungry maybe, and curses them for a pack of lazy scoundrels.
He forgets, or long custom has blunted perception, the potency of that sixty-pound load.
Think of it!
Sixty pounds—the regulation load.
Sixty pounds on your head for anything from fifteen to thirty miles.
I say consider that under these conditions the man is cheerful.
Nay, he is more.
He is full of quips and jokes ... at the expense of his companions, and quite as much at the expense of himself.
It is this extraordinary cheeriness which appeals to the average white human.
That a creature of flesh and blood like yourself, carrying sixty pounds on his head for hours and hours in the blazing sun, dripping with perspiration, pestered by flies, and earning [16] sixpence a day—threepence of which is supposed to be spent in “chop”—and doing this not for one day, but for day after day, sometimes for over a week without a sit-down, can remain cheerful—that is the incredible thing.
One hopes that it is a lesson.
Assuredly it ought to be an inspiration.
Yesterday, after a tramp from six-thirty to half-past twelve, the camp aimed for was found to be tenanted by other white men and their carriers.
There was nothing for it but to push on another eleven miles to the nearest village and stream.
Just as dusk began to sweep down upon the land, the first carrier straggled in—smiling.
And when all had reached their destination they had to stick up a tent by the light of the moon.
For hours this man is alone—so far as you are [17] concerned—with your goods.
You may, you probably are, either miles ahead of him, or miles behind him.
During these hours of total lack of supervision, your property is absolutely at the carrier’s mercy.
The uniform case in which, he knows, you keep your money.
The uniform case, of which he knows the lock is broken.
The “chop-box,” of which he knows the padlock is missing.
But at the end of every day your things are intact.
I have not lost a matchbox, except a few dozen or so that white men have stolen (I may say it is the local fashion—I have caught it myself, and steal matches regularly whenever I get the chance).
The only thing I have lost is something I lost myself.
You may say “Yes, but think of the risk and the difficulty of breaking open a uniform case on the road.” As for the difficulty, there is little or none.
A vigorous fling upon one of these granitic boulders, and there would be precious little left of your uniform case.
Faithfulness to the bargain struck.
Well, I have passed through the mining country.
The few shillings a carrier would sacrifice by deserting, he would recoup at the mines in ten days, or less.
I have not had a desertion.
The only man of the crowd who has absconded, did so openly.
On a certain spot on the line of march he suddenly got a fit of fanaticism, or something unhealthy of that kind, and declared [18] himself to be proof against sword cuts.
The next morning, finding his load incommoded him in consequence, he returned homewards, a sadder, and, presumably, a wiser man.
If I were a poet I would write an ode to the African carrier.
I cannot do justice to him in prose.
Nature seems such an open book here.
She does not hide her secrets.
She displays them; which means that she has none; and, in consequence, that she is as she was meant to be, moral.
The trappings of hide-bound convention do not trammel her every stride like the hobble skirts of the foolish women who parade their shapes along the fashionable thoroughfares of London.
What quagmires of error we sink into when we weigh out our ideas of morality to the African standard—such a very low one it is said.
Well, I have covered a good deal of ground in this country—although I have not been in it very long, measured in time—and I have seen many thousands of human beings.
I have seen the Hausa woman and the bush Fulani woman in their classical robes.
I have visited many African homes, sometimes announced, sometimes not, at all hours of the [20] day, and sometimes of the night.
I have passed the people on the beaten track, and sought and found them off the beaten track.
I have yet to see outside our cantonments—where the wastrels drift—a single immodest gesture on the part of man or woman.
Humanity which is of Nature is, as Nature herself, moral.
Break up the family life of Africa, undermine the home, weaken social ties, subvert African authority over Africans, and you dig the grave of African morality.
It is easy, nothing is easier, and it may be accomplished with the best intentions, the worthiest motives, the most abysmal ignorance of doing harm.
Preserve these things, strengthen them, and you safeguard the decencies and refinements of African life.
Here is a homily!
Its origin one of those trivialities of which I have spoken.
One had pushed on ahead, desiring to be alone.
The sun was at its zenith, and danced over the dusky track.
But there were broad grateful trees on either side, and low bushes with white sweet-scented flowers.
A bend in the road brought into view a little cameo of natural life.
By a tree, straight-backed and grave-faced, an elderly Fulani woman, supporting on her lap the head and shoulders of a younger woman, who lay outstretched.
At her feet a small child trying to stand upright, with but indifferent success.
For a moment one was not perceived, both women’s eyes being fixed on the infant’s resolute efforts, and one’s approach being quietened by the deadening dust under foot.
For a moment only.
Then all [21] three looked up.
We strayed yesterday.
Starting off early we struck across country, leaving the road, the red-and-green dressed gentleman and I; having arranged to meet the rest ... somewhere.
It does not matter where, because, as a matter of fact, we didn’t.
Their laughing voices were wafted across the cultivated fields towards us, as cheery as the antics of the little brown goats skipping over the ground.
And then, well we were clearly at fault.
No signs of breakfast, I mean of the person by whom breakfast is supposed to be produced—and nearly eight o’clock.
The gentleman in red and green twisted his turbaned and bearded visage to right and left.
Then he turned his broad back and his white horse’s head, and ambled on, and I followed.
It is queer how you accommodate yourself to philosophy, or how philosophy accommodates itself to you.
After all, every road leads to Rome; and there is a certain amount of exhilaration in not knowing what particular Rome it may be, or through what twists and turns the track may lead you on the way thither.
No homesteads now, and the risen sun had warmed the birds into silence.
One notices that, by the way.
In the early mornings the timid notes are heard, and as the sun’s rays pierce through the mists and burn them up, they cease.
It is a melodious little ode to the great Life-giver, and when it has served its purpose it quavers, quivers, and is no more.
An imposing figure of a man he is, splendidly mounted on a chestnut stallion, with a heavy cloak of dark blue cloth flung across his shoulders, the red crest of a fez just showing through the top of his dark blue turban.
An animated conversation ensues between him and the gentleman in red and green.
The Chief—for one knows he must be such from his bearing and the sharp ring of his tones—waves a long, thin hand to right and left.
He is the Governor, I learn later, of one of the principal districts of Kano province, and he looks it from head to foot.
At the approach of every stream, half hidden with tangled creepers, wherever the path is broken or impeded by some natural obstacle, he half turns his horse towards one in warning, then waits on the other side until he is satisfied that the difficulty is overcome.
And when, at last, in an open space a small group under a tree proclaims the much perturbed—his usual condition—cook, busy boiling milk and cocoa, another low bow, and the old gentleman retires at an appropriate distance, turning his back with the politeness required of tradition and custom, but not before another rapid order has been given, and the quite unnecessary attention of clearing a piece of ground where you may conveniently partake of your meal is in process of accomplishment.
And soon from out of nowhere come shouts and laughter, and the jangle of bits and the confused hum of approaching men and horses.
The bush and the grasses cave outwards and your people appear, a little wondering whether the white man is grumpy or not; very pleased to know they have pitched on the right road at last; rather enjoying the adventure and thoroughly happy with themselves and the world in general.
Off-saddle and hobble the beasts!
Down with the loads!
Out with the “chop!” And all as merry as a marriage bell.
So another morn has dawned and gone, bringing with it its lessons and its thoughts.
The road glimmered dimly in the distance.
Over the deep furrows the shadows crept, and the little path between them mingled with the gathering gloom.
Presently it seemed to sink downwards and assume formlessness.
My route back to the camp took me within perhaps a dozen yards of it.
A nearer view disclosed a man, whose bent back was turned to me, making his solitary evening prayer to God.
Yet not alone, perhaps.
What does the word “religious” mean, I wonder?
This white-robed figure of a man was religious as one generally interprets the word.
But is that what “religious” infers?
One kind of religion?
What a queer mixture the Anglo-Saxon is.
Has Europe, in any racial sense, an inner spiritual life, as has the East?
The “law of Christ,” says the Church, in the matter of relations between the sexes everywhere, commands monogamy.
But the law of Christ commands, in a far more definite manner than any words that may be culled from His sayings in regard to this, many other things which the religion of Europe absolutely, entirely, and wholly ignores, because the customs of Europe and the laws of Europe, and the social life of Europe do not square with it.
The Emir and his councillors looked over the wide plain.
Marvelling somewhat, the Emir, nevertheless, sent out messengers.
The messengers sped swiftly onwards.
They looked for a solitary figure, the figure of an ascetic, bearing stamped upon features, lined and worn with thought, and in gaunt form, the imprint of holiness; in whose eye, illumined with the fire of inspiration, they would read intimate communing with God.
What they saw was a long file of weary carriers, conveying boxes full of food, drink, apparel, and camp furniture.
Behind them, quite an ordinary looking White man on horseback.
“Is this the great White preacher?” they asked the interpreter, who headed the caravan.
So two of the Emir’s messengers off-saddled, and when the preacher came along they bowed low, as is the custom of the country.
But the third messenger had turned back.
He prostrated himself before the Emir, and he told what he had seen.
The Emir drew his flowing cloak a little closer round him, for the sun was about to set, and the air grew chill.
Then he turned himself towards Mecca, and lowered his forehead in the dust, followed by his councillors.
It is difficult to write plainly of Christian missionary effort in West Africa.
The individual missionary may be an influence for good in the best sense.
He may not be.
He is, as a rule, singularly selfless.
His life is often, perhaps generally, a work of essential self-sacrifice.
In the category of human motives gravitating towards West Africa, his, it must be conceded, takes front rank.
But it is the genesis of the effort, not the man, that most counts fundamentally.
If the effort itself is out of perspective the work of the individual must feel the effect.
I say it is difficult to write about missionary effort.
It seems to be regarded as taboo.
You must not touch it lest you hurt people’s feelings.
But nowadays, one sphere of human activity cannot be ruled out of discussion, Christian effort out here seems to me to have forgotten in many cases that Christ was the servant of the people, not their master.
It is intolerant of native customs; native religions irritate it; native law it regards with contempt.
I walked one evening along the Niger banks with a missionary.
We passed some native huts.
In one was a fetish with a votive offering at its feet.
That gesture was so characteristic of much one sees and hears out here.
I exclude the Roman Catholics from that remark.
There is so much that is dark and dismal about this missionary effort, inwardly I mean.
All the African world is black to it, black with sin, black with lust, black with cruelty.
And there is its besetting misfortune—it is alien.
It preaches an alien God; a White God, not a Black God.
The God that is imported here has nothing African about Him.
How can He appeal to Africa?
I saw a week ago in an English paper (about two months old) that there is to be a crusade against Islam in Nigeria.
Emissaries are to come out and check this poisonous growth.
That, too, is very strange to read ... out here, as one listens to the call to God in the evening, and in the morning, pealing out to the stars.
It seems they ought to worship the God of Europe; and yet there is more evidence of spiritual influence out here, than in our great congested cities.
With the cry of the African priest, the faithful bows his body to the earth—out here.
Their note was both beautiful and sad.
It was a spacious building, arched and vaulted, noble in proportions.
There were many people in the streets.
Yes, it is a great puzzle.
[28] All is silent in the camp.
The fires have gone out.
The whole countryside is flooded with a soft, delicate effulgence, and the Great White Road appears as a broad ribbon of intenser light, winding away, away into the infinite beyond.
It is eleven o’clock.
Such, the rise in the road beyond which the first of the great Mohammedan towns of the north lay concealed.
Past a Fulani cattle encampment; past flat country covered with rice fields; past rustling fields of guinea corn ready for the cutter, with heads towering eleven feet in height; past clumps and dotted specimens of shea butter trees, in the branches of many of which are fixed calabashes for the bees; past the weird red clay monuments of the white ants dotting the plain; along the rough pitted, red dusty road, and so on until the rise.
In point of fact, we are a great deal safer on this African road than we should be crossing Trafalgar Square.
In his work this Englishman [31] relies for the pomp and panoply of power upon three policemen, one of whom is old and decrepit.
The facts suggest a thought or two.
A long, broad stretch of golden sands.
Small mites, naked and tubby, splash and rollick about on the water’s edge.
Lower down stream fishermen are getting out their nets, and, at a shallow ford, shepherds are piloting a flock of sheep across, from whose scattered ranks a chorus of loud bleating arises.
A file of pack donkeys stream across the sands to the village on the opposite bank.
The winding river, the golden sands, the blue sky, the two villages —one on either side of the crossing—with their conical thatched roofs, the green of the trees and of the water, the peaceful, quiet human life, combine to make as pretty and as harmonious a picture as you would wish to see.
Tramp, tramp, tramp!
The stamping of innumerable feet.
The murmur of innumerable voices.
The waving of arms, the jangle of iron anklets, and the rising cloud of dust beneath the trampling of bare toes.
The chant rises and falls, monotonous, barbaric.
Bracelets and anklets, amulets and charms clash and clang again as the wearers thereof bend this way and that, crouching, stooping, flinging the upper part of their bodies backwards, raising high the knee and bringing down the leg with thunderous stamp, shaking themselves from head to foot like a dog emerging from his bath.
Naked bodies, but for a strip of jagged leather falling athwart the hips; naked, lithe bodies on which the moon sheds her beams.
Go where you will, you cannot escape the drum—where human life is.
The everlasting drum which heralds the setting sun, which ushers in the morn, which troubles your sleep and haunts your dreams.
Now and then a black and green Papilio, flashing silver from his under wing, [33] harbinger of spring.
Narrow veins of muddy ooze trickle from the well-nigh dried-up bed.
The butterfly world is much like the human world after all in its egotism.
See him spread his glorious panoply where that fitful sunbeam has somehow managed to pierce the vault.
Men and politics become as small fry.
The right perspective asserts itself.
Beneath, the fishermen are making fast their canoes and spreading out their nets to dry—all kinds of nets, ordinary cast nets, nets resembling gigantic hoops, stiff nets encased in wood somewhat after the pattern of the coracle.
The broad river fades away into the evening haze.
For the swift wings of night are already felt, and the sun has just dropped behind the curtain of implacable forest.
One by one, in twos and threes, in struggling groups, the workers scramble up the slope on to the path—or what remains of it from the floods—which skirts the village.
It grows dark.
One is vaguely aware of many naked, shadowy, mostly silent figures on every side of one; wending their way along the path, or flitting in and out among the houses.
In the open doorways a multitude of little fires spring into life, and with them the smell of aromatic wood.
The lament of a child serves to remind you how seldom these Niger babies cry.
And now it is the turn of the fireflies to glow forth.
Thick as bees, they carpet the ground on every marshy spot where the reeds grow—vivid, sentient gems.
Patches of emeralds: but emeralds endowed with life; emeralds with an ambient flame lighting them from within.
They float impalpable, illusive, unearthly beautiful in the still night air, as some rare and fleeting dream of immortality, some incarnation of transcendent joy towards which dull clay stretches forth arms everlastingly impotent.
(THE HOE-DANCE IS A HAUSA AGRICULTURAL DANCE OF GREAT ANTIQUITY.)
For days beforehand people have been pouring in from the villages in the surrounding plain.
Long files of oxen, sheep, and goats have been passing through the gates.
Every household has been busy getting together presents for friends, making provision for poor relations, bringing forth the finest contents of their wardrobes, preparing succulent dishes for entertainment.
Every class of the population has been filled with eager anticipation, agriculturists and weavers, blacksmiths and tanners, dyers and shoemakers.
The barbers have plied an active trade, and the butchers likewise.
Every face has worn a smile, and the hum of human life has been more insistent than usual.
Its reddish [36] clay walls, crumbling in parts, twenty to thirty feet high in others, and many feet in thickness at the base, enclose a sea of compounds and tortuous picturesque streets, above which wave the fan-palms, the paw-paw, the beautiful locust-bean tree, and the graceful tamarind.
But the outstanding feature of the day approaches.
As we enter the gates of the city, after a two miles canter from the Residency down a long and dusty road, we find almost deserted streets.
Every one is congregating in the square.
Soon we enter into it, to see a vast concourse of people clothed in white and blue.
They form a living foreground to the walls on either side of the Emir’s residence, which stands at one extremity of the square.
The brilliant sun of tropical Africa smites downwards, giving a hard line to lights and shadows, and throwing everything into bold relief.
Behind us a few mounted men in gallant array, and immediately on our left a charming group of the Emir’s sons, or some of them, in costly robes of satin.
Another rather bigger boy, clad in dark yellow satin, is an imposing figure.
A deep “Ah” comes from the throats of the assembled thousands as the blare of trumpets resounds faintly in the distance, and a cloud of dust rises from the road.
With a shout they rein up their steeds in front of the Emir’s residence, then wheel swiftly, and are off again whence they came—the avant-garde of the procession.
The sound of drums and trumpets gets louder.
The head of the procession comes in sight, or, to be more accurate, the dust solidifies itself into a compact mass, flashing and glittering with a thousand shades.
First, many hundreds walking on foot, who, as they enter the square, deploy right and left and mingle with the waiting crowd.
Behind them more horsemen detach themselves and gallop towards us, backwards and forwards.
Each man is dressed according to his own particular fancy.
The majority, we observe, wear long cross-handled swords in leather scabbards.
Rattle, rattle, come the drums, mingled with the long-drawn-out notes of the tin or silver trumpets.
Suddenly a loud shout arises, a shout of merriment, as a monstrous figure, clad in skins of beasts, and, apparently, hung round with bladders, in his hand a long stick, dashes out of the advancing throng, clearing the intervening space between it and the Emir’s residence in a succession of frantic bounds.
This is the Court fool, and his appearance is quite in setting with the piece.
At last, here is the Emir and his immediate bodyguard, and the drummers and the trumpeters.
His mouth we cannot see, for the folds of the turban are drawn across the lower part of his face.
His feet are encased in beautifully embroidered boots, and his saddle is richly ornamented.
On the forefinger of his left hand is a heavy silver ring.
Halting, he turns and faces the multitude.
His attendants, one on either side, wave the dust away from his face with ostrich feather fans.
Four figures on foot advance, three of them are clad in skins and carry drums.
The fourth is a crouching creature with a curious wizened face bearing a drawn sword in his hand.
A sword dance ensues, the four going round and round in a circle.
This performance being terminated—accompanied the while by incessant shouting on the part of every one in general—the actors retire, and the Emir holds up his thin aristocratic hand.
Instantly a silence falls.
The change is singularly impressive.
The Emir begins to speak in a low voice to a herald mounted on a raised platform at his side.
The herald, the perspiration pouring down his face, shouts out each sentence as it falls from the Emir’s lips.
As the speech proceeds the Emir becomes more animated.
He waves his arm with a [40] gesture full of dignity and command.
And now the silence is occasionally broken with sounds of approval.
He thanks God’s messenger (Mohammed).
He gives thanks for the blessings of his parents and his ancestors.
He gives thanks to the Europeans who are the gates of his town.
He thanks all White men.
Next—you must attend to the orders which the Emir gives you every year.
Remove your hand from the people.
Let them follow their own courses.
Separate yourselves from injustice.
Why do I say ‘Give up injustice’?
Are we not better off than formerly?
Next—I thank my headmen who assist me in my work.
I thank my servants who are fellow workers.
I thank my young chiefs who are fellow workers.
I thank the men of my town who are fellow workers.
I thank my followers in the town.
I thank the village heads.
Next—I wish you to pay attention to the commands of the English.
And I say unto you that all who see them should pay them respect.
He who is careless of the orders of the White man does not show them respect.
Next—every one who farms let him pay his tax.
Every one who says this man is my slave, or this woman is my slave, or these people are my slaves, and uses force against them, let judgment fall upon him.
What I say is this —may God reward us!
May God give us peace in our land!
May God give us the abundance of the earth!
As we ride home to the Residency two miles out of the town, uppermost in the mind at least of one of us is the fascination of this strange land, with its blending of Africa and the East, its barbaric displays, its industrial life, its wonderful agricultural development— above all, perhaps, the tour de force of governing it with a handful of White officials and a handful of native troops.
With the discovery of Nigeria are associated exploits which for romantic interest and personal achievements hold a prominent place in British exploring records.
The spirit of MacGregor Laird, the hardy pioneer who laid the first foundations of British commerce in this country seems to hover over the broad bosom of the Niger.
This land is, indeed, a land rich in heroic memories to men of British blood.
Nigeria is, at present, arbitrarily divided into two units, “Southern” and “Northern;” the division corresponds with the historical events which have distinguished the assumption of British control, and is to that extent inevitable.
But to-day, with internal communications and administrative control rapidly extending, this situation presents many drawbacks.
I [47] propose to deal with this subject in greater detail later on.
SHIPPING PALM-OIL ON THE NIGER AT HIGH WATER.
Meantime it would seem necessary at the outset to emphasize two facts which the public mind does not appear to have realized.
The first is that Nigeria, both in size and in population, is not only the most considerable of our tropical dependencies in Africa, but is the most considerable and the wealthiest of all our tropical dependencies (India, of course, excepted).
Until a few years ago the work of Great Britain in West Africa, apart from a few trifling exceptions, was confined to the administration of the Pagan Negro.
The position is very different now.
In the southern regions of the Protectorate, where its progression is a modern phenomenon, Islam is, from the administrative point of view, a purely social factor.
It is there a political as well as a religious and social force, solidly entrenched.
This fact which, administratively speaking, need not alarm us—unless the Administration is goaded into adopting a hostile attitude towards its Mohammedan [48] subjects—does, however, invest Nigeria with an additional interest of its own and does supply a further reason why the affairs of this greatest of our African protectorates should receive more intelligent consideration and study at the hands of the public than it has enjoyed hitherto.
This is the apex of the delta, and here the Niger is, indeed, majestic.
From each of these main channels of discharge spring countless others, turning and twisting in fantastic contours until the whole country is honeycombed to such an extent as to become converted into an interminable series of islands.
It is the primeval world, and man seems to have no place therein.
Trade with the outer world which the merchant—himself working under conditions of supreme discomfort, and in constant ill-health—has brought; improved means of communication through the clearing and mapping of creeks and channels, thereby giving accessibility to new markets which the Administration is yearly creating—these are the civilizing agents of the Niger delta, the only media whereby its inhabitants can hope to attain to a greater degree of ease and a wider outlook.
The outer fringe of the delta is composed entirely of mangrove swamps, whose skeleton-like roots rise up from the mud as the tide recedes, and from whose bark the natives obtain, by burning, a substitute for salt.
The mangrove region is sparsely populated by fishing and trading tribes.
It is curious to come across signs of human life when you would hardly suspect its possible presence.
A visit to some such village holds much to surprise.
Diligent search has revealed to the intending settler that the particular spot selected contains, it may be a hundred yards or so from the water, a patch of firm land where, doubtless with much difficulty, a crop of foodstuffs can be raised, and here he and his family will lead their primitive existence isolated from the outer world, except when they choose to enter it on some trading expedition.
Their denizens are busy traders and [52] there are plentiful signs of surface civilization.
The walls of the vestibule below were similarly adorned, and through a half-open door one perceived a ponderous wooden bed with mattress, sheets, pillows, and gaudy quilt (in such a climate!)
The deltaic region is the real home of the oil palm with its numerous and still unclassified varieties, although it extends some distance beyond in proportionately lessening quantities as you push north.
No other tree in the world can compare with the oil palm in the manifold benefits it confers upon masses of men.
The collection, preparation, transport, and sale of its fruit, both oil and kernels for the export trade is the paramount national industry of Southern Nigeria, in which men, women, and children play their allotted parts.
To the Southern Nigerian native inhabiting the oil-palm area the tree is, indeed, domestically indispensable, while its product represents something like 90 per cent.
How entirely wrong would be any attempt at restricting his free enjoyment of its bounties needs no emphasizing.
The importance of the export trade in the products of the oil palm may be gauged by the returns for 1910, which show that Southern Nigeria exported 172,998 tons of kernels and 76,850 tons of oil, of a total value of no less than £4,193,049; and yet the capacities of the trade, especially in kernels, are only in their infancy.
The bulk of the oil is exported to England (£1,191,000 value in 1909), but nearly the entire kernel crop goes to Germany, where it is treated by the big crushing mills.
It is possible that this state of affairs may undergo considerable change within the next decade, and the reason for it is, incidentally, of considerable economic interest, as it is of moment to Nigeria.
This has had as a consequence an enormous widening of the home market, and the soap trade has now to contend with keen competition for the supply of one of its staples.
If the numerous difficulties they will have to face are successfully negotiated, the ultimate result can hardly fail to be that of transferring the considerable palm kernel crushing industry from the banks of the Rhine to those of the Niger, besides creating a new export trade in oil cake from the Niger to England and the Continent.
Beyond the forest belt again lies, with recurrent stretches of forest, the more open hilly country, the beginning of the uplands of the North.
When an authority on forestry recently wrote that “British Columbia is the last great forest reserve left,” he forgot West Africa.
That is what West Africa has continually suffered from—forgetfulness.
The resources of the Nigerian forest belt are as yet far from being fully determined, but sufficient is now known of them to show that they are enormously rich.
THE TROPICAL BUSH.
The soil of this forest region is wonderfully fertile, and forest products apart, the possibilities of agricultural development are considerable.
The three articles under [57] cultivation by the natives the Administration has of late years done its best to popularize have been cotton, cocoa, and maize.
The cultivation of cocoa, for which the humid atmosphere, rich alluvial soil, and abundant shade of the forest region seem peculiarly suitable, has, on the other hand, steadily, if slowly, increased since it was started fifteen years ago.
In 1900 the quantity of cocoa exported was valued at £8,622.
It had risen in 1910 to £101,151.
The industry has progressed, but far less rapidly than its promoters hoped.
[4] Things do not move quickly in West Africa.
In all these questions several factors have to be taken into account, for which sufficient allowance is not made in Europe.
The idea that the native has merely to scratch the earth or watch the fruit ripening on the trees in order to sustain himself and his family is, speaking generally, as grotesque an illusion as that he is a helpless, plastic creature with no will of his own.
In that respect he differs not at all from other sections of the human race amongst whom the economic sense has been developed, and he cannot be fairly expected to devote his attention to raising one particular raw material which a certain home industry may desire, if he can make larger profits in another direction.
But the native must be given time, and the country is one which cannot be rushed either economically or politically.
Such reference is the more necessary since the work of the department crystallizes, so to speak, the conception of its duties towards the native population which guides the Administration’s policy.
Briefly stated, the Forestry Department is designed to conserve forest resources for the benefit of the State—the State meaning, in practice, the native communities owning the land and their descendants, and the Administration charged with their guardianship, and while encouraging any legitimate private enterprise, whether European or native, to oppose the wholesale exploitation of those resources for the benefit of individuals, white or black.
It aims at impressing the native with the economic value of his forests as a source of present and continual revenue for himself and his children; at inducing native communities to give the force of native law to its regulations and by their assistance in applying them, to prevent destruction through indiscriminate farming operations and bush fires, to prevent the felling of immature trees, to replant and to start communal plantations.
It aims at the setting aside, with the consent of the native owners, of Government reserves and native reserves, and at furthering industrial development by private enterprise under conditions which shall not interfere with the general welfare of the country.
Apart from the question of safeguarding the rights of the people of the land, our wards, the necessity of forest conservation in the interest of the public weal has been taught by bitter experience, and experience has also shown that scientific forestry can only be profitably undertaken by the Government or by bodies whose first obligation is the interest and protection of the community.
The Forestry Department of Southern Nigeria, short as its existence has been, is already a revenue-making Department, for in the last ten years it has either planted, or induced the natives to plant, trees (some of which, like the rubber trees in Benin, are now beginning to bear) whose present estimated value is £287,526, and has thus added over a quarter of a million to the value of the capital stock of the forests without taking into account the indirect effects of the steps taken to help their natural regeneration.
The Department has many local difficulties to contend with, especially in the Western province, which I shall have occasion to discuss in connection with the general administrative problem facing the administration in that section of the Protectorate.
The character of its work necessitates that, in addition to scientific training in forest lore, those responsible for its direction shall be possessed of knowledge of native customs and of considerable tact in conducting negotiations with native authorities, always suspicious of European interference in anything which touches the question of tenure and use of land.
The Administration is fortunate in possessing in the Conservator and Deputy- Conservator two men who combine in a rare degree these dual qualifications.
It is but the barest statement of fact to say that Mr. H. N. Thompson, the Conservator who went to [61] Southern Nigeria after many years in Burma, enjoys an international reputation.
As an expert in tropical forestry he stands second to none in the world.
No wiser course could be taken by the administration than that of setting aside a sum of borrowed money to be used, as in the case of the railways, as capital expenditure on productive forestry work.
The House Rule Ordinance is a measure designed by the late Sir Ralph Moor to prevent social anarchy from ensuing when slavery was abolished by the British Government.
It gives force of Law to House Rule.
House Rule is, in reality, the native form of government, which has existed in Southern Nigeria for many centuries.
In recognizing the former the Administration acknowledges the existence of the latter for which it can provide no substitute.
Native society, as already stated, is in the patriarchal state.
The foundation of it is the “Father,” whether of the family, of the community, or of the tribe.
The members of the House are, in a measure, apprentices.
Under native law there are obligations on both sides.
It is a transitional stage, and should be regarded as such, and allowed to reform itself from within.
The one difficulty, in this respect, is lest the Ordinance should tend to prevent a gradual internal evolution towards a higher state by sterilizing any healthy influences making for modification.
A much greater danger would be any sudden change which would throw the whole country into absolute confusion.
There is, therefore, a check upon despotic abuses by the head of the House.
In the bulk of the Central Province and in the whole of the Eastern Province, the head of the House is virtually the head of the community, the higher forms of internal control not having evolved.
Any hasty and violent interference which domestic “slavery,” as it is termed, in a country like the Central and Eastern Provinces should be strenuously opposed.
It would be an act of monstrous injustice, in the first place, if unaccompanied by monetary compensation, and it would produce social chaos.
Native society would fall to pieces, and endless “punitive expeditions” would be the result.
To the Western Province is attached, as distinct from the Protectorate, what is termed the “Colony of Lagos,” comprising the capital and a small area on the mainland—Lagos itself is an island—amounting altogether to 3,420 square miles.
The supreme government of the three Provinces is carried on from Lagos by the Governor, assisted by an Executive [64] Council and by a Legislative Council composed of nine officials and six unofficial members selected by the Governor and approved by the Secretary of State.
Each Province is in charge of a Provincial Commissioner, although in the Western Province his duties are more nominal than real.
In none of the Provinces is there a Provincial Council.
These Native Councils or Courts constitute the real administrative machinery of the country.
They administer native law in civil and criminal cases between natives.
The District Commissioner’s Court is virtually a branch of the Supreme Court, and deals almost entirely with cases in which non-natives are concerned.
The Central and Eastern Provinces, which include the deltaic and the larger part of the forest region, are inhabited by Pagan tribes, among whom Mohammedanism is at present making but relatively slow progress (none at all in many districts) and Christianity, which by fits and starts and with long intervals has been at them since the fifteenth century, still less.
These tribes are of an independent, sturdy temperament, and in the remoter parts of [65] both Provinces still uncontrolled, or virtually so.
They are, almost without exception, great traders, and the British merchants who know them best speak highly of their honesty in commercial transactions.
The problem of governing these peoples offers no complications, which may be called political, of a serious character.
It is rendered easier in the Central Province, where the authority of the Benin Kingdom, exercised for so many centuries, has led to the centralization of a strong native authority; and proportionately less so in the Eastern Province, where no considerable native power was ever evolved.
The Administration levies no direct tax, and its chief concern is to keep the peace, to open up the country, and to check barbarous customs.
Astonishing progress has been effected in these respects during the past decade, nor must it be supposed that because there is an absence of complex political questions, progress has not been attended with complexities of a different order.
For six months in the year a very large portion of the Central and Eastern Provinces is partially submerged.
The Niger overflows its banks, every forest rivulet becomes a river, the creeks and channels spread their waters upon the land, the forest is flooded over an enormous area, and the pathways intersecting it are impassable.
That the latter give way does not, alas!
[6] Assuredly it is necessary, as a prominent statesman addressing the House of Commons declared some years ago, that “the more you extend your Empire the more imperative it is that this House should extract from its agents abroad the same standard of conduct which we exact at home.” But it is also necessary that public opinion in Britain should take more trouble than it does to realize something of the conditions under which its agents in the most unhealthy tropical regions of the Empire have to spend their lives, and should extend to them more sympathy than, at present, it seems often inclined to do.
If we are honest with ourselves we must admit that the inspiration which has evolved a sort of misty horror around the peoples of the West Coast of Africa, has been largely drawn from the setting of swamp and forest where the sacrificial rites associated with them, more prominently, perhaps, than they deserve, have been performed.
In themselves these rites differ in no way from those we are familiar with in the records of white peoples when they had reached a stage of intellectual advancement which the Nigerian negro has certainly never attained, and which it is doubtful if any human stock could, or can ever, attain, in such an environment.
Owing to the unconquered and, I think, unconquerable natural forces surrounding him, the Nigerian of the delta is still in the stage “to listen to the will of Jove which comes forth from the lofty and verdant oak”; to seek as the load-star of his spiritual necessities and in his ceaseless struggle against implacable odds, the conciliation of the fertilizing spirit through whose assistance alone he can hope to subject them; to incorporate the personality of protecting deities into man by oblation and by human or animal sacrifice, the shedding of blood being the mystic symbol of established contact with the protecting spiritual elements (the same prompting animates the most sacred of Christian rites) as it remains the tangible and most potent symbol of human brotherhood.
[68] But in itself and in the motive which raises it quivering over the bound and helpless victim, it differentiates not at all from the story of Abraham and Isaac handed down to us in the sacred writings and not, certainly, in a light other than commendable, given the setting.
It may be safely predicted that the process will be far more rapid than it was in Europe.
BENIN CITY TO-DAY.
The King’s superstitions made him a puppet in its hands.
The murder of several British officials was followed by the capture of the city, and the occupation of the country.
No man’s life was safe, and Benin city, the capital, was a place of abominations.
They have co-operated so efficiently with the Forestry Department that throughout the Benin territory no tree can be unlawfully felled without the Forest Officer being informed.
They are planting up their forest land with valuable timber trees.
So greatly do these intelligent people appreciate the efforts of the Administration to enrich their country that when a little while ago they started tapping operations in their rubber plantations under the supervision of the Forestry Officer, the chiefs and villagers insisted that a third share should go to Government, and, despite the Governor’s objections, they would consent to no other arrangement.
This has now become embodied in law.
The Forestry Department undertakes to dispose of the rubber from the communal plantations, the profits being divided as to one-third for the paramount chiefs, one-third for the village community, and one-third for the [70] Administration.
Many obvious morals suggest themselves.
The Hinterland, threatened by Dahomeyan invasions from the west and Fulani inroads from the north, distressed by internal struggles between various sections of the Yoruba people rebelling against the central authority, was in a state of perpetual ferment.
Severed from the mainland, maintaining themselves from hand to mouth, and swept by disease, the few British officials led an unenviable existence.
To-day Lagos is a picturesque, congested town of some 80,000 inhabitants, boasting many fine public buildings and official and European and native merchants’ residences, churches, wharves, a hospital, a tramway, a bacteriological institute, a marine engineering establishment, to say nothing of cold storage and electric light plant, hotels, a racecourse, and other appurtenances of advanced civilization.
Like every other part of West Africa [72] that I have seen, Lagos is full of violent contrasts.
Every variety of craft—the tonnage of the place is something like 250,000 tons per annum—is to be observed in the water and every variety of dress in the busy streets, from the voluminous robes of the turbaned Mohammedan to the latest tailoring monstrosities of Western Europe.
Here a church thronged on Sundays with African ladies and gentlemen in their finest array; here a mosque built by the local and rapidly increasing Yoruba Muslims at a cost of £5,000.
A certain kind of prosperity is writ large over the place, but there is good reason to believe that economic pressure in its different forms, none more acutely felt than the ascending price of foodstuffs, is beginning to bear hardly upon the poorer classes, and the political and social atmosphere of the town is not altogether healthy.
Historical circumstances rather than natural advantages have made Lagos the most [73] important commercial emporium of British West Africa and the starting-point of a railway into the interior.
It is difficult to see, if the traffic of this railway and its future feeders develops, as there is every reason to believe it will, how the already crowded and circumscribed area of Lagos can possibly prove equal to the demands upon it.
An elusive and sinister obstruction is Lagos bar, strewn with wrecks and hitherto refractory to dredging, which shifts its depths three feet in a single week, while the position of the channels is continually altering.
Be that as it may, the destinies of Southern Nigeria have for the last five years been in the hands of a Governor of large ideas and enormous energy.
West Africa has certainly never seen anything comparable to it.
Nature disputes with man for every inch of vantage.
As the work progresses the sand twists and withes into ever-changing formations; banks arise and disappear only to again re-form; the foreshore on the outer side of the mole grows and swells and rises weekly, threatening to become level with the wall itself and even to overwhelm it; the scour of the sea scoops into the ocean’s floor, thus forcing the advancing mole into deep water, which [75] demands a proportionately larger meal of stone.
Every foot’s advance requires sixty tons of stone.
At the accelerated rate of progress now ensured the eastern mole will be finished in four years.
Moreover, official Christianity, already represented in Yoruba by as many sects as we have at home, has been riven by the defection of a body, some 3000 strong, I believe, which has constituted itself an independent Church, the real, though not explicitly avowed, motive being a refusal to abide by the monogamous sexual relationship which the Church enforces.
The situation is really quite extraordinary, and offers an unlimited field of speculation to the student.
The Commissioner, Mr. Young, finds himself, indeed, in a position where the utmost tact is required.
He has passed through very unpleasant times, and the confidence and respect he has ultimately won constitute a veritable triumph of personality.
The whole machinery of administration is on the European pattern, with its Secretariat, Treasury, Public Works Department, Police, Prison, Printing Offices, Post Office, etc.—all managed by Europeanized Africans.
I visited most of the Government departments, the prison, and printing offices, and was impressed with the industry and business-like air which reigned within them.
The revenues, thanks to the Commissioner, are in a healthy state.
Excellent roads have been and are being constructed.
A water supply is being arranged for out of a loan of £30,000 advanced by the Southern Nigeria Government.
An imposing college is in course of erection.
It is all very remarkable and interesting.
Whether it is durable is a matter which I shall have occasion to discuss later on.
Here, administratively speaking, government is neither fish, fowl, nor good red-herring; neither African, nor European, nor Europeanized-African.
All real influence has been taken out of the hands of the Bale (head-chief) and nothing has been substituted for it.
The inevitable consequence is that the chiefs themselves constantly intrigue against one another and have no prestige with the people, while the people themselves have no respect either for their own rulers or for the white man.
A visit to the Bale’s Court in company with the recently-appointed Acting-Resident was a surprising revelation—quite as painful, I am inclined to believe, to that official as to the writer—of unmannerly conduct, of total absence of respect for his Majesty’s representative, of utter lack of decorum and dignity.
The “Ibadan Government,” as I saw it, is a caricature, and a dangerous caricature, of government, unlike anything, I am glad to say, which I observed in either of the two Protectorates.
The town and the inhabitants are obviously out of hand, and in my opinion—an opinion which, having felt bound to communicate it to the responsible authorities in Nigeria, I am the freer to state here—is that if the whole place be not thoroughly overhauled, events must arise at no distant day leading to considerable trouble.
I am inclined to think that some people would rather welcome trouble.
Here the native form of government has been happily preserved against many assaults from both within and without.
Here the Court is held, distinguished by all the ceremonial inherent to what was once (and might again become) a wonderfully efficient national Government.
A notable incident in the State reception I witnessed was the presence among the prostrated chiefs of several whose dress showed that they had embraced Islam, doing obeisance to their pagan lord.
I fear that much trouble lies ahead if steps are not adopted to evolve something more closely approximating to statecraft in handling the problems of the country.
An attempt to show what might be done and the reasons for doing it will be made in the next chapter.
In the Ibadan district native government is, in practice, a myth.
Such a state of things leads to singular inconsistencies, and the Southern Nigeria Administration would find it difficult to reconcile its actions in certain directions with its actions in others.
Take, for example, the land question.
What has been the result?
This, according to all its professions and to its actions in some specific circumstances, for which it is to be warmly commended, is, in the view of the Administration, inimical to the public interest of the Protectorate.
Take another example.
This is inherently a public interest, and the Forestry Officer in the discharge of his duties is merely a servant of the public.
But in the Western Province, for the same reasons, we cannot or are unwilling to put our case to the native authorities for the protection of the people against themselves with the same moral force as in the case of the other two provinces.
We are confined, or think we are confined, to simple persuasion.
Now, persuasion by the Forestry Officer alone is one thing, and persuasion by the Forestry Officer supported by direct representations from the Executive at Lagos is a very different thing.
It is almost unnecessary to point out that the interests of the population do not suffer merely indirectly and potentially, but directly thereby.
In these problems the policy of the Southern Nigeria Administration has been to leave the matter to the native authorities, in other words, to let the land question slide down a perilous declivity, and to allow the question of forestry preservation to be left to the unsupported efforts of the Forestry Department.
If this policy of non-interference had been consistently applied in other directions an intelligible case, at least, might be made out for it.
But the facts are notoriously otherwise.
To mention but one instance.
Two years ago pressure was put upon the Ibadan authorities to vote unpopular licensing regulations in the interests of temperance, and one of the incidents subsequently arising out of it was the stoppage of the Bale’s stipend by the Acting Resident with the concurrence of the Executive at Lagos!
If the native chiefs realized what the logical outcome of the Ordinance might mean for them, by an Executive in Lagos, which adopted the legal [86] argument quoted, there would be ferment from one end of Yoruba to the other.
It must be clear from what precedes that the time has come when the whole position of the Yoruba States in relation to the paramount Power should be reconsidered.
Now neither of these courses is, I am convinced, desired by the Imperial Government.
The drift is, nevertheless, apparent to all that have eyes to see and ears to hear.
There is the increasing danger of leaving the land question unregulated and the difficulty attending the adoption of adequate measures for forest preservation.
Only one course would appear open to the authorities if they desire to stop the dry rot.
The first step would consist in getting the Native Councils—i.e.
Inalienability of land is the cardinal principle of Yoruba land tenure.
The preamble of the measure would define Yoruba law and custom in regard to land.
The body of the measure would declare to be illegal all buying and selling of land, either between natives and natives or between [87] natives and non-natives, and would establish limitations of area and time for the holding of leased lands by private individuals or associations, with provision for revision of rentals at specified periods.
It cannot be doubted that were the measure fully and thoroughly explained to the Native Councils and its urgency in the interests of their people emphasized, little or no trouble would be experienced in ensuring its adoption.
In the improbable event of difficulties arising it would be the plain duty of the Administration to overcome them.
The second step would be more far-reaching—viz.
The existing Councils of the various districts would, of course, remain, but we should have what we have not at present, a true “Yoruba Council,” a strong central native Government through which the development, the progress, and the common welfare of the country could proceed on definite, ordered, national lines.
This would be Empire-building of the real kind.
It would not be unattended with difficulty.
It would require time, much tact, and, above all, full and frank exposition and [88] explanation.
But it is feasible of accomplishment, and by a policy of this kind alone can one of the most interesting and promising races of Western Africa hope to reach, under our supreme direction, its full development.
The elements necessary to the success of such policy exist.
The heat of the afternoons, the myriad insect visitors which are heralded by the lighting of the lamps, blacken the cloth and invade every part of the person accessible to their attentions, the stifling nights, spent, may be, at anchor under the lee of perpendicular banks; these are trifles not worthy of mention by comparison with the rewards they bring.
Kaleidoscopic varieties of scenic effects enchant the eye as hour follows hour and day follows day on the bosom of this wonderful Niger, passing from serpentine curves so narrow that the revolving paddles seem in imminent danger of sinking into the bank itself or snapping against some one of the many floating snags, to ever broadening and majestic proportions with vistas of eternal forest, of villages nestling amid banana groves, of busy fishermen flinging their nets, of occasional dark massive [92] heads lifted a brief second from the deeps to disappear silently as they arose, of brilliant blue kingfishers darting hither and thither.
Here its course is broken by long stretches of fine hummocky sand across whose shining surface stalk the egret and the crane, the adjoining rushes noisy with the cackle of the spur-winged geese.
Here it glides expanding between open plains bordered with reeds, only to narrow once more as the plain heaves upward and the tall vegetable growth gives way to arid granite outcrops, ascending towards the far horizon into high tablelands.
If at dawn the Niger veils its secrets in billowy mists of white, at sunset the sense of mystery deepens.
For that, I think, is the principal charm of this great highway into the heart of Negro Africa, the sense of mystery it inspires.
To-day when its sanctuaries are violated, its waters churned and smitten by strange and ugly craft, it is still mysterious, vast and unconquered.
Mysterious that tall half-naked figure on yonder ledge, crimson framed in the dying sun, motionless and statuesque.
Mysterious that piercing melancholy note which thrills from the profundities beyond, fading away in whispers upon the violet and green wavelets lapping against the side of the boat.
Mysterious those rapid staccato drumbeats as unknown humanity on one shore signals to unseen humanity on the other.
Mysterious the [93] raucous cry of the crown-birds passing in long lines to their resting-place in the marshes.
Mysterious those tiny lights from some unsuspected haunt of natural man that spring into life as the sun sinks to slumber, and darkness, deep unfathomable darkness, rushes over the land there to rest until a blood-red moon, defining once again the line of forest, mounts the sky.
From the point of view of navigation and of commerce the Niger is a most unsatisfactory and uncertain river to work.
It can be described, perhaps, as a river full of holes with shallows between them.
Its channels are constantly changing.
It is full of sandbanks which take on new shapes and sizes every year.
In the course of the year the water level varies twenty-seven feet, the period of rise being from June in an ascending scale until the end of September, the fall then commencing, the river being at its lowest from December to May.
In the rainy season the banks are flooded in the lower regions for miles around.
In the dry season the banks tower up in places fifteen feet above water level.
Roughly speaking, the Niger is navigable for steamers drawing five feet in June, six feet in July, and so on up to twelve feet in the end of September; from November to April for vessels drawing between four and five feet.
But the conditions of two consecutive years are seldom alike.
Government has done little or nothing to cope with these natural difficulties.
The Admiralty charts available to the captains of steamers are ludicrously obsolete, and all [94] wrong.
No continuous series of observations have been taken of the river, and no effort made to tackle the problem of improving navigation.
The experienced merchant smiled.
He is a slightly cynical person, is the West African merchant who knows his Niger.
One dredger, the best which money could buy, was purchased by the Northern Nigerian Administration.
It is one of the inevitable, one of the many deplorable, results of dual control over a common territory; one of the consequences of the long competition between the two rival Administrations, each quite honestly playing for its own hand and each quite satisfied that it alone can think imperially.
The upshot has been pernicious to the public interest.
The river-service is shocking from the point of view of efficiency, and enormously costly.
The steamers themselves are falling to pieces.
Trading steamers must anchor at night, which involves, in the aggregate, a great waste of time and money.
I do not now speak of the heads of these powerful trading firms in Europe, many of whom, by the way, have themselves gone through the mill in their time.
To them England is indebted for the Imperial position she holds in Nigeria to-day, a fact which is too apt to be forgotten.
I refer to the men, mostly young, in charge of trading stations on the banks of the Niger and its creeks, living a life of terrible loneliness amid primitive surroundings in a deadly climate, separated in many cases several days’ journey from another white face, not nearly so well housed as the officials (I am describing Southern Nigeria, be it remembered), and not, like them, helped by the consciousness of power or stimulated by the wider horizon the latter enjoy.
Thrown entirely on their own resources, usually unfitted by their previous life to face the privations and isolation of an existence such as this, very hard-worked—their lot is not an enviable one.
No doubt the hardships they have to endure are incidental to a career they freely choose, although often enough with little or no previous comprehension of its character.
No doubt these hardships are infinitely less severe than those which the early pioneers were compelled to undergo, many succumbing under the process; but in that connection it should not be forgotten that the latter had the incentive of carving out their fortunes with their own hands, whereas the [96] present generation out in Nigeria are not their own masters.
One cannot help reflecting upon the irony of the contrast between the commiseration so freely lavished at home upon the spiritual drawbacks of the Nigerian native, and the total lack of interest displayed by the Church in the welfare of these young fellows, many of them mere lads, exposed to all the moral temptations of their savage environment in which only exceptional natures will detect the broadening spiritual influences.
What an untold blessing would be a periodical visit to their African homes, fronted by the silent river, invested by the tropical forest, from an experienced, genial, sympathetic minister of God, who for a day or two would share their lives and win their confidence.
There is another matter which should be raised.
These young men who come out from England—I refer to the English trading firms only, not having inquired into the system prevailing among the Continental firms—do so under a three years’ contract.
This is an altogether excessive period for the Niger.
It should be cut down one half.
Even then it would be half as long again as the officials’ term of service.
Professors of tropical medicine and magnates at home may say what they like about the improvement of health in the large European settlements.
The towns are one thing.
The “bush” is quite another.
At the end of a year’s continuous residence, the strain begins to make itself felt in a multiplicity of ways.
Not to acknowledge it, and not to make provision for it, is, on the part of an employer, penny wise and pound foolish—to put the matter on the lowest ground.
The river curves, winds and narrows, obstructed here and there by dangerous boulders, which the falling waters bring into view.
Plantations of yams, and guinea corn set out on parallel, raised ridges, attest a higher skill in cultivation.
The mangroves of the Delta, the awesome grandeur of the forests, these are left far behind.
We have entered the uplands of the North.
From the ranks of these people, spread over West Africa from the Senegal to the Chad, had sprung from time to time political leaders, divines and men of letters who had played a conspicuous part in the history of the old Niger civilizations.
The Hausa Chieftains had established a nominal authority over a wide expanse of territory and were constantly at war with the aborigines on their borders.
The general condition of the country remained pretty much what it had been.
A period of comparative political quiet ensued.
A recrudescence of spiritual influence and of letters everywhere manifested itself.
The trans-desert trade revived.
Administrative decay gradually set in and extended with the years.
Emirs quarrelled amongst themselves.
This or that chief acted on his own responsibility in political affairs affecting the general weal, or entirely broke away from control.
Rebellious chieftains formed robber strongholds.
Military operations degenerated into mere raiding for the capture and sale of prisoners of war to replenish revenues from ordinary taxation which the disturbed state of the country was causing to decrease.
There has probably been a natural tendency in recent years to exaggerate the aggregate effect for evil upon the country which accompanied the weakening of the Fulani dynasty.
Some notion of parallels in approaching the events of West African history is very desirable, but not often conspicuous.
But there can be no doubt— the evidence of one’s own eyes in ruined villages and once cultivated areas “gone to bush” is conclusive—that when the alien Britisher arrived upon the scene as a reforming political force, Northern Nigeria was once more urgently in need of a power sufficiently strong to restore order.
Such was the condition of the Hausa States.
There is no need here to describe the events which led to the British occupation, or to [102] narrate the circumstances attending it.
We have replaced the Fulani in supreme control of the destinies of Northern Nigeria.
We are there to stay.
What are the problems with which we have to grapple?
These are the questions to examine.
But before doing so, let us first see what manner of people they are over whom we rule henceforth as over-lords.
And this is the more remarkable since these territories have been separated from the east by inhospitable, mainly waterless stretches, and from the north by vast and desolate sandy wastes; while southwards the forest and the swamp cut them off from all communication with the outer world by sea.
That is the condition in which they are to-day in this difficult transition stage when the mechanical engines of modern progress, the feverish economic activity of the Western world, the invading rattle of another civilization made up of widely differing ideals, modes of thought, and aims, assailed them.
Will the irresistible might wielded by the new forces be wisely exercised in the future?
Will they have the patience to move slowly; the sympathy to appreciate the period of strain and stress which these revolutionary influences must bring with them; the perception to recognize what elements of greatness and of far-reaching promise this indigenous civilization contains?
From the burnt grasses, golden flowers destitute of leaf companionship peep timidly forth as though fearful of such uncongenial surroundings.
The sun beats downward shrewdly, and combined with the gentle amble of the patient beast beneath you, induces drowsiness.
It is hot, dreamily, lethargically hot.
All the world seems comatose, the unfolding panorama unreal as if seen through a fog of visionary reverie.
But there is nothing fanciful about the rapidly approaching cloud of dust ahead, which emits a swelling murmur of confused sound.
It takes shape and substance, and for the next half-hour or so, drowsiness and heat are alike forgotten in the [108] contemplation of a strange medley of men and animals.
Droves of cattle, among them the monstrous horned oxen from the borders of Lake Chad, magnificent beasts, white or black for the most part.
Flocks of Roman-nosed, short-haired, vacant-eyed sheep—white with black patches.
Tiny, active, bright brown goats skipping along in joyful ignorance of impending fate.
Pack-bullocks, loaded with potash, cloth, hides and dried tobacco leaves, culinary utensils, and all manner of articles wrapped in skins or in octagon-shaped baskets made of parchment, tight drawn in a wicker framework, which later—on the return journey—will be packed with kolas carefully covered with leaves.
A few camels, skinny and patchy, and much out at elbows so to speak, similarly burdened.
The drivers move among their beasts.
Keeping in the rear, with lengthy staves outstretched over the animal’s back, they control any tendency to straggle across the road.
Tall spare men, for the most part, these drivers, small-boned, tough and sinewy.
But many Tuaregs are here also from the far-distant north, even beyond the Nigerian border; their fierce eyes gleaming above the black veil drawn across the face, covering the head and falling upon the robe beneath, once white, now stained and rent by many weeks of travel.
But here is a professional hunter who has joined the party.
You can tell him from his bow held in the right hand and the quiver of reed-arrows barbed—and, maybe, poisoned—slung across his back.
The legs of the men are bare to the knees, and much-worn sandals cover their feet.
Some carry loads of [109] merchandise, food and water-gourds; others have their belongings securely fastened on bullock or donkey.
Many women bear in addition to the load upon the head, a baby on the back, its body hidden in the outer robe, its shiny shaven head emerging above, sometimes resting against the soft and ample maternal shoulders, sometimes wobbling from side to side in slumber, at the imminent risk, but for inherited robustness in that region, of spinal dislocation.
Two tired mites are mounted upon a patient ox, the father walking behind.
A sturdy middle-aged Hausa carries one child on his shoulders, grasps another by the wrist, supporting his load with his free hand.
A gay, dusty crowd, weary and footsore, no doubt, tramping twenty miles in a day carrying anything from forty to one hundred pounds; but, with such consciousness of freedom, such independence of gait and bearing!
What a contrast!
Throughout the dry season the trade routes are covered with such caravans and with countless pedestrians in small groups or in twos or threes—I am told by men who have lived here for years and by the natives themselves, that while highway robbery is not unknown, a woman, even unattended (and I saw many such) is invariably safe from molestation—petty traders and itinerant merchants, some coming north loaded with kolas, salt and cloth, others going south with butchers’ provender, potash, cloth, grass, and leather-ware, etc., witness to the intensive internal commerce which for centuries upon centuries has rolled up and down the highways of Nigeria.
The sonorous tones perforate the mists of sleep, heralding the coming of the dawn.
Insistent, reverberating through the still, cold air—the night and first hours of the day in these latitudes are often very cold.
Then the unseen voice is again raised, seeming to gather unto itself a passionate appeal as the words of the prayer flow more rapidly.
The myriad stars still shine in the deep purple panoply of the heavens, but their brilliancy grows dimmer.
The atmosphere seems infused with a tense expectancy.
The tones rise triumphant and die away in grave cadence.
Surely it is a good thing and not a bad thing that African man should be reminded as he quits his couch, and as he returns to it, of an all-presiding, all-pervading, all-comprehending Deity?
His fashion may not be our fashion.
What of that?
Whom does this call to God imperil?
The people who respond to it and prostrate themselves in the dust at its appeal?
Let us be quite sure that our own salvation is secured by our own methods, that the masses of our own people are as vividly conscious of the Omnipotent, as free and happy in their lives, as these Nigerian folk, ere we venture to disturb the solemn acknowledgment and petition that peal forth into the dusk of the Nigerian morn.
And now a faint amber flush appears in the eastern sky.
It is the signal for many sounds.
The scent of burning wood assails the nostrils with redolent perfume.
The white tick-birds, which have passed the night close-packed on the fronds of the tall fan-palms, rustle their feathers and prepare, in company with their scraggy-necked scavenging colleagues the vultures, for the useful if unedifying business of the day.
Nigerian life begins, and what a busy intensive life it is!
From sunrise to sunset, save for a couple of hours in the heat of the day, every one appears to have his hands full.
Soon all will be at work.
The men driving the animals to pasture, or hoeing in the fields, or busy at the forge, or dye-pit or loom; or making ready to sally forth to the nearest market with the products of the local industry.
The women cooking the breakfast, or picking or spinning cotton, or attending to the younger children, or pounding corn in large and solid wooden mortars, pulping the grain with pestles—long staves, clubbed at either end—grasped now in one hand, now in the other, the whole body swinging with the stroke as it descends, and, perhaps, a baby at the back, swinging with it; or separating on flat slabs of stone the seed from the cotton lint picked the previous [113] day.
This is a people of agriculturists, for among them agriculture is at once life’s necessity and its most important occupation.
The sowing and reaping, and the intermediate seasons bring with them their several tasks.
The ground must be cleared and hoed, and the sowing of the staple crops concluded before the early rains in May, which will cover the land with a sheet of tender green shoots of guinea-corn, maize, and millet, and, more rarely, wheat.
When these crops have ripened, the heads of the grain will be cut off, the bulk of them either marketed or stored—spread out upon the thatch-roofed houses to dry, sometimes piled up in a huge circle upon a cleared, dry space—in granaries of clay or thatch, according to the local idea; others set aside for next year’s seeds.
The stalks, ten to fifteen feet in height, will be carefully gathered and stacked for fencing purposes.
Nothing that nature provides or man produces is wasted in this country.
Nature is, in general, kind.
And man himself, in perennial contact with Nature, has learned to read and retain many of her secrets which his civilized brother has forgotten.
One tree grows gourds with neck and all complete, which need but to be plucked, emptied and dried to make first-rate water-bottles.
A bush yields a substantial pod which when ready to burst and scatter its seeds is found to contain a fibrous substance which [114] resembles—and may be identical with, I am not botanist enough to tell—the loofah of commerce, and is put to the same uses.
As many as a dozen oblong, mud-lined, wicker hives closed at one end, the other having a small aperture, may sometimes be seen in a single tree.
Before harvest time has dawned and with the harvesting, the secondary crops come in for attention.
Cassava and cotton, indigo and sugar-cane, sweet potatoes and tobacco, onions and ground-nuts, beans and pepper, yams and rice, according to the locality and suitability of the soil.
The farmers of a moist district will concentrate on the sugar-cane—its silvery, tufted, feathery crowns waving in the breeze are always a delight: of a dry, on ground-nuts: those enjoying a rich loam on cotton, and so on.
While the staple crops represent the imperious necessity of life—food, the profits from the secondary crops are expended in the purchase of clothing, salt and tools, the payment of taxes, the entertainment of friends and chance acquaintances (a generous hospitality characterizes this patriarchal society), and the purchase of luxuries, kolas, tobacco, ornaments for wives and children.
The fields themselves are protected from incursions of sheep and goats by tall neat fencing of guinea-corn stalks, or reeds, kept in place by native rope of uncommon strength.
Many cassava fields, the root of this plant furnishing an invaluable diet, being indeed, one of the staples of the more southerly regions, are similarly fenced.
The plots are marked out with the mathematical precision of squares on a chess-board, divided by ridges with frequent gaps permitting of a free influx of water from the central channel, at the opening of which, fixed in a raised platform, a long pole with a calabash tied on the end of it, is lowered into the water and its contents afterwards poured into the trench.
Conditions differ of course according to locality, and the technique and industry displayed by the farmers of one district vary a good deal from the next.
There is little we can teach the Kano farmer.
There is much we can learn from him.
In fact, every scrap of fertilizing substance is husbanded by this expert and industrious agricultural people.
Kano is, of course, the most fertile province of the Protectorate, but this general description of agricultural Nigeria does not only apply to Kano Province.
From the early rains until harvest time a prolific weed-growth has continuously to be fought.
Very hard work at the right time is the secret of success for the Nigerian agriculturist.
One can but hope that the former may outweigh the latter as the country gradually settles down after the severe demands placed upon it these last few years.
The Fulani peasant is but rarely an agriculturist in Nigeria, but he plays an important, if indirect, part in the agriculture of the Hausa provinces.
One month a given district may be full of Fulani camps, come from where his fellow-man has but the vaguest of notions.
The next, not a single Fulani will be seen within it.
But they return, as a rule, the ensuing year to their old haunts.
I struck several of their encampments, at distances hundreds of miles apart.
A FULANI GIRL.
There is no more interesting sight in Nigeria than a Fulani encampment.
It is usually pitched well away from the beaten track, albeit within convenient distance of a village.
As for the people themselves, you are aware of an indefinable sentiment of affinity in dealing with them.
They are a white, not a black race.
A fact worth recording, perhaps, is that while the Hausa woman spins and the Hausa man weaves cotton, the Fulani woman does both the spinning and the weaving.
If the agricultural life of the Northern Nigerian peoples is a full one, the industrial life, especially in the northern provinces of the Protectorate, is equally so.
It is an extraordinarily self-sufficing country at present, and the peasant-cultivator and artisan are [120] interdependent, the latter supplying the domestic wants and making the requisite implements for the former.
The variety of trades may be estimated from the old Hausa system of taxation.
Exemption from taxes was granted to shoe-makers, tailors, weavers, tanners, potters, and makers of indigo; but market taxes were imposed upon corn measurers, brokers, sellers of salt, tobacco, kolas, and ironstone.
This pagan hoe somewhat resembles our English spade, but is wielded in quite different fashion.
Iron drills, rough hammers and axes, nails, horseshoes, stirrup-irons and bits are included among the ordinary forms of the blacksmith’s art.
Iron-stone is common in many parts of the country and is extensively worked, furnaces being met with in every district where the use of the metal is locally in vogue.
The history of native tin smelting in Nigeria furnishes a remarkable proof of the capacity of the Nigerian native, but is too long to set forth here in detail.
Suffice it to say that for a hundred years, a certain ruling family with numerous branches, has succeeded in turning out a singularly pure form of the white metal whose sale as an article of trade brought prosperity to the countryside.
When I left the tin district, owing to unjust and stupidly selfish interference with immemorial rights, the native furnaces had been closed for nine months and poverty was beginning to replace comparative affluence.
Hoe-handles, mortars, pestles, beds, doors, gins, spindles, bobbins, looms, shuttles, saddles, riding-boots, sandals, slippers, bridles, scissors, razors, rope, fishing-nets, earthenware cooking-pots, lamps, water-bottles and pipes are among the innumerable articles turned out by the artisan in Northern Nigeria.
In a dark and spacious hut perspiring men kneel in rows facing one another on either side of a huge log of wood, stained black and smooth-polished with constant use, upon which the cloths are spread and vigorously beaten with rounded wooden mallets.
Very hard work it is, as I can personally testify, having tried my hand at it, much to the entertainment of the dusky experts.
But the product is astonishingly excellent.
The completed [122] skins, dyed deep red or orange with native dyes, the roots, leaves and bark of sundry shrubs and trees being utilized in the many processes through which the raw hide passes, are as soft to the touch as Russian leather.
They are greatly appreciated in the Western world, and the trade is a rapidly increasing one.
When Henry VIII.
Its market-place, still the scene of clamorous activity, continues to attract merchants and merchandise from all parts of western Central Africa.
Picturesque by day, with numerous and gaily dressed pedestrians and horsemen perambulating its tortuous streets, busy crowds around its markets, dye-pits, tanneries, and looms, Kano is still more so when the moon floods its broad open spaces with light and flings strange shadows across the sandy thoroughfares where they abut upon the dwelling-places of its inhabitants.
Then, but for the occasional howl of a dog, this city which has endured so long and withstood so much lies wrapped in impenetrable silence.
The ugly sores of Africa—not, assuredly, as ugly or as numerous as those of Europe, but more conspicuous—are mercifully hidden.
No one walks abroad.
It is difficult to explain this fascination, for the architecture of Kano, though imposing in its way, is rude.
There are no flashing domes and sumptuous buildings as in the East; yet the few who have visited it, and the handful of officers—all travelled men—who by turn have had responsibility for the good order of the Emirate would be prepared, I fancy, one and all to confess that not even the blunting effects of familiarity can do away with the curious influences it exercises.
You are [126] aware of a vast concourse of men and women, cheery-faced, closely packed together, clad in robes of many hues—white and various shades of blue predominating; of tossing arms and turbaned heads; of long lines of clay-built booths where piled-up merchandise awaits the customer; of incessant movement, the strife of many tongues, the waft of many scents, mostly the reverse of fragrant—over all, blue sky and fierce hot sun.
Keen-featured men of business, women with elaborate coiffures resembling pictures of old Assyrian helmets, their cheeks often disfigured by exaggerated “beauty spots” daubed on with lead or antimony.
Pale-complexioned Fulani from the country, the women wearing their straight hair in ringlets, with silver earrings and gentle eyes.
The Arab merchant, arrogant and intriguer, making his way through the market to the “Arab quarter,” a quarter of the city remarkable for its Moorish architecture and unpleasantly notorious for its smells.
Each trade has its quarter.
Beneath the shelter of the booths vendors sit cross-legged, [127] their wares spread out before them.
The products of native looms from towns hundreds of miles distant, enjoying special renown for some attractive peculiarity, are purchasable here, together with the manufactures of Europe.
The former are almost infinite in diversity, and each has its particular uses.
Rough pottery, but often of elegant design, such, for example, as the small lamps used for burning ground-nut oil, in the manufacture of which mica enters.
Sheds and stalls, in addition to the booths, are devoted to the sale of numerous merchandise.
The store of an elderly white-turbaned Hausa contains a mass of rough silk mixed up with the cocoons; these are produced by the silkworm, which feeds on the tamarind tree.
Here is a stall containing the products of the local smithy, stirrup-irons, locks for doors, every kind of agricultural implement used by the native farmer, axes, knives, and skin-scrapers used in preparing goat and sheep skins for export.
Much space is taken up by the sellers of foodstuffs, mostly vegetable, such as guinea-corn and millet in variety, beans, yams, sugar-cane, sweet potatoes (in variety), pepper, onions, the fruit of the tamarind, the red flowers of the tobacco plant, cassava, and ginger.
ANOTHER OF THE ENTRANCES TO THE CITY.
Long files of cattle, donkeys, sheep, and goats can be seen winding their way to the cattle market, where many thousands are daily on sale.
The total area of the Province is 28,600 square miles, i.e.
The present Emir, Abbas, a reserved and very dark Fulani, with refined regular features and long aristocratic hands, is a fine figure of a man.
To depict the Emir’s residence as a compound built of clay is, while accurate, to give but an inadequate idea of the imposing character of these solid structures, the best of which are, with supervision, capable of resisting for centuries the action of the weather.
I am probably understating the case when I say that the tall and bulky wall—some fifteen feet in thickness—surrounding the residence encloses five acres.
Dismounting at the principal entrance, we are escorted through the gateway by several functionaries and emerge into a vast enclosure open to the sky.
On our right stands the Emir’s private mosque, a building of considerable proportions but smaller, of course, than the public mosque outside the walls.
Here and there a few picturesque figures are noticeable.
For, perhaps, a minute we wait.
Then a blare of trumpets resounds, and through the inner gateway emerges a brilliant gathering which advances slowly towards us, the Emir in the midst.
Within a dozen yards or so it halts, and the Emir, separating himself from the throng, greets us with hand outstretched—the only African in the Emirate to whom etiquette allows this particular form of salutation with the White man.
Towering above most of the councillors, officers of state and heads of leading families by whom he is accompanied, and bearing himself with great dignity, the Emir murmurs some words of welcome.
He invites us to follow him and leads the way in silence to his apartments, his courtiers closing round us as we proceed.
In the same impressive silence we pass through the inner gateway and find ourselves in a broad passage flanked on either side by lofty audience chambers whose dimensions it is difficult to gauge in the semi-obscurity which reigns within them.
At the end of the passage is yet another gateway.
Crossing a courtyard we enter the outer room of the Emir’s private apartments.
A word as to the architecture and appearance of the room, which, as we were subsequently to ascertain, is roughly similar to the audience chambers we have left behind.
INSIDE KANO CITY.
Conversation then ranged over the part of the province of Kano I had, up to that time, visited; the industry of the inhabitants, their methods of agriculture, the care they bestowed upon secondary crops, such as cotton, cassava and onions, the great city market [133] and the variety of goods sold therein.
I expressed a wish to see the irrigated farms, and the Emir named certain localities near the city where such farms were to be seen.
The antiquity of the city and its interesting records was the next subject approached.
It would, I remarked, be a very great pity if its essential characteristics were not maintained amid the innovations which the railway would bring in its train.
From that point of view I ventured to express regret that the ancient walls of the city were, in parts, falling into disrepair.
Would it not be possible to start repairs on one section at first, performing the needed work gradually, doing a certain amount every year and finishing section by section?
The Emir fully concurred, saying that his people themselves wished the walls restored.
He hoped to deal with the matter, but thought that it might be easier to commence preliminary repairs on a general scale rather than start one part and finish that first as I had suggested.
From the question of the wall we turned to the more difficult one of European traders and educated Native traders from the coast whom the railway would bring, settling in the city.
The subject has already given rise to discussions at home, which are being followed in Northern Nigeria with anxious concern, and such momentous consequences are bound up in it that I felt it incumbent to ascertain through personal contact, the views of one of the most important, in a certain measure the most important, of the [134] Mohammedan chiefs through whom we exercise supreme control.
I told the Emir I would be quite frank with him, and hoped that he would be equally frank with me.
What I wished to know were the Emir’s opinions in the matter.
Did he, or did he not, see objections to the presence of Christian preachers in the city?
For some time the Emir kept silent, his fingers twitching nervously.
Our fathers and our grandfathers were Muslims.
For many generations we have been Muslims.
What is the use of preaching if there are no converts?
The missionaries might not wish to use force.
But they would exercise pressure amounting to force, [135] because of the prestige all white men have, and the people would be disturbed and troubled in their minds.
After a further period of silent consideration, he said he had none.
Neither you nor we desire the country to become unsettled, for that would be harmful.
On the other hand, as regards secular matters and the affairs of this world, we can do anything—however great a change it might be—since our people are accustomed to law and to obey the orders of their rulers as their fathers and grandfathers were before them.
Also, as regards white men living in the city of Kano, if they do so many of our people will leave it, since the white men are too strong, and every one of them is in our eyes, a great man and powerful.
The lion and the lamb cannot lie down together.
He not only gave it his full official support and checked certain leanings of an opposite kind, but he brought to bear upon the situation a personal sympathy, an illuminating and penetrative genius which popularized the policy in quarters previously hostile or indifferent.
That nothing should be allowed to divert us from keeping on the same road is the writer’s conviction, for what it may be worth, after several years’ study at a distance and recent investigations on the spot.
Too much importance can hardly be ascribed to the distinction.
The success already attained would be thrown away if policy were deflected in the direction of substituting European for native ideas.
If the native machine is expected to perform functions for which it is unqualified, the works get out of gear.
If the Chiefs are called upon to exercise their authority in enforcing measures essentially alien to the native constitution, their prestige over the individual lapses.
They become mere puppets, and indirect rule breaks down.
I hope to make clear what the native constitution is, and what is meant by ruling on “native lines.” The difficulties of improving and purifying when required a native administration, without impairing its general efficiency, are always considerable.
In Northern Nigeria they are, for several reasons, peculiarly so.
If the result, so far, has shown the wisdom of the original conception, it has been due to the determination and tact of the senior Political Residents, and to the excellence of the native material.
Our task has been furthered by the administrative capacities of the Fulani Emirs.
Some were, indeed, found unfit and had to be removed, but the majority are increasingly showing themselves not only capable but quite indispensable to the work of government.
It would, however, be mischievous to conceal the fact that indirect rule in the proper sense of the term, i.e.
This opposition is often quite honest and quite easy to understand if the conditions are grasped.
It is important they should be grasped.
Indirect rule is an obstacle to employment and promotion in some branches of the service.
It restricts the scope of secretarial, judicial, police and military activities.
It robs [138] the educated native barrister trained in English law, and the educated native clerk, of a field for the exercise of their professions.
It checks the European capitalist in a hurry to push on “development.” The missionary is apt to regard it as a stumbling-block to Christian propaganda.
Finally, there is the type of European who is racially biased against the retention of any sort of control by the native in his own country.
Indirect rule, therefore, has very many enemies, and it cannot have too many friends among the thinking public at home.
So far as Northern Nigeria is concerned, strenuous efforts will have to be put forward by all who are convinced of the necessity of upholding indirect rule therein, when the amalgamation of the two Protectorates is taken in hand.
That time cannot be far distant and the wind which blows from the south is charged with many hostile particles.
Let us first consider geographical verities and ways and means.
Northern Nigeria is 255,000 square miles in extent and the territory is divided into thirteen provinces.
One cannot imagine that their Lordships’ satisfaction would increase if they were presented not with a bill of a quarter of a million but of two millions.
The single Province of Kano, which under the present system is supervised by seventeen political officers, and more than pays its own way, would require at least three hundred officials if direct rule were established, or the prestige of the Emirs so weakened as to deprive them of all real authority over the people, and this, exclusive of a swarm of native officials who could not be done without in any case.
That brings me to my next point.
Direct rule would, of necessity, involve an enormous, directly paid, native staff.
For its every action the Government would be compelled to accept responsibility, and its members would, perforce, be largely composed of the class of native—the most undesirable type, it may be added—from which the policemen and soldiers are now recruited.
Then, assuming for purposes of argument the non-existence of these impediments, where would lie the moral justification, let alone the purely political expediency, of sweeping away the rule of the natural rulers of the country?
Essentially the same groundwork is found in the more rudimentary pagan communities which have remained without the area of Mohammedan organization.
Incidentally, it may be well to mark that Northern Nigeria has not evolved powerful pagan organisms comparable with those of Yoruba and Benin in the south.
The basis of the social system is the village community.
A number of village communities form the tribal community.
The partly hereditary, partly elective rule of the tribal community constitutes, with the Executive, the Government of the entire community.
The ruler himself is the “Governor,” against whose actions the people can appeal to native law and custom.
For the welfare of that community the ruler is guardian.
Land is the common heritage of the community.
The ruler is trustee for the land.
Upon him devolves the granting of rights of occupancy.
The structural law of tenure is the right of occupier and user, not of owner.
Private ownership of land is unknown.
The cultivator is, in reality, a licensee.
Alienation of land is unknown.
The unit of taxation is the village community.
[141] Each individual is supposedly assessed according to his earning capacity.
If he is an agriculturist he furnishes a proportion of his crop, which, in effect, is a rent paid to the community for the use of land.
If an artisan, he pays a tax upon his trade.
If a herdsman, upon his cattle.
The community as a whole is subject to specific imposts which assist in maintaining the civil list of the ruler.
If a balance could be struck, it would probably be found that a system of this kind ensures a greater amount of human happiness than many of the forms of government even now existing in Europe.
Indeed, the closer one’s knowledge of African life and the more insight one obtains into the immense sea of human misery heaving beneath the crust of Western civilization, the more one is led to marvel at the shallow commonplaces which picture the African wallowing in degraded barbarism.
Like all institutions, the African system lends itself to abuse.
Those abuses the British Administration has set itself to correct, while maintaining the system itself.
The British, having replaced the Fulani, are in native law and custom the conquering tribe.
The urgency of devoting as much time as it was possible to spare from the pressing problems of the hour demanding daily solution, to an investigation of the exact conditions prevailing in each province was, therefore, imperative.
One question above all others had to be elucidated, that of the ownership of land—basis of the whole social edifice.
Legislation which should embody them was, moreover, of additional moment for two reasons.
Secondly, because the approach of the railways, the development of roads, the increasing demand for foodstuffs and the all-round intensifying economic pressure were bound, once more automatically, to originate, independently of the industry of the cultivator, an incremental value in the land.
Before that state of affairs was brought home to the native and had, perhaps, been made under native law and custom, the subject of private property, which would have meant the creation of vested interests difficult to displace, it was the obvious duty of a Government trustee for the community to step in [143] and secure these expanding values for the future benefit of that community.
But things move slowly in West Africa, and legislation of the kind referred to was novel: unique, indeed.
West Africa’s problems had never been thought out ahead before.
But the Colonial Office was sympathetic, and there were men in Nigeria who, comprehending well the perils of leaving the land question unregulated, were determined to do their utmost to push the matter through.
On January 1st of this year the most far-seeing measure of constructive statesmanship West Africa has ever known was put upon the statute-book.
“The Land and Native Rights Proclamation” consecrates the three main principles of native law and custom.
First, that the whole of the land whether occupied or unoccupied is “native land.” Secondly, that the land is under the control and subject to the disposition of the Governor, to be “held and administered by him for the use, need and common benefit of the natives of Northern Nigeria.” Thirdly, that the Governor’s power shall be exercised in accordance with “native laws and customs.” For the rest, and without going into detail, the measure can be described as expressing the native system, and the natural developments of the native system, in English.
It is not, in Nigeria, an innovating measure, but a conservative measure; not an experiment, but a preservation of the status quo.
It is not a measure of land nationalization, because land nationalization means State control of the land and all that is done upon it.
What this measure does is to provide for the communalizing of the communal value of the land, leaving the occupier full control over the use of land and full benefit for his private enterprise upon it, with payment of rent to the community to which the land belongs, instead of to a landlord.
The individual’s right to all that is due to [144] individual work and expenditure, but not to the communal value, is secured.
The holding up of land for speculative purposes is, in effect, penalized, while the man who is industrious is not made to pay more as the outcome of his enterprise.
At the same time the basis is laid for a land revenue which, with the years, will be the chief source of income of the Government —the healthiest form of income, perhaps, for any Government.
For the first time in the history of West Africa, the art of governing the native on native lines has become consecrated in British legislation and the pernicious tradition of applying the law of England to African land questions has been set aside.
It is impossible to exaggerate the potentialities for good of such a departure from crude, ignorant and unscientific precedent.
It will be the duty of the Colonial Office, to whom everlasting credit is due for having sanctioned this proclamation, to watch strictly that the principles laid down therein are not departed from in practice, and to apply them, with the modifications of method which differing and pre-existing conditions render advisable, to Southern Nigeria also.
That attempts to undermine the provisions and the spirit of the Northern Nigerian law will arise, may be unhesitatingly assumed.
It is being pursued in every branch of the Administration concurrently, with a steadily marked improvement in the efficiency and purity of the public service.
This is the Supreme Court of Appeal.
Ninety more police are spread over the various districts and attached to the District Courts.
There are no British native police whatever.
That experiment was tried for a time, being attended with such conspicuous ill-success and being accompanied by such an increase in crime that it was wisely abandoned.
Nothing could surely convey a more striking proof of the order reigning throughout the Emirate and of the law-abiding character of the people, than the fact of its being policed with ninety men armed with nothing more formidable than a sword.
I have walked alone save for one white companion through the deserted streets of Kano city at night.
Kano city is not, however, free from thieves, and seeing that so many strangers are constantly coming and going it is hardly to be wondered at.
Some two years back night burglaries became unpleasantly frequent.
Native ingenuity hit upon a plan to cope with [147] them.
The services of the professional rat-catchers were enlisted.
They were enrolled as night-watchmen, paid £1 a man, and told they would be fined 2s.
Very few fines were inflicted, and Kano was cleared of its nocturnal undesirables “one time.” The general standard of probity among the inhabitants of Kano themselves is, however, shown by the free and easy manner in which merchandise is left unguarded in the great market, and it appears that lost property is constantly being handed over to the Alkali, who has the articles called out by a public crier in the market-place.
The absence of a fixed scale of emoluments for public servants is always the weak point of native government.
Northern Nigeria was no exception to the rule.
The system follows traditional lines but vastly improves them.
Half the total revenue collected goes direct to the Northern Nigeria Government.
Of the remaining half, fifty per cent.
The balance is divided into fifths on the basis of two-fifths of each district’s yield to the District Headman; two-fifths of the sub-district’s yield to the Sub-district [148] Headman; one-fifth of his own village’s yield to the Village Headman.
This would enable the District Heads, Sub-district Heads and Village Heads to have fixed salaries like the Native Executive, a very desirable ideal to aim at.
There are thirteen districts in charge of thirteen local Alkalis drawing £60 a year each.
The contract was given out by the Emir and the contractor paid the workmen to the number of over a thousand, a previously unheard-of event in native annals and an example of one of the many improvements which the Native Administration is carrying out under British influence.
The administration of justice has been vastly purified by the inauguration of fixed [149] emoluments.
Speaking generally, the Alkalis are a fine body of men, and they appear to be realizing more and more the dignity and responsibilities of their position.
The chief Alkali in particular is a man of very high character.
The legal code in criminal and civil matters is, of course, mainly inspired by the sacred books, and the Alkali is generally a Doctor of Mohammedan common law.
The courts are very hard worked, dealing with about 7000 to 8000 cases per annum, and the Alkalis fully earn their salaries.
I attended the chief Alkali’s court in Kano city, and was greatly impressed by the general decorum, the respect shown to the Alkali, the activity of the assessors, the marshalling of the witnesses, the order, rapidity, and business-like manner in which the whole proceedings were conducted.
It was an example of native self-government in Western Africa which would have astonished a good many people in Europe.
From a practical point of view the maintenance of the Native Administration, guided and supervised by the Resident, i.e.
If the Native Administration were not financially provided for it would cease to exist.
If the Emirs and their executives were converted into mere civil pensioners of the Government, they would become figure-heads deprived of all power and prestige.
Under the system I have described the Emirs have power, and only hyper-sensitiveness and short-sightedness can see in their power our weakness.
Anything that impairs the influence of the native authorities, not only impairs the efficiency of the Administration of the country, but is an invitation to lawlessness and disorder.
It is only fair to state in this connection that the initiative of perpetuating, under British rule and with the modifications required, the system of land taxation indigenous to the community, was due to the suggestion of Sir William Wallace, for many years Acting High Commissioner of Northern Nigeria.
Increased knowledge born of familiarity in the art of tropical government and of anthropological knowledge, a clearer realization of human needs which an expanding mental horizon brings with it, are teaching us many things.
Our one and only [152] conspicuous Imperial failure was due to a misguided belief that we could, and that it was desirable in our own interests that we should, crush out nationality by violence.
It inflicted upon the victims immense misery and upon the performers embarrassments which have endured for centuries.
British India is rent with confusion and mentally unsettled by a jumble of conflicting ideals, to which the Protected Native States offer a contrast that cannot but carry with it its own very significant lessons.
All the good work accomplished in Northern Nigeria during the last seven years can be flung away by a refusal to benefit from experience in other parts of the world.
In pleading for the slow but sure policy everywhere in Nigeria, and in pleading that where in Nigeria national life has already expanded through the exercise of its own internal forces into organized communities, possessing their own laws and customs, their own machinery of government and their own well-defined characteristics, that national life shall be protected, preserved and strengthened to enable it to bear the strain of new conditions, one is pleading, it seems to me, for the true welfare of the people and for the highest concept of Imperialism.
These considerations hold good as regards every branch of European activity.
Effective British political control does not require constant encroachments of departmental activity.
British industrial interests can be allowed to find a natural outlet in the ordinary play of economic forces without calling upon Government assistance, for example, to undermine a national weaving industry in which, as Barth remarked of it many years ago, there is something that is “truly grand,” giving employment and support as it does to innumerable families without compelling them to sacrifice their domestic habits or to pass their lives in immense establishments detrimental to health.
British commercial necessities do not [153] demand that the big native cities should be thrown open to the White trader, who can pursue his useful avocations just as well, and certainly with much greater regard to health conditions, outside than inside them.
In the same way the advent of the missionary into the organized Mohammedan provinces of the north before the country is ripe to receive them, would be a positive danger, besides being an act perilously akin to a breach of faith.
Surely we have become sufficiently intelligent to take a broadly human view of these things?
We hold this newly occupied country by the force of our prestige, far more than by the very small number of native troops in our service.
That it is the duty of Government to prevent the introduction of elements, whatever their character and however lofty their motives, whose presence is calculated to cause unrest, is sufficiently self-evident as not to need emphasizing.
No Government can afford to disregard so clear a view as that formulated, for example, in the Emir of Kano’s letter given in Chapter VIII.
But one would desire, if possible, that the leaders of the Christian Churches themselves should be brought to appreciate the justice of the contention.
The establishment of Christian missions in the Mohammedan Emirates would not succeed in damming up the self-propelling currents of Islamic propaganda which are permeating Nigerian paganism.
That is the true problem which the Churches have to face.
The question of economic development is on the same plane.
That peace, the advent of [154] railways and the growth of population will eventually result in the creation of a large commercial movement of affairs with Northern Nigeria—apart from the mineral output —is not to be doubted.
But exaggeration as regards immediate prospects is to be deprecated, and the claims of economic development, important as they are, should not be allowed to play too great a part in administrative solicitude.
The main concern of the Administration for the next few years should be that of placing the political, financial and educational organization of the country upon secure foundations.
Political unrest and social confusion are stumbling-blocks to commercial progress, and everything should be done to avoid them.
Those in a position to realize the marvels already accomplished in this region of Africa by the handful of British officials administering the country, and the many problems requiring on the part of those who are called upon to deal with them the utmost delicacy and tact in adjustment, cannot but enter a caveat against all tendencies, from whatever source they may emanate, be they of self-interest or of unselfish devotion, to “rush” Northern Nigeria.
Rapid expansion does not necessarily mean progress.
Sometimes it means exactly the reverse.
Let us, rendered wise by experience elsewhere, set our faces like flint against the “Europeanizing” of Northern Nigeria.
That Northern Nigeria should be preserved from it must be the earnest wish of all who are acquainted with its peoples and alive to their possibilities.
The motive of the Fulani jihad has usually been attributed either to mere religious fanaticism or to personal and racial ambition; or, again, as an incident in the prolonged struggle for power on the part of this or that ruler or dynasty which has destroyed the fertile uplands of Western Africa south of the Sahara since the shattering of the ancient Niger civilizations by the Moorish invasion at the end of the sixteenth century.
It appears to me that this appreciation is superficial, and that we must look deeper than the surface results.
I am not sure that these surface results themselves do not suggest the need of doing so.
A man of letters galvanizing a whole countryside to revolt against oppression.
Shepherds and cowherds flinging away their sticks and staves and rallying to his standard.
Initial defeat turned into victory.
A number of independent States converted into a homogeneous entity acknowledging a temporal and spiritual over-lord.
An immense region ill-provided with means of internal communication brought to recognize one common authority—and all within a year or two.
These are remarkable occurrences.
They insinuate the existence of some driving force below the surface.
The invasion did not actually swamp the Hausa States, but its indirect consequences must have been felt throughout them in everywhere shaking established order, and in the decay of spiritual influence following upon the heels of anarchy.
In the absence of any continuous written records, the history of the period following the advance of Morocco’s musketeers into the Western Sudan, appears to Western minds as a confused medley of internecine strife without defined objects of any kind.
One can imagine, let us say, a Chinese historian picturing the history of England from the tenth to the fifteenth century much in the same light, if his materials for composing it were almost wholly confined to oral traditions.
But a close study of the few documents at our disposal must, I think, induce the belief that, dating from the introduction of a higher spiritual influence into the country— Mohammedanism had begun to acquire a footing by the eleventh century—the land was never free from an agency which sought the uplifting of society.
In the midst of all these disordered turmoils, when the worship of the [157] true God was being swept aside by a wave of recrudescent paganism, when mosques were being destroyed and desecrated and social lawlessness reigned supreme, little knots of true believers gathered, forming as it were islands in the sea of turbulence and moral abasement, to which Christian Europe added a renewed element of subversion by her demand for slaves, thus intensifying internal warfare by furnishing it with a new and deadly incentive.
He used his influence at the Court of the Hausa King to secure the building of schools and the spread of letters.
He himself and his brother and his son—into whose hands he placed affairs of state after the conquest—wrote a number of books whose titles are sufficient to indicate their character.
Here are some of them: “The Book manifesting the Path of Righteousness and Unrighteousness,” “The Book for the saving of the People of the Time and the Teaching of the Ignorant to understand the Knowledge of the Word,” “Explanation to the Rulers as regards their Duties and what is due from them in the execution of their Duties,” “The Book expressing the Difference between Right and Wrong,” “The Book the Window for Students in the holding of the Doors of the Faith in God the Giver,” “The Book to prevent others from following the promptings of the Devil,” “The Book plainly showing that the love of the World is the cause of every [158] Fault.” A reflection by the way.
When the Fulani reformers were composing these works, and for many years afterwards, European and American slavers were periodically visiting the lower Niger, six hundred miles south, and, by presents of guns and powder, hounding on the natives to raid one another for the benefit of the Western plantations!
A consideration of these facts irresistibly suggests that the root causes of the Fulani outburst were spiritual in their nature.
He gave a renewed inspiration to letters.
That the country, after half a century, fell back once more into political chaos does not in the least weaken the moral to be gleaned from these events.
The religious revival has not gone back.
From that political chaos the country has been rescued by the British power.
One of the obvious duties of the Administration is to continue the work of the [159] great Fulani reformer in everywhere extending and broadening the intellectual horizon, and doing nothing to weaken the national spiritual influences, of the people of the land.
The creation of a system of education which shall be truly national is imperative at this moment when the whole fabric of native society is being shaken by disturbing elements.
The field is clear: the slate clean.
We are here unfettered by those bitter experiences of the West Coast of Africa and of India which are perpetual reminders of past blunders and daily handicaps to true progress.
The result is so notoriously unsatisfactory as to need no specific illustration.
The object of the Northern Nigeria Administration is to set on foot an educational system throughout the country which shall save the Protectorate from these follies, while at the same time affording the rising generation the intellectual pabulum we are bound to provide, and ultimately laying the basis for a native civil service.
At the present moment [161] the scheme is only in its infancy, but the infant is robust and full of promise.
The creation of a primary and secondary school will follow as soon as the work is sufficiently advanced.
Special importance attaches to the elementary schools, as through them the mass of the population will be influenced.
As soon as the teachers now being trained are ready they will be supplied to the Provinces, where the Residents are eagerly awaiting them, and it is the intention in every case that they shall be accompanied by a technical instructor.
Here at last, one saw, was a common-sense, well-thought-out, scientific scheme to enlarge the mental outlook of the West African on African lines, to preserve his racial constitution, to keep him in touch with his parents, in sympathy with his national life.
For another thing, the fatal mistake of taking in pupils free, or even paying them to come, is not being repeated here; the principle of every pupil paying a fee, paying for his books and paying for his medical attendance having been laid down from the start.
Land surveying and farm measuring is included in their curriculum, and some of them, although their course of instruction is not completed, have already rendered very considerable assistance, their work (which I was able to examine at a later date), calculated in acres and roods and covering many assessment sheets, being neat and generally accurate.
I did not see rows of lads in European costume, unsuited to the climate, hideous (out here) and vehicles for the propagation of tuberculosis, but decently clothed in their own graceful, healthy African garb.
Here were perhaps threescore youngsters, the older and more advanced boys forming a separate class, and a more intelligent, keener crowd it would be difficult to select in any country.
In the technical school, the leather-workers were particularly interesting.
The encouragement of this branch of native art should prove a great incentive to what is a [164] national industry.
There is no reason why in time the Hausa leather-workers should not only cut out the trade in Tripoli saddlery and boots, imported across the desert and sold at fabulous profits in the local markets, but supply, as the Hausa cotton manufacturer supplies, the needs of French and German territory.
Indeed, there is no limit to the vistas which this national system of education opens up.
A people of considerable intellect, of notable industrial aptitudes, having the sense of history, possessed of singular national vitality, guided on national lines of thought expansion, the old-time barriers of internecine strife wiped out—what a magnificent experiment, and how great the privilege of the initiators!
One other fact needs chronicling in connection with these national schools.
It is the intention of the Administration to insist that all pupils receive careful religious instruction from teachers of their own creed.
It is earnestly to be hoped that the Colonial Office will resist any attempt at interference with this policy.
Interference would be disastrous.
Many prejudices have had to be overcome.
Justification for the confidence which the chiefs repose in our good faith can alone enable us to defeat these influences.
Were that confidence to be shaken, the effort to train the future rulers (under the British suzerainty) of the country with a view to making them mentally and physically better fitted to assist the Administration, and to bring them into closer contact with one another and with the Government official, would receive a fatal blow, and the prestige of the Government would be deeply shaken.
To allow a weakening of the spiritual forces at work among the peoples of the Northern Hausa States would be to perpetuate a cruel wrong upon those who have come under our protection and from thenceforth are our wards.
Three or four other commercial houses have extended their operations to the territory, and more will certainly follow.
Another alien commercial element is the Arab trader.
His seat of interest is Kano city, where he has been established for several centuries, and where, as already stated, there is a recognized Arab quarter.
The trans-desert trade from Tripoli has always been in his hands, but he is now beginning to use the parcel post and the western route largely.
Ten thousand parcels, weighing eleven pounds each, were despatched or received by Arab traders during the first half of last year.
The Arabs appear to deal in lines of trade with which European firms are not in touch.
Several of them have been in England, and the business headquarters of one of them is in Manchester.
They are intelligent men, but form an uncertain and not particularly safe element in the affairs of Kano.
A representative of these traders who visited me at the house kindly placed at my disposal [167] near the Residency, two miles from the city, gave it as his opinion that the railway would double the trade of the country in five years.
The two principal articles of import at present are cotton goods and salt.
The present policy strikes one as short-sighted.
A great many hopes have been engendered touching an immediate and large export of raw cotton consequent upon the termination of the railway.
I should be extremely loath to [168] say anything here which would tend to throw cold water upon the commendable enterprise of the British Cotton Growing Association, to which Imperially we owe much, and the problem is one which is affected by so many varying local influences that to dogmatize upon it would be unwise.
But at present there are two difficulties, apart from the general difficulties affecting all economic development in Northern Nigeria, to which I shall refer in a moment.
One is the question of price.
The other is the local demand.
In one sense they are inseparable.
The local demand for the raw material by local weavers exceeds the supply, and the result is that the price the Association finds itself, either directly or through its agents, the Niger Company, able to pay is insufficient to tempt the growers.
These views may be quite sound, but, granted their soundness, some time must elapse before they become appreciably operative, and I have difficulty myself in believing that any really substantial export of raw cotton is to be looked for in the immediate future.
[9] Among agricultural [169] products, corn should also figure largely in course of time.
The export of dressed goat and sheep skins is steadily increasing.
The trade now amounts to over one million skins per annum, of a total home value of £50,000 to £60,000.
Until a few years ago it was an entirely trans-desert trade, and the skins were purchased at Tripoli for the American market.
Latterly the London and Kano Trading Company have diverted more than half of this trade by the western route, and London is to-day the principal purchaser.
The possible obstacle to this is partly political and partly ethnological, and the first, at least, is worthy of special attention on the part of the Administration.
Virtually all the herds in the Hausa States are the property of the Fulani.
Indeed, his very calling necessitates that he should be continually on the move to seek out pasture-land, according to the seasons, and the localities he knows.
Here the ethnological peculiarity comes in.
The Fulani is very fond of his cattle.
He does not breed them for slaughter, but because he literally loves them.
He knows every one of them by name, and lavishes as much attention upon them as he does upon his children.
This is peculiar to him not in Nigeria only but all over Western Africa.
Fulani migration eastwards towards the Nile valley is a marked phenomenon of the last ten years, both as regards French and British territory in West Africa.
The forest resources of the country are as yet practically untapped, for lack of adequate transport.
A forestry department organized on the lines of Southern Nigeria is urgently needed.
But in this, as in almost everything else, the Administration is hampered for lack of funds.
The very vastness of the country and the natural difficulties of communication preclude rapidity in development.
In West Africa the game is generally to the tortoise, not to the hare.
And several factors must ever be borne in [171] mind.
Between district and district, province and province, all over the country there is a ceaseless interchange of commercial commodities.
That is one factor to take into account.
The belief that the majority of the inhabitants of Northern Nigeria pass their time in idleness, or what approximates to idleness, is a pure delusion.
Even from the European standpoint, which is not and cannot be the African’s from climatic causes alone, the Northern Nigerian, speaking generally, is the reverse of idle.
From this the farmer benefits, [172] but at the expense of an increase in the production of raw material for the export trade with Europe.
The Northern Nigerian farmer will grow the crop which it pays him best to grow, and if he sees a larger profit in corn for local consumption than in ground-nuts or cotton for export, he will grow corn.
These economic questions do not appear to me to be given their due proportion in the estimates which are made.
The whole country is in a state of transition, and it must be given breathing space in which to adjust itself.
Patience and statesmanship are the main necessities of the moment.
The fact of the matter is, that the paramount position held by the Niger Company—the “monopoly” as some call it, although it hardly amounts to that and must decreasingly do so—is a very sore point with many of the officials.
One very sore point is the question of “cash for produce,” and this affects not the Niger Company only, but the other merchants.
The official case is, that the natives desire cash for their produce, but that the merchants will not pay cash, or pay as little cash as possible, because they make a very much larger profit on the barter business; that this strangles trade development by discouraging the native producer, who is automatically forced to accept goods he often [173] does not require, and must afterwards sell at a loss in order to get the cash he wants.
Indeed, the official case goes further.
It is contended not only that the merchants will not buy produce against cash when asked for cash, but on occasion actually refuse to sell goods against cash offered by the native, demanding produce in lieu thereof.
Instances are given of merchants having refused to sell salt to natives for cash; of natives being able to buy cloth in the open market for actually less than the merchants reckon in paying the native producers, and so on.
Why, it is urged, should the political officer encourage the native to bring produce for sale to the merchant when all he will get is cloth that he must sell at a loss in the market in order to get silver to pay his taxes?
The views of the merchants are various.
It is pointed out that if the Administration of Southern Nigeria, whose economic resources are so much richer, makes no such charge, it is preposterous that the Administration of Northern Nigeria, whose economic fortune, in the European sense, depends so largely upon the growth of trade, should do so.
No doubt there is much to be said on both sides, and each side has a case.
On the other hand, to dub as “pernicious” the barter system, which is responsible for the vast bulk of the trade that provides the Government all over West Africa with such large revenue, must appear a straining of the use of language; nor does the Administration, I think, allow sufficiently for the innumerable difficulties which the merchant has to face in Northern Nigeria.
For example, in many of the out-stations produce has often to be stored for six months or more, depreciating all the time, before the state of the river permits of its shipment.
But, after all, cash is spreading rapidly, and the key to the situation undoubtedly lies in competition.
The more the Administration can do to attract new blood the better will be the all-round results.
Iron exists in considerable quantities and in many districts, in Southern but more particularly in Northern Nigeria.
Lignite, as is well known, stands about halfway between wood and coal.
It forms an excellent combustible, and if it can be produced in the proper form for the purpose, it would be invaluable for the Nigerian railways and for the steamers and steamboats plying up and down the river, besides saving the Administration, which is a large importer of coal, much expense.
The first experiments made with the raw material, as extracted, by the Marine Department, the Northern Nigerian Railway, and the Niger Company were not altogether satisfactory, which is, perhaps, not surprising.
The Imperial Institute in London is giving close attention to the matter.
That the deposits are of commercial value is undoubted.
Lignite is extensively used in Germany, where it is manufactured into briquettes, and excellent briquettes have been made by a German firm [176] from specimens of the Nigerian lignite supplied by the Institute.
I am told that the deposits cover an area of no less than five square miles.
There can be little doubt that in these deposits the Administration has a valuable source of potential revenue, and that the Colonial Office will be called upon before long to come to a decision as to the best means of reaping advantage therefrom.
In some quarters the opinion is entertained that the home and local authorities would be well advised to refuse to part with control over the fields, but, for some years to come at any rate, to let the Southern Nigeria Administration itself develop them.
West Africa is a peculiar country and is apt to turn the tables upon the company promoter with a disconcerting completeness.
Mica and kaolin occur in Kano.
A number of mineral surveys have been carried out by the Imperial Institute, but the potentialities of the vast bulk of the country are still unknown.
The chief discoveries have been concerned with tin.
The industry was originally, and in restricted form, a native one, and has a somewhat romantic history.
They ascertained that it possessed a trading value.
Further than that they could not move owing to the hostility of the pagan tribes.
Tin, in thin, rounded rods, became a regular article of sale in the markets.
The first sample of tin ore was sent home by Sir William Wallace, then Acting High Commissioner, in 1902.
It was examined by the Imperial Institute and was found to contain over 80 per cent.
From that time onwards the Niger Company which, under the arrangement contracted with the Imperial Government at the time of the abrogation of the Charter, stands to gain very largely through the development of the mineral resources of the Protectorate, has spent considerable sums—at first without return—in proving and in encouraging the industry.
To the company is due the fact that the field has been opened out at all.
It is but fair to state this because the company is the butt of much criticism in Northern Nigeria, and in some respects, I think, criticism inspired by jealousy of its own remarkable enterprise.
In the last three or four years no fewer than eighty-two companies have been floated to exploit Northern Nigeria tin with a total capital of £3,792,132.
[10] Hardly a week passes but that some fresh company is not floated, or the attempt made to do so.
It has, therefore, become a very big thing indeed, and an outside non-expert opinion may be of [179] some use from the point of view of the “man in the street” at home.
The country is flooded with prospectors, on the whole of a much better type than is usually attracted to a new mining region, and the Government, under guarantee from the Niger Company, are now building a light railway in the direction of the principal deposits.
Needless to say, there has been the usual amount of swindling, and, perhaps, more than the usual amount of lying.
Tin has been located in districts where there never was and never will be the slightest vestige of tin; imaginary “bore-holes” have been sunk and companies have been formed in London on the strength of utterly fraudulent reports.
Statements have been issued proclaiming that the country is self-supporting for the white prospector in the matter of supplies, which is totally untrue; and that it is a health resort, which is equally false.
Young fellows have been sent out on agreements which are a disgrace to those who drew them up, and in some cases, their bones are rotting in the ground.
[11] No doubt these incidents are common in the initial stages of every such enterprise.
Anything more at variance with the forest regions of the south it would be impossible to imagine.
Practically (there is one known exception, perhaps two) all the tin as yet discovered is alluvial, and there is virtually no alluvial tin except in the river-beds themselves.
It occurs in patches, which explains, although it does not excuse, the flamboyant statements issued on the strength of specific returns, over a given area, from washings.
The returns from washings in these patches, some of which are very rich, are made to apply in prospectus-framing to the whole area, when the bulk of it may be virgin not only of tin in payable quantities, but of any trace of tin at all.
It is unwise to dogmatize about a new country where further discoveries may give a [181] different complexion to the situation.
But in the present state of our knowledge, the statements describing Northern Nigeria as the “richest tin field in the world,” are, to put it mildly, a manifest exaggeration, and the happiest thing which could happen to the country and to the industry would be a cessation of the “boom.” It may be fairly urged that the Government’s business is not the protection of the home investor.
All the same, it is not in the public interest that Northern Nigeria should get a bad name, through wild-cat schemes and dishonest finance.
Five years hence a boom may be justified by results.
Disinterested expert opinion on the spot estimates the eventual output of the discovered field at 5000 tons per annum.
It is always possible that further and valuable deposits may be struck.
On the other hand, the life of an alluvial tin mine is, by general consent, a short one, and ten years will probably cover the life of the existing mines.
Under the circumstances it is very evident that a great number of the companies which have been floated are over-capitalized and will never pay an honest dividend.
The representative of the Niger Company, who [182] has considerable knowledge of the country and whom I saw at Joss—a beautiful station reflecting the greatest possible credit upon the company and its local staff—was very emphatic on this point, and his views were borne out by the most experienced people I consulted.
On that occasion the guilty party escaped with a substantial fine.
Should anything of the sort recur, expulsion from the country ought to accompany the fine.
Harsh and unjust handling would send them flying to the inaccessible hills.
It is tempting Providence to allow three hundred white prospectors to go wandering over the face of a vast country like this (27,000 square miles) with a political staff amounting to no more than thirteen all told; and that number, a purely nominal one, be it stated.
Twenty political officers at least should be permanently on duty in the province.
The question of transport has been a difficult one and still remains so.
Possibly the situation has changed since.
The scarcity and the distance of the villages and, consequently, of food supplies for men and beasts, from the road is also a drawback.
But at best the route is not an ideal one, costs a great deal to keep open, and is hardly capable of dealing with more than 500 tons per annum.
Of course the company enjoys a complete monopoly of that road, even the Government, it seems, having to apply to the company for carriers; and a monopoly is always undesirable in theory and sometimes very irritating in practice.
But it is difficult to see how any tin at all could have been got down, or machinery and stores got up, to and from the river if it had not been for the company’s enterprise and far-seeing methods.
Certainly the loudest of its local critics would have been quite unable to have coped with the problem.
The total population is about half a million.
No fewer than sixty-four distinct languages—not dialects—are said to have been noted within it.
The men are an upstanding race, lithe rather than muscular, great archers and in many cases daring horsemen, riding bare-backed, covering immense distances in a phenomenally short space of time and shooting accurately (with the bow) while mounted.
Most of them go about absolutely naked but for a sanitary adornment of special character.
Northern Nigeria is a land of extraordinary contrasts, which to some extent no doubt is the secret of its fascination.
The women’s clothing is also of the scantiest, consisting of a bunch of broad green leaves fixed round the waist and falling over the hips and lower abdomen.
Their chastity is proverbial even among the dissolute camp-followers.
The Administration has no money to spare.
But it is really a misfortune that public opinion in England is so lax in these matters.
We wait in order to understand the ethnological lore of our African dependencies, until German scientists have gone through them and told us what they contain of anthropological value, incidentally sweeping the country bare of its ethnological treasures.
In these things we appear to have no national pride whatever.
The soil of the province is supposedly poor, but I observed it to be covered in many places with millions of casts of virgin soil flung up by earthworms, and these must, when the rains come, enrich its recuperative properties.
The province would probably grow [186] wheat.
They are also readily taking to the rubber trade and learning how to tap the rubber trees which, in some parts, are to be met with in every village, without destroying the tree.
In the plains there are large herds of cattle, which form the principal wealth of the inhabitants, and an abundance of good grazing land.
The Fulani herdsman, ubiquitous as ever, may be seen tending his beasts.
I hesitate to strike a discord where so much unanimity prevails.
But the period within which these things can come about strikes me as still remote.
You have always the tropical African sun to reckon with, and there appears to be some subtly dangerous quality about it which even men who have lived in other tropical lands find very trying.
The situation, as it obtains to-day, is incongruous—in some respects almost absurd; and the absence of a sense of proportion in estimating responsibilities and acknowledging public services is conspicuous.
No comprehensive scheme of development and, what is more important, no unity of principle in public policy is possible while it lasts.
It is not only quite natural, but under the existing circumstances it is right that the Administration of Southern Nigeria should work for the interests of Southern Nigeria and the Administration of Northern Nigeria for the interests of the latter.
But Nigeria is geographically a single unit, and Imperial policy suffers from a treatment which regards the interests of one section as not only distinct from, but in certain cases antagonistic to [188] the interests of the other.
It is not suggested that administration should everywhere be carried out on the same pattern.
No one would contend that the problems of government in the Northern Hausa provinces can, for instance, be assimilated to the problems of government in the Eastern Province of the Southern Protectorate.
But that the main principles of government should be identical, and that the governing outlook should be directed to a consideration of the interests of Nigeria as a whole, can hardly be disputed.
Take, for example, the question of direct and of indirect rule.
The tendency in Southern Nigeria, as the Secretariat gets stronger and the initiative of the Commissioners decreases, is towards direct rule, especially in the Western Province.
Northern Nigeria has resolutely set the helm in the contrary direction.
Take the question of taxation.
North of the imaginary line which separates the two Protectorates the native pays a direct tax to the Administration, and tribute from the people to their natural Chiefs and to the Government is assured on specific principles.
Take the question of education.
The Southern Nigerian system is turning out every year hundreds of Europeanized Africans.
The Northern Nigeria system aims at the establishment of an educational system based upon a totally different ideal.
In Northern Nigeria the land question has been settled, so far as the Northern Protectorate is concerned, on a broad but sure foundation; but the Southern Nigerian native is an alien in Northern Nigerian law.
In Southern Nigeria there is no real land legislation, and the absence of such, especially in the Western Province, is raising a host of future complications.
Every year the gulf widens between the two ideals, and its ultimate [189] bridging becomes a matter of greater difficulty.
While on the one hand the Northern Nigeria Administration has had the priceless advantage of “starting fresh” and has been compelled to concentrate upon political and administrative problems, British rule in Southern Nigeria has been the slow growth of years, advancing here by conquest, there by pacific penetration, here by one kind of arrangement with native Chiefs, there by another kind of arrangement.
Politically and of necessity British rule in Southern Nigeria is a thing of shreds and patches.
In criticizing a West African Administration it must always be borne in mind that no broad lines of public policy are laid down from home.
None of the Secretary of State’s advisers have ever visited Nigeria, and however able they may be that is a disadvantage.
There is no West African Council composed of men with experience of the country, as there ought to be, which would assist the Permanent Officials in advising the Secretary of State.
The result is that each Governor and each Acting-Governor “runs his own show” as the saying is.
One set of problems is jerked forwards by this Governor, another by another.
The Governor’s position is rather like that of a Roman Emperor’s, and the officials responsible for large districts, never knowing what a new Governor’s policy is going to [190] be, look upon every fresh change with nervous apprehension, which has a very unsettling effect.
A vast wastage of time as well as many errors would be avoided if we had clear ideas at home as to the goal we are pursuing, and laid down specific principles by which that goal could be attained.
This could be done without hampering the Governors.
Indeed, the very indefiniteness of the home view on all these problems is often a serious handicap to a Governor who, for that very reason, may hesitate to take action where action is required, fearing, rightly or wrongly, the influence which Parliamentary questions may exercise upon the Secretary of State, and who may also find himself committed by an Acting-Governor, in his absence, to actions of which he personally disapproves.
In other instances the existence of definite plans in London would act as a salutary check upon sudden innovations by a new and inexperienced Governor.
Frequent changes of Governors there must be until the conditions of life in Nigeria are very much improved; but the inconveniences arising therefrom would be largely mitigated if there were continuity of a well-thought-out policy at home.
This digression is not, perhaps, altogether irrelevant to the subject under discussion.
The position of Northern Nigeria is very anomalous.
A vast Protectorate shut off from the seaboard by another less than four times its size; having no coastline, and the customs dues on whose trade are collected by the latter.
Southern Nigeria enjoying a very large revenue; its officials decently housed and catered for; able to spend freely upon public works and to develop its natural resources.
Northern Nigeria still poor, a pensioner upon the Treasury, in part upon Southern Nigeria; unable to stir a step in the direction of a methodical exploration of its vegetable riches; its officials housed in a manner which is generally indifferent and sometimes disgraceful, many of them in receipt of ridiculously [191] inadequate salaries, and now deprived even of their travelling allowance of five shillings a day.
The latter measure is so unjust that a word must be said on the subject.
The reason for the grant of this allowance [which the Southern Nigerian official enjoys] was frequent travelling, expensive living, and mud-house accommodation.
As regards the two first, the arguments to-day are even stronger than they used to be.
The safety of the roads and the increased pressure of political work compels the Resident and his assistants to be more or less constantly on the move if they are worth their salt.
When travelling about the country, 4s.
As to living, it is a commonplace that the price of local food supplies is very much higher than it was seven years ago, while the price of goods imported from abroad have not all appreciably decreased.
A good mud-house is not to be despised, but the money to build even good ones is quite inadequate.
I could give several examples where officials have spent considerable sums out of their own pockets to build themselves a decent habitation of mud and thatch.
Moreover, many of the brick-houses supplied are an uncommonly poor exchange for £90 a year.
They are made of rough local brick, which already show symptoms of decay, and the roof is often so flimsy that in the verandah and supper-room one has to keep one’s helmet on as protection against the sun.
Our women as well as our men have built up the Empire and made it, on the whole, the clean and fine thing it is, and what a good woman, provided she is also a physically strong one, can accomplish in Northern Nigeria is beyond calculation.
It is not too much to say of a very extensive region in the eastern part of the Protectorate, that the moral influence of one such woman is powerfully felt throughout its length and breadth.
Other aspects of this question will obviously suggest themselves, and they ought to be boldly tackled; but the national prudery makes it difficult to discuss such matters openly.
The salaries paid in Northern Nigeria fill one with astonishment.
The salary of a first class Resident appears to vary from £700 to £800; that of a second class Resident from £550 to £650; that of a third class Resident from £450 to £550.
Kano Province when I visited it was in charge of a third class Resident, admittedly one of the ablest officials in the country, by the way; that is to say, an official drawing £470 a year was responsible for a region as large as Scotland and Wales, with a population of 2,571,170!
These two instances will suffice.
The men saddled [193] with these immense responsibilities are really Lieutenant-Governors and should be paid as such.
It is perfectly absurd that an official in whom sufficient confidence is reposed to be given the task of governing a huge Province like Kano should be paid the salary of a bank clerk, when, for instance, the Governor of Sierra Leone, with half the population, [12] is drawing £2500, exclusive of allowances.
A comparison of the Northern Nigeria salaries with those paid to the Governors of the West Indian Islands gives furiously to think.
The Governorship of the Bahamas, 4404 square miles in extent, with a population of 61,277, is apparently worth £2000; that of the Bermudas, with an area of twenty-nine square miles and a population of 17,535, £2946; that of Barbados, 166 square miles and a population of 196,498, £2500.
PLATE-LAYING ON THE NORTHERN NIGERIA RAILWAY.
To all these incongruities must be added the series of events which have led to the creation of two competing railway systems, and, consequently, to open rivalry between the two Administrations in the effort to secure the traffic from the interior, a rivalry which is certainly not lessened by the circumstance that the method of railway construction followed in one Protectorate differs radically from that pursued in the other.
I will refer briefly to this method in a moment.
That was the position when I left the country, and I do not gather that it has greatly advanced since.
There has been a conference, but it has not resulted, and could not result, in agreement as to the question of what line is to get preferential treatment; and that, of course, is the main question which should be decided by an impartial authority, having regard to the interests of Nigeria as a whole.
Now a word as to the two systems.
So far as governing principles are concerned, it would probably be regarded as a fair description to state that the Southern Nigerian method is less concerned with capital expenditure and with rapidity of construction, as with the advisability of securing permanently good construction and putting in permanent work throughout, including stone ballast, fine stations and so on.
The Northern Nigerian method, on the other hand, aims at keeping [196] down initial capital expenditure and interest, exercising strict economy in the matter of buildings, both for the public and for the staff, combined with rapidity of construction and improving the line as the traffic grows.
But as regards the respective systems under which these principles are carried out, it is impossible to resist the conclusion that Northern Nigeria has demonstrably proved its superiority so far as actual construction is concerned.
The Southern Nigeria line has been, and is being, constructed on the old model.
Consulting engineers in London are employed by the Colonial Office, and appoint the staff in Africa.
They are unchecked, for the Colonial Office has no independent railway adviser for tropical Africa, no railway board, or department, or anything of that kind.
Where the responsibility of one begins and the other ends, both would probably find it difficult to define; and no one who knows West Africa can fail to appreciate the divided counsels, the friction, the waste of time and money which such a system must inevitably entail, even though every human rivet in the machine were endowed with superlative qualities.
It is very difficult to arrive at a clear idea as to what the average expenditure of the Southern Nigerian railway has been per mile, but it does not appear to be disputed that the cost of construction of the first section of 120 miles to Ibadan, plus the capital expenditure incurred on the open line and the working capital for stores, was enormous, viz.
£11,000 per mile.
The great advantage which the Northern Nigerian system possesses over that of Southern Nigeria is unity of direction.
But the vital difference between the two systems is this: Northern Nigeria has shown that it is possible to construct a railway without the services of Consulting Engineers in England at all.
What are the facts?
The Administration, i.e.
The absence of any foreign body has reduced friction to a minimum.
In fact, there has been no friction whatever, because the Railway Staff has co-operated in every way with the Political Staff, and the exercise of the Political Officers’ legitimate duties in protecting the interests of the natives has not been resented or looked upon in the light of vexatious interference by the railway management.
I should be the last to wish to minimize the excellence of the individual work performed by the engineers in charge of the Southern Nigeria line, which I was able to admire, and from whom I received the greatest [198] hospitality and kindness at various stages in my journey; but the nature of the system there followed precludes that enthusiastic co-operation of all the elements concerned which is the predominating characteristic of Northern Nigerian methods.
And, as already stated, there is a very considerable item of expense to be considered through the employment of Consulting Engineers in London.
In fact, one might almost say that the line has been built on the communistic principle.
In other words, it shows the right procedure to be that of recruiting through and with the co-operation of, and by the orders of, the natural authorities of the people under the supreme control of the Resident, combined with a form of payment which shall ensure the wage being placed in the wage-earner’s own hand, not in somebody else’s hand.
Persuaded of this truth, the [199] Political Officers of Northern Nigeria, aided by the ready willingness of the Railway Staff, have achieved a veritable triumph of organization which should ever remain a model to follow.
And in that triumph can be read a deep political lesson.
That such organization has been possible in Northern Nigeria is due, primarily, to the existence of a native political organization to which we could appeal and upon which we could rely.
Built under conditions such as these, the Northern Nigeria railway, constructed under great difficulties with wonderful rapidity and at a cost of well under £4000 per mile, rolling-stock and stores included, is not only in itself a striking performance—with, I believe, if free conditions of development are assured to it, a bright economic future—but a political and educational work of permanent value.
It has helped to bring the Political Officers into closer personal touch with the population.
It has increased the confidence of the people in the honesty of their alien overlords, and has imbued them with a personal interest and friendly curiosity in the railway.
It has taught them many things which they did not know before, things which will be useful to themselves in their own social life.
It has brought previously hostile tribes together into the same trench, effacing tribal barriers and burying old feuds.
It has largely increased the use of silver coinage, and stimulated commercial activity.
Every freshly constructed line is bound to have a surplus of rolling stock.
For the following suggestions as to the character amalgamation could assume, the writer claims no more than that they may, perhaps, constitute an attempt, put forward with much diffidence, to indicate a few constructive ideas which might form the basis for expert discussion.
(a) Financial management directed not only to meeting present needs but to making provision for the future.
(c) The division of the territory into Provinces corresponding as far as possible with natural geographical boundaries and existing political conditions, involving as few changes as possible.
(d) A comprehensive scheme of public works.
These various points can, in the limits of a chapter, be best examined collectively.
In the accompanying map Nigeria is divided into four great Provinces.
Its headquarters would be Kano.
Each of these great provinces would be ruled by a Lieutenant-Governor, with Residents and Assistant Residents under him, and, wherever possible, the present political boundaries of what are now provinces, but would become known as districts and [203] sub-districts, would be retained.
The enlargement of the Eastern Province as proposed, would in some respects facilitate the work of administration and would not cut across any ethnic divisions.
In the Western Province the principal alteration would be the re-grouping of the different Yoruba sections in their old state form (vide Part II.)
The functions of the Lagos Council would be confined to the Colony.
The Governor-General would be [204] assisted by an Executive and Legislative Council.
The official members of the Legislative Council would include the Directors of rail and river transport, of public works, of agriculture, of forestry and of commercial intelligence; the Director of mining; and the Principal Medical Officer.
SKETCH MAP OF NIGERIA, SHOWING SUGGESTED REARRANGEMENT OF PROVINCES.
The whole problem of communications, both rail and river, ought to be placed under a special department, subject to periodical inspection by an independent expert sent out from home by the Colonial Office, and the services of consulting engineers in England disposed of if possible.
The situation financially lends itself, in a general sense, to a certain boldness of treatment and departure from ordinary British West African precedent.
Two distinct classes of budgets might with advantage, perhaps, be evolved, viz.
In other words, there would be a central budget and four local budgets, one for each Province.
The Colonial budget would be fed by the customs revenue, the whole of which would be credited to it.
(It may be estimated that two or three years hence the total customs revenue collected in Nigeria will amount to £2,500,000.)
The revenues of the Colonial budget from whatever source derived, other than from loans, would be distributed by the Governor-General in council for the administration of the four Provinces in accordance with their respective needs.
These needs would show marked variation for some years to come.
When that stage had been reached, the surplus would be set aside under the Provincial budget for extending the system of fixed salaries to native officials, for expenditure on provincial public works and economic research, improvements in sanitation, and so on, in [206] collaboration with the native authorities of its various sections.
A portion of my hypothetical Northern or Sudan Province is already self-supporting, viz.
Indeed, but for the military establishment the whole of that Province would be showing to-day a handsome surplus and, apart from the public works to be met out of loans, would require —even if it continued to be debited with the military establishment—very little assistance from the Colonial budget.
The hypothetical Central Province would require more assistance for a time, but, as in the Northern Province, the basis of an expanding land revenue is securely laid and a not inconsiderable mineral development bringing revenue, apart from royalties, is assured to it.
On the other hand, most of the hypothetical Western Province and almost the whole of the Eastern Province—i.e.
Therefore, until and unless the delicate problem of introducing direct taxation among peoples—the majority of whom we have been in touch with for years without requiring of them the payment of any form of tribute—were approached, the Colonial budget would have to furnish these Provinces with most of their administrative revenues.
Lagos would, under such a scheme, become the capital of the extended Western Province (see map), and the action of the Lagos Legislative Council would extend to the whole of that Province.
A Legislative Council would be created for the extended Eastern Province.
The [207] administrative machinery of the new Central and Northern Provinces would be left as it is now.
It will be objected that these suggestions do not take into account the present military expenditure of the Protectorates and are dumb with regard to the Imperial grant to Northern Nigeria.
I have left a consideration of these two questions until now because they can, I think, be taken together.
The military establishment of Southern Nigeria costs £100,000 per annum.
That of Northern Nigeria costs £160,000 per annum.
Neither is excessive in itself, although in the latter case it amounts to no less than 33 per cent.
It is not one penny too much, and to reduce the number of troops would be folly, having regard to the immensity of the country and the kind of political problem facing us.
Here is a financially struggling Protectorate urgently in need of the most vital necessities; incapable even of building decent houses for its over-worked and short-handed staff; forced to deprive the latter of even their travelling allowances, and to sacrifice considerations of reasonable comfort and, therefore, of health for its personnel; in a position to pay so little for posts of enormous responsibility that the entire political expenditure is only some £70,000 per annum; able to devote but a miserable £1300 a year upon economic forestry, but saddled with this incubus of £160,000 upon a military [208] establishment which has already been called upon (in the case of the last Ashanti war) to provide contingents for service outside the Protectorate, which would infallibly happen again, in the by no means remote contingencies of a further outbreak in Ashanti or disturbances in the Sierra Leone hinterland.
This situation needs to be examined in conjunction with the Imperial grant about which so much fuss is made.
The nation imagines that Northern Nigeria is costing the Imperial Treasury something like £250,000 to £300,000 per annum.
Nothing of the kind.
The grants in aid from 1906 to 1909, inclusive, amounted to £1,220,000, or an average of £305,000.
The average yearly cost of silver in the last nine years has, I believe, varied between 2s.
The coin at par value is issued at 5s.
To say, therefore, that Northern Nigeria is costing the British taxpayer a quarter of a million a year or more, is to make a statement which is not in accordance with fact.
What the nation advances directly, it recoups itself for directly in [209] part; without counting that these grants are in the nature of a capital investment.
Let this grant under amalgamation be cancelled, and let the Imperial Government, on the other hand, foot the bill for the military expenditure (which, as we have seen, amounts to £260,000), looking upon it, say, for the next ten years as Imperial expenditure.
Nothing would so alleviate the whole situation, while at the same time simplifying it, and, as has been shown, the actual disbursement of the nation on this item would be considerably less, even now, than what it would appear nominally to be, owing to the profit made by the Mint on the silver coin sent out.
As already explained, the above proposals, illustrated in part by the accompanying map, are put forward merely as a basis for the discussion of a problem of some difficulty but of great urgency.
I claim for them nothing more than that, and no conceivable scheme of amalgamation could be set down which would not lend itself to copious criticism.
But that the mush of anomalies now obtaining cannot be perpetuated without increasing detriment to Imperial interests in Nigeria, I am fully persuaded.
If these remarks can influence in any way an early and serious examination of the problem by the Colonial Office, they will not, however open to criticism, have been made in vain.
Amalgamation must come.
All realize that.
Unforeseen events might very well, at a given moment, compel decisions of far-reaching moment being precipitately reached without due [210] consideration being given to all the features of the case, such as characterized the amalgamation of the Lagos Colony and Protectorate with old Southern Nigeria in 1899.
The advantages of clear thinking out ahead, and of taking the inevitable step before the situation has got tied up into more knots than it already contains, with calm deliberation, after a full and serious study of all the facts, surely needs no emphasizing.
As to the man, a last word.
The task confronting a Governor-General, especially in the first five years, will be replete with difficulties.
The post will need heavy calls upon tact, patience, and a peculiarly high type of constructive statesmanship.
The only remark I would venture to make on the point is this.
Any serious administrative error perpetrated in handling affairs in the north would be attended with consequences of exceeding gravity.
That is a proposition I think no one will be inclined to dispute.
It suggests either that the Governor-General himself should be personally acquainted with the political conditions of what is now known as Northern Nigeria, or, at least, that the Lieutenant-Governors of the hypothetical Northern and Central Provinces should be chosen from among the most experienced of the existing Senior Residents.
There has now to be considered the question of Christian missionary propaganda in Southern Nigeria, and the corresponding growth therein of Mohammedanism.
The relative failure of the one and the admitted success of the other are at present the subject of much debate and give anxious thought to the heads of the Church.
The fundamental cause appears to lie in a disinclination to face the fact, however obvious, that a religion which took centuries upon centuries to take root in Europe, owing, very largely, to its ethical demands upon man, cannot hope to establish itself in the now accessible tropical forest regions of West Africa in a few decades, while a religion embodying a distinct advance upon paganism but not involving the complete structural change in native society which the Christian Church exacts, has every chance of doing so.
Then, too, there is another question which the ecclesiastical authorities may never, it is true, find it possible frankly to confront, but which laymen, it seems to me, are bound to do—those, at any rate, who are persuaded that the African race is one of the great races of mankind, not intended by the Almighty Architect to disappear from the scene of human affairs.
I refer to the physiological requirements, in the present age, of the Nigerian forest peoples in their struggles with the forces of primeval Nature.
All that remains of the Portuguese attempts to Christianize the deltaic region of [214] Nigeria in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries are a few names and the addition of crucifixion to native punishments of criminals or happy despatch of sacrificial victims.
The chief obstacle to the modern efforts of the Anglo-Saxon in Southern Nigeria and the real explanation of the successful modern efforts of the African Muslim, are to be sought in the appeal respectively made by Christianity and Islam to the patriarchal communities to which they are addressed, and in the methods and character of the respective propaganda.
It remains for the people of Nigeria, and of all West Africa, an alien religion taught by aliens who cannot assimilate themselves to the life of the people.
Islam, on the other hand, has long ceased to be an alien religion.
It is imparted by Africans.
It is disseminated by Africans.
It has its roots in the soil.
It has become a religion of the people, losing much of its rigidity and fanaticism as it works down to the coast absorbing the true negro.
The conditions of Southern Nigeria are the conditions of the Old Testament.
Vice plays only a microscopic part in the relationship of sex in Nigeria.
Race propagation is the motive force which regulates sexual relationship.
The Nigerian, incessantly striving with the destructive agencies of Nature, responds to the instinctive and mysterious call of racial necessity.
Infant mortality is terrible.
It must continue to be so for a period whose limit will be determined by the rate of his progression in coping with these destructive agencies.
This is not the place to discuss what the attitude of the Christian missionary should be to this paramount racial need, but it is obvious that his insistence upon an acceptance of a sex relationship contrary to the promptings of Nature must present a barrier—one of the greatest, if not the greatest—to the acceptance of the Christian faith, or, perhaps, it would be better to say, of orthodox Christianity.
Sex relationship, whatever its character and whatever the conditions of society or climate, is never, and can never be, free from abuses.
West African polygamy contains many ugly sores, and so does the European system.
Family bonds are equally threatened by Christianity, as propounded to the Nigerian, for it trains the child, whether deliberately or otherwise, to look upon his parents as living a life of sin, thus introducing a subversive element into the household.
Native authority is likewise menaced, for how can the convert entertain his former respect for rulers whom he has been taught to regard as morally and spiritually his inferiors?
And this creed is proffered either by aliens between whom and the inner life of the people there yawns an unbridgeable gulf, or by denationalized Africans who have become in the eyes of the people, strangers well-nigh as complete as the alien himself, part and parcel of the alien’s machinery.
As if these did not constitute sufficient deterrents to the permanency of its footing, the alien race which tenders to the Nigerian this creed—this creed claiming for all men equality before God— is the conquering, controlling, governing race that scorns to admit—because, being an Imperial race, it cannot—equality of racial status with the Nigerian whom it subjugates and controls.
Finally, there is the lamentable intolerance displayed by Christian proselytizers towards one another.
Only the other day I read in a West African newspaper the address of a white American Protestant Bishop, whose sphere of work lies in Africa, to his flock.
It does [217] not stipulate revolutionary changes in social life, impossible at the present stage of Nigerian development; nor does it undermine family or communal authority.
Between the converter and converted there is no abyss.
Both are equal, not in theory, but in practice, before God.
Both are African; sons of the soil.
The doctrine of the brotherhood of man is carried out in practice.
Conversion does not mean for the converted a break with his interests, his family, his social life, his respect for the authority of his natural rulers.
He does not become, through conversion, an alien in thought, in custom, and in outlook; a foreigner in his own land, a citizen of none.
He remains African, attached to his country, looking for inspiration inwards, rather than towards an alien civilization across thousands of miles of unknown seas.
No one can fail to be impressed with the carriage, the dignity of the Nigerian—indeed, of the West African—Mohammedan; the whole bearing of the man suggests a consciousness of citizenship, a pride of race which seems to say: “We are different, thou and I, but we are men.” The spread of Islam in Southern Nigeria which we are witnessing to-day is mainly social in its action.
It resembles in its progress the annual overflow of the Niger diffusing its waters over the land.
The Hausa pushes ever further south his commercial operations.
Not to be outdone, his trading rival the Yoruba taps in additional numbers the markets of the north.
A vast commingling, a far-reaching fusion unexampled in the history of these peoples is taking place.
The expansion of an African religion which, somehow, succeeds in investing the convert with a spiritual and social standing that at once raise him among his fellows, follows as a matter of course.
This is why and this is how Islam is propagating itself and taking root in pagan Nigeria without financial outlay, without doles and collecting boxes.
He was almost disposed reluctantly to allow that in the providence of God, Islam might prove to be intended as the halfway house through the portals of which it was necessary the West African negro should pass in order to lift him out of a sterilizing paganism and make him a fitter vessel to receive in course of time the nobler ideals of the Christian faith.
Sir Harry Johnston is right, I think, when he says that “to Negro Africa,” Islam has come “as a great blessing, raising up savages to a state, at any rate of semi-civilization, making them God-fearing, self-respecting, temperate, courageous, and picturesque.” But Islam does more than this; it preserves racial identity.
In West Africa, Christianity destroys racial identity.
It should not: as taught it does.
“Picturesque,” says Sir Harry Johnston, and there speaks the artist.
But the word covers a profound truth.
A great deal of the denationalizing or Anglicizing process which is going on and which makes bad Africans and bad Christians, is attributable to the discarding of the national dress.
Why cannot the Administration and the missionary societies combine in some practical, positive form, to combat this curse of alien dress?
The West African looks better in African dress, the robe of the Mohammedan and of many pagan Africans.
It is much [220] healthier for him.
It is preservative of his racial identity; and that is, perhaps, the most important of all pleas which can be put forward for its retention.
Clad in his national dress the African has a dignity which in most cases he loses almost entirely when he attires himself in a costume totally unfitted for the country, and hideous at best.
In the case of the women it is not only dignity and nationalism which are concerned, but decency as well.
The national dress of the women in West Africa is classical and graceful, and although leaving more of the body exposed than is usual at home (except in the ballroom) it lacks suggestiveness.
It does not accentuate the figure.
It emphasizes that racial difference—not inequality, but difference—which it is so essential to emphasize.
With the substitution of European dress, especially of the prevailing fashion, the West African woman loses much of what she need never lose, and acquires that which is of no profit to her.
These things cannot be altered in a day, nor would it be possible in some cases for the present adult generation to go back to African costume.
But it would in many cases, and the reform could be at once taken in hand so far as the children are concerned.
Government could do much.
The missionary societies could do more.
I believe that if some popular Government official, known and trusted, could be led to appeal, in private conference to the native staff and win them over, the movement once started would spread and have enormously [221] beneficial results.
That a body of thoughtful men would not, I am satisfied by the many representations on this very subject personally made to me.
I shall always recollect, in particular, the private visit paid to me in one of the great Yoruba towns by one of the leading merchants of the place.
A magnificent specimen of an African, dressed in African costume and speaking our language fluently, he came with the usual touching words and gifts, and begged me very earnestly to take up the question of dress with his compatriots.
And, in conclusion, there is another and a very serious handicap upon Christianity in West Africa, in Southern Nigeria especially.
Under the native social system, religion and politics—the religious organization and the political organization—go together.
It is inconceivable to the native mind that they should be separate or antagonistic.
Islam, again, preserves this ingrained conviction.
But in West Africa the political and religious organizations of the white man are separate and distinct.
The religious organization itself is split up into countless opposing sections.
And in Southern Nigeria the section specially identified in the native mind with the white over-lord has for some years past played a discordant note in that white over-lord’s political organization.
Its representatives are almost everywhere, and upon many subjects persistently hostile critics of the Administration, begetting unrest and disloyalty to Government.
The mass of native opinion concludes there is something rotten in the system presented to it, and the Islamic wave rolls on.
Is an export trade in cotton, of any large dimensions, a possibility—early or remote?
I am not, however, an expert on cotton-growing, and I am in general sympathy with the work the British Cotton-growing Association is trying to carry out, although, as will be seen, I am not entirely in agreement with all its methods, either here or in Nigeria.
One of the earliest impressions one forms out there is the contrast between the presentation of the case at home and conditions on the spot.
The view at home— somewhat modified by recent events—has seemed to be inspired by the idea that if the number of square miles which Nigeria covers is totted up in one column and the number of inhabitants it supposedly contains in another and these totals compared with conditions in the cotton belt of North America, then you arrive at a conclusion which enables you to speak of the “huge possibilities” of Nigeria, and even to forecast that Northern Nigeria alone “at some future date” will be able “to supply the whole of the requirements of Great Britain and to leave an equal quantity over for the other cotton-consuming countries.” Four years ago a prominent British statesman declared publicly that “once the [223] fly belt near the river was passed ... cotton would be grown under exactly the same conditions as it was grown under on such a great scale in America.” He went so far as to say that the native of Northern Nigeria was “beginning to cease to grow cotton” because he could get British manufactured goods in lieu of his home-grown article.
Well, between these statements and actualities there is a “huge” gulf fixed.
In the first place it can be said of Nigeria that in a part of it only is cotton now grown, and that in a part of it only will cotton ever be grown.
To talk of Nigeria, as a whole, being a cotton-growing country par excellence, either now or potentially, is absurd.
Three-fourths of Southern Nigeria and a third, probably more, of Northern Nigeria are quite unsuitable for cotton-growing, and this for many reasons.
To talk of Nigeria supplying the whole requirements of Great Britain (to say nothing of the promised surplus) is tantamount to saying that some day “Pleasant Sunday Afternoon” excursions to the moon will be a regular feature of the national life.
Both may become possible “at some future date,” but there is so much future about the date that such flights of rhetoric might well be left to the compilers of gold-mining prospectuses.
These extravagances have not helped the Association.
The sincere and sober persons connected with that body are merely hindered by them.
As to cotton being produced in Northern Nigeria under the “same conditions” as in the States, and the natives of the country “beginning to cease” to grow cotton, one can only remark that they are too silly to deal with.
In Southern Nigeria, the deltaic region, the Eastern Province, virtually the whole of the Central Province, and a considerable portion of the Western Province—i.e., four-fifths of the whole Protectorate—may be ruled out of account as a cotton field.
The deltaic region will not produce cotton.
The forest belt behind it, passing (with occasional breaks) from [224] dense to secondary growth and fading away into open country, no doubt would.
But only if you cut down the forest first.
To destroy the West African forest to any extent in order to grow cotton would be economic madness.
Indeed, the Administration is working hard to preserve the forests from the ignorance and improvidence of primitive man, and to build up for the native communities, and in the public interest, a source of future revenue from the methodical exploitation of its inexhaustible wealth.
With trifling exceptions the whole of this region is the home of the oil-palm, the most beneficent tree in the world, and such activities as the inhabitants can spare from their own requirements are given over, in the main, to the palm oil and kernel trades.
It is the home of valuable cabinet woods, of vegetable oils, gums, and rubbers, and in time is likely to become a great natural nursery for the cultivation of plantation rubber and such a moisture-loving plant as the cocoa; never, I think, of cotton.
Out of 2,237,370 lbs.
In 1862 the export amounted to 1810 lbs., rising in 1868 to over 200,000 lbs., and continuing, I believe, at that figure or thereabouts for some years.
The industry was revived on a much larger scale by the Association in 1905.
The exports of cotton lint from Southern Nigeria from 1906 to 1910—i.e.
It is entirely creditable to the Association that it should have been instrumental in reviving a decayed industry in one district and creating one in others, and in five years to have fathered an export of cotton to so considerable an amount.
I found the best-informed opinion in Southern Nigeria imbued with the belief that the 1911 crop will be a poor one, though better than last year’s, but that the prospects for the crop of 1912 are good.
At any rate, it had done nothing, I was there informed, ever since it was put up, some four years ago.
A good deal seems to have been spent upon the experimental plantation at Ibadan, with indifferent results.
It has now been taken over by the Government, whose officers, I was informed, found it in a very neglected condition.
The field, it must always be remembered, is small, the entire Western Province being only 27,640 miles square, and much of it, as already [226] stated, covered with forest.
In West Africa new industries are always liable to violent fluctuations.
The drop in the maize export is much more considerable than the falling off in cotton.
Things move very slowly in West Africa as a rule.
The cotton crop is not the easiest to handle.
Compared with ground nuts, for instance, it entails a great deal more time and trouble.
All kinds of obstacles have to be encountered and overcome which people at home have difficulty in fully appreciating.
The experimental stage of any enterprise, especially in a place like West Africa, is bound to leave openings for error, and error in West Africa is a costly luxury.
The Protectorate is under considerable obligations to the Association for the good work it has done and is doing.
Fundamentally that policy is without question sound—viz.
The Association should receive public support in resisting any pressure which might be placed upon it to alter its fundamental policy by those of its supporters who may be impatient of a comparatively slow advance—slow, i.e., in comparison with the unwise optimism displayed by some of the Association’s friends upon public platforms.
I doubt, however, if an export trade in cotton will ever reach substantial proportions—let us say 100,000 bales per annum [227] twenty years hence—in the Western Province unless the element of competition is introduced.
Hitherto, by combining with the merchants, the Association has established a fixed buying price.
In the initial stages this was a good thing.
The native farmer wanted the certainty that his crop would be purchased if he were induced to grow it.
Now that the industry is well on in its stride it may be seriously questioned whether the Yoruba farmer, the certainty of sale notwithstanding, will be content with the prices offered him under the monopoly agreement now obtaining.
He has always the oil palm to fall back upon; but he has, in addition, cocoa and maize.
Cocoa is rapidly increasing, and the profit realized by the cultivator is a good one.
The timber trade, too, is growing slowly, and the forest is always yielding fresh elements of trade.
The bulk of the cotton produced in the Western Province to-day is roughly similar to “middling American,” which is now quoted, I believe, at 8d.
The native cultivator is (now) supposed to get from the combine—i.e.
I say “supposed,” because I was informed that the actual producer had not always got the amount which he was understood to be getting.
As regards Northern Nigeria, until the close of last year the native had never been paid 1d.
The Association reckons, I understand, that at this rate every pound of lint landed in [228] Liverpool costs the Association 6½d.
I cannot check that figure.
I merely quote it.
But one may point out that in addition to the profit at the present price of “middling American” disclosed by this estimate, there must be a considerable profit to the Association on the seed, which, upon arrival in England, is worth, I believe, between £5 and £6 per ton.
It must be fairly obvious from what precedes that if the industry were placed upon an ordinary commercial footing like any other, with merchants competing on the spot for the raw material, the Yoruba farmer would have no difficulty in obtaining very much more than he gets at present for his crop.
Cultivation, under those circumstances, would become proportionately more profitable and a greater acreage would be laid out in cotton.
No doubt it would cut both ways, the native restricting his acreage when the price fell, but it may be fairly argued that no special reason now exists for treating the cotton industry on an artificial basis, that it must take its chance like any other, and like any other become subject to ordinary economic ups and downs.
We cannot expect the native farmer to concentrate upon one particular crop if he can make a greater profit in cultivating another.
No industry can develop healthily on artificial lines.
That, no [229] doubt, would force the Association into competition with the merchants, and the merchants, bringing out their own gins (if it paid them to do so), might cause the Association’s position to become precarious.
Each force would then be operating within its natural orbit, and an unnatural alliance would cease, unnatural in the sense that one price means one market, and that one market is not an inducement to economic expansion, especially when the price of other tropical products produced by the Yoruba farmer with an open free market to deal in has been steadily rising during the last few years.
The Association has always contended that its primary object is not money making, but the establishment in our oversea dependencies of an Imperial cotton industry calculated in the course of time to relieve Lancashire, in whole or in part, of her dangerous dependence on American speculators.
I was later on to find that it was one upon which very strong, though not unanimous, opinions were held by persons of experience and judgment in the Southern Protectorate.
A great deal of energy, and doubtless money too, is apparently expended by the Association in experimenting with and distributing seeds of non-indigenous varieties of cotton.
Now, although one cannot say without careful cultivation, speaking of the north, one can at least say without perpetually improving scientific cultivation extending over a century, Nigeria is able to produce indigenous cotton, fetching to-day 1¼d., 2d., and even 3d.
If these indigenous plants, without a century’s scientific care, can produce cotton superior in value to “middling American,” what could they not do with a tithe of the attention which has been lavished upon the industry in the States?
I know the experts will argue that the indigenous varieties make a lot more wood, and that an acre planted with American varieties will yield much more lint than an acre planted with a Nigerian variety.
Not being an expert I would not venture to dispute this.
All that I would make bold to query would be whether experiments tending to prove it have in Nigeria been sufficiently continuous and carried out under conditions of fairness to the indigenous cotton sufficiently conclusive to place the matter beyond the pale of discussion.
Even if this were so, I am not sure that it could be taken as an irrefutable reply to the contention I have ventured to put forward.
For, on the other side, must be reckoned the diseases which invariably attack all exotics, animal, vegetable, and human, introduced into the West African forest region.
One question I never failed to ask was whether the Government had distributed seed to that particular village or in that particular area, and if so, what result had followed the sowing of it?
Sometimes the answer was in the negative.
When it was in the affirmative it was invariably the same.
The Government seed had come.
It had been sown.
But it was “no good.” Now, I disclaim all attributes of wisdom in this matter of cotton.
But I beg you to believe me when I say that the Hausa farmer is no fool.
In Kano province—28,600 square miles in extent with 2,500,000 inhabitants, more than one-fourth of the total population of the Protectorate—its cultivation is accompanied by what can, without exaggeration, be termed a national industry of weaving, manufacturing, embroidering, and dyeing the garments, both under-garments and over-garments, which the Kano people wear.
But not the Kano people alone.
As carried out in Kano province this industry adds dignity, interest, and wealth to the life of the people, assists their inventive faculties, intensifies their agricultural lore, and sustains several other branches of industrial activity, binding in close alliance of material interest the agriculturist and the artisan.
It gives a healthy, attractive employment to many thousand homes—employment carried on in the free air of heaven, beneath the bright sunshine of Africa.
It has become a part of the national life, the pride and profit of the people.
Men, women, and children participate in it, the men clearing the ground, hoeing and sowing, the women and children doing the picking, the women cleaning the lint of the seeds (on flat stones), teasing, the men weaving, tailoring, and usually, but not always, embroidering.
Woven in long, narrow strips, the manufactured article is of remarkable durability and firmness of texture.
It is a very heavy garment, and it is costly.
But it is suitable for the cold nights and chilly mornings, and it lasts for years.
It is impossible to separate the cultivation of cotton from the agricultural pursuits of the people generally.
The people are primarily a people of agriculturists, raising vast quantities of cereals year after year for home consumption and export to other districts—guinea-corn and millet, yams, maize, a little wheat.
In the Kano [234] Emirate or division—as distinct from what is known as the Kano province—the population is exceedingly dense, and virtually the whole land is under cultivation.
I have seen nothing more remarkable in the way of cultivation either in France or Flanders.
How does the soil retain, year after year, its nutritive properties?
Great care is lavished upon the cotton and cassava plantations—the two chief secondary crops.
In April and May, with the advent of the early rains, the land is cleared and hoed into furrows and ridges.
Along the ridges drills are made at a distance of two and a half to three feet apart, the seed dropped in, and the ridge hoed up.
In some districts, however, this custom is varied by the ridges being made after the sowing.
The water lies in the hollows between the ridges, prevents the seeds from being washed away by the torrential downpour, and allows air to circulate freely, thus keeping the plants in a healthy state.
A month later, when the plants have grown to a foot or more, the ground is again hoed.
That is the first sowing.
Conditions are slightly different with the variety of cotton grown, but as a rule the plants are in a fit condition for picking about five months after sowing.
December, January, March, and April appear to be the months when cotton is most abundant in the markets.
Speaking generally, the plantations were in excellent condition, and [236] the absence of weeds would have done credit to an up-to-date British farmer.
After the third year the annual crop decreases.
When so treated the plant is invariably manured.
Artificial chemical manuring is out of the question; the rains would wash it all out of the soil.
Green manuring is well understood but might be improved.
The native is only affected by actual demonstration, and, so far, demonstrations inspired by Europeans designed to show the Hausa farmer how to improve his agricultural systems have done little more than provoke a smile.
The white man has failed where the black man has succeeded, because the white man thought he knew local conditions and did not.
This is an excellent initiative which it is to be hoped will be maintained.
It is really Government work.
The British Cotton-growing Association should be spared all expense of this kind.
The operation is proceeding, and a substantial quantity of cotton has already been bought.
I will refer to that later on.
However, this is merely a personal opinion.
These two are the best kinds, their quality being about the same.
It is of an inferior quality with a shorter staple, usually but not always grown where the soil is not naturally rich enough to support the other kinds.
It fetches a lower price on the local markets and takes a month longer to mature.
The native remedy, apart from constant hoeing, is to light a fire to windward, upon which the dried leaves of a certain plant, and also dried fish, are thrown.
The question of indigenous versus exotic varieties here crops up again.
One hears talk of flooding the country with exotic seed and doing away altogether with the indigenous varieties.
No doubt it may be all right.
From the non-expert point of view it seems dangerous.
As already stated, African insect life fastens with relentless savagery upon exotic plant life, just as it revels in nice fresh blood out from Europe.
One season’s failure with an exotic or non-local variety, sown by instructions of the Emir’s headmen in lieu of the indigenous kind, might create a prejudice in the native’s mind that it would take years to remove.
Concentration upon improving the fertility of the soil, and therefore the quality and quantity of the local varieties (combined, of course, with seed selection) would be a slower process.
It is just possible that it might be a wiser one.
They buy up between them virtually the whole crop, importing live stock and manufactured goods, which they dispose of in the markets for silver coin, buying with that coin the cotton.
The Kano division of the Kano province consumes all the cotton it grows.
In this district cotton-growing forms the principal means of livelihood of the inhabitants.
But these figures are mere estimates, and not over-reliable at that.
The country is too extensive and the British occupation too recent to permit of accuracy in such matters at present.
As already remarked, the whole of the crop now grown is used by the local industry (except the Association’s purchases this year, which I will refer to in a moment).
So far this industry not only shows no signs of decreasing, but the demand, especially from the southern markets is, I was told, steadily increasing.
The advent of the railway may, apart from the activities of the Association, modify the situation appreciably through the increasing influx of Manchester goods.
As well-being increases—and up to a certain point it is doing and will do so as the result of our occupation—the consumption of [240] Manchester goods wall doubtless increase, but it does not altogether follow that the output of the native looms will decrease.
It is curious that the Kano weavers themselves think that the railway will enlarge their market.
I was informed that the natives of the south, who have been in touch with Manchester cotton goods for many years, very much prefer the Kano cloths, which although dearer, are much more durable.
In the north I heard frequent complaints of the quality of the Manchester goods imported.
Many of them, so I was told, were much too thin, and so heavily starched that on the first washing they became threadbare and useless.
I saw nothing on sale in the markets from Manchester suited for the early and late hours of the day.
Cheap prints are all very well for the hot hours of the late morning and afternoon.
But the people require warmer garments than that.
I used to strike camp when trekking at about 5 a.m. or 5.30 a.m., and at that time, and for a couple of hours afterwards, I was glad of two sweaters over a khaki shirt, riding.
When the sun goes down it is equally chilly.
I am persuaded that the British Cotton-growing Association is in every way worthy of support, that its ideal is a fine one and a patriotic one, and that the West African dependencies of Southern and Northern Nigeria are very much indebted to it.
At the same time I should not be giving honest expression to the views I have rightly or wrongly formed if I did not enter a caveat against any Government action calculated to undermine or destroy the weaving industry of the Kano province.
That industry may disappear as the result of natural causes.
But nothing should be done by the Administration to assist its decay.
Frankly, I am compelled to state that from the standpoint of the happiness and [241] welfare of these Hausa people, our wards, the disappearance of their national industry would be deplorable.
It would lower their outlook and stunt their development, and send them down in the scale of civilization.
Their intelligence is of an order which would enable them under tuition to advance their methods of production beyond the hand-loom.
There remains to be examined the question of price and of competing articles of production.
They bought this season, I believe, something like 60,000 lbs.
His influence would be directed to giving a tangible proof of his interest and goodwill.
This desire would be shared by his people, by whom he is personally respected.
If the cotton were bought on the spot the farmers might be willing to sell at 1d.
The question of price is bound to play an important part in the interesting developments which have now begun.
In the latter part of January it fell temporarily to 1d.
It went up again to 2d.
The bright side consists in the possibility—the probability, perhaps—that the knowledge of a permanent and unlimited market at a fixed price, albeit a low one, in their midst will incline farmers to patronize that market (and increase their acreage), assuring them as it does of an immediate sale.
Personally, I cannot but think that the Association will have to put up its price if it is to obtain substantial quantities.
There is, of course, what there is not in Southern Nigeria, an element of competition in the Northern provinces—viz.
Another element comes in here which is worthy of note.
I refer to the price of foodstuffs.
Everywhere the price of foodstuffs is growing with our occupation of the country.
Round the main highways and large markets it has risen enormously in the past eighteen months.
In one part of the Niger province the native farmer now reckons upon getting, I was informed, £8 to £10 per acre out of yams.
Cotton at 1d.
That is rather an extreme case, I admit, nor does the whole country produce yams, and the farmers generally do not appear yet to have fully grasped the economic importance for them of the increased demand for foodstuffs.
On the other hand, it is, of course, true that the sowing of cotton between the ordinary food crops is not uncommon.
It may well be that in certain respects I have read the situation wrong and that the suggestions made are faulty.
It is too soon to say how matters will develop.
That development will in any case be slow may be taken for granted.
The Administration [244] is in urgent need of a properly equipped agricultural department with at the head of it the very best man that money can secure.
Everywhere in Northern Nigeria, whether the personal view inclines to optimism or pessimism, I found the officials without exception deeply interested in and anxious to assist in every way the effort to build up an export industry in cotton, and fully persuaded of the great importance and value of the work of the Association.
That moral reformers in England and elsewhere should feel strongly about drink is natural enough.
A considerable proportion of the population of this country, of France, Germany, Belgium, and other European States live wretched and unhealthy lives.
They are over-worked, under-fed, herded in insanitary tenements with insufficient space, ventilation, and light, under conditions which preclude decency and breed moral and physical diseases.
Who can feel surprise that people thus situated should seek momentary forgetfulness in drink?
The drink problem in Europe is not a cause but an effect.
The cause lies deep down in the failure-side of our civilization, and statesmen worthy of the name are grappling with it everywhere.
Those of us who think we see beyond an effect, are striving to prevent the reproduction in tropical Africa of this failure-side of our civilization.
We are striving to maintain the economic independence of the West African; to ensure him a permanency of free access to his land; to preserve his healthy, open-air life of agriculturist and trader, his national [246] institutions, his racial characteristics and his freedom.
We feel that if we can protect the West African from the profounder economic and social perils which encompass him on every side; from the restless individualism of Europe; from unfair economic pressure threatening his free and gradual development on his own lines; from the disintegrating social effects of well-meaning but often wrongly informed and misdirected philanthropic effort; from political injustice—that if we are able to accomplish this even in small measure, the question of drink, while requiring attention, becomes one of secondary importance.
The West African has always been a moderate drinker.
From time immemorial he has drunk fermented liquors made from various kinds of corn, and from different kinds of palm trees.
It is not a teetotal race, as the North American race was.
It is a strong, virile race, very prolific.
Unfortunately this question of drink has been given a place in the public mind as regards Southern Nigeria altogether disproportionate to the position it does, and should, hold.
It has been erected for many sincere, good people into a sort of fetish, obscuring all the deeper issues arising from the impact upon the West African of civilization at a time when civilization has never been so feverishly active, so potent to originate vast changes in a few short years.
The temperance reformer in England strikes, often blindly, at “drink” anywhere and everywhere on the same principle, utterly oblivious to physiological and climatic differences; he cannot see beyond or behind the subject which specially interests him and which has become his creed.
The use of intoxicants of some kind is common to humanity all over the world.
It responds to a need of the human body.
Christ Himself did not condemn its use, since He Himself, the Sacred Writings tell us, [247] changed water into wine at a marriage feast.
Excessive indulgence in liquor, like indulgence in any other form of human appetite, is a human failing.
It is not the drink which is an evil, but the abuse of it.
The abuse of liquor nine times out of ten is the outcome of social discomfort and unhappiness, a way of escape, like a narcotic, from the pangs of conscience, or of misery.
People who concentrate merely upon effects are unsound guides when constructive measures are required.
The temperance reformer in England approaches the question of drink in West Africa from the subjective point of view which characterizes the home outlook upon most questions lying outside the home latitudes.
Saturated with his home experience, the English temperance reformer places the West African in the same economic and social setting as the European and argues on parallel lines.
The public remains indifferent.
The public is cold and unconcerned.
It is virtually impossible to arouse popular interest.
It is disinterested: therefore it must be right.
That is the popular belief and the general fallacy.
Poor Mary Kingsley, who knew her West Africa as few have ever known it and who had the true scientific mind, fought hard against this ingrained characteristic of the Anglo-Saxon temperament.
But she fought in vain.
Public sentiment responds with alacrity.
It becomes at once a popular cry, and the most inconceivable distortions of native character and native life pass muster.
Stones from episcopal catapults will whistle round your ears.
Scribes, utterly ignorant of the country whose inhabitants they portray in an absurdly false light, and who make their living by going shuddering around in professional temperance circles, will hint darkly that somewhere in the dim back of beyond your attitude is dictated by personal interest.
You will be described as a man who cynically ministers to the degradation of the negro.
People who believed in you will ponder sadly over your moral declension.
You may consider yourself lucky if your best friend does not cut you in the street.
To disparage the Administration, to describe the English gentlemen who serve it in Nigeria as callous onlookers while a people sinks down before them in ruin and decay; to paint the sober Nigerian as a drunken brute—all this is permissible.
It would be [250] humorous if it were not pathetic, because amidst all this froth and fury the vital problems arising out of European contact with West Africa are obscured, and a force which, instructed and directed in the right way, might be of untold benefit is wasted on a sterile issue.
The liquor traffic is common to the whole of West Africa and requires constant and vigilant attention.
As European political influence extended, the various Administrations found it necessary to control the traffic by placing an import duty upon spirits at the port of entry.
In this policy Great Britain has always led; the other Powers have always lagged.
Now the existence of a permanent, outside influence, whatever its origin, directed at encouraging the Administration in this course could only be to the good.
While differences of opinion must exist as to the relative importance of the matter compared with other problems of administration, I have met no one who would not regard a policy of letting in spirits free, as wrong.
I have met no one who is not convinced that it is right to tax the trade just as high as it can be taxed, up to the point, that is, when people will still buy and not be driven to illicit distilling, which in the West African forest could not be suppressed.
But the course they have been pursuing for the last few years has been quite different.
Instead of common-sense and reasonable debate, there has been violent and senseless denunciation accompanied by the grossest misstatements.
The Administration, urged perpetually to increase the tax, has been cursed with bell, book and candle for the automatic result in swelling the proceeds of revenue derived from these increases.
A trade forming from time immemorial, as already stated, part of the general barter trade of the West Coast has become identified in the public mind with a particular British dependency, the very one where official vigilance has been specially exercised.
A difficult and complicated economic and fiscal problem has been handled in so unintelligent a manner that it has degenerated into systematic and silly abuse of British officials, who have no more to do with the existence of the traffic than has the Duke of Westminster who presides over the Native Races and Liquor Traffic United Committee.
These officials of ours, some of whose difficulties I have attempted to portray, have actually been accused—nay, are still being—of encouraging the trade in every possible way, of forcing it upon the people, of thriving on the drinking habits of the native.
Fanaticism has even gone the length of stating that they are “financially interested” in the traffic, as though they received a percentage from Government on the revenue derived from taxing the article!
In an official pamphlet issued by the Native Races [253] Committee the statements of Sir Mackenzie Chalmers, the Chairman of the Commission, as recorded in the minutes of evidence, have been reproduced in mutilated form, presumably in order to carry conviction of his bias with the public.
Those who can stoop to such methods do irreparable injury to a good cause.
The Native Races Committee has been singularly ill led.
It has identified itself completely with extremists whose looseness of statement, whose persistency in statistical and other errors, and whose extraordinary lack of judgment were so painfully apparent when they testified before the Commission of Inquiry.
It is matter for regret that divines of high position in this country and Members of Parliament have plunged into the fray without exercising sufficient caution before allying themselves to a campaign conducted on lines inconsistent with accuracy and fair play.
The literature on this subject is enormous, and several chapters would be needed to follow it in any detail.
I propose, however, to summarize certain points.
They have, indeed, been officially dropped by the Native Races Committee.
The allegations as to the evil quality of the liquor imported have also been disproved and dropped by the Committee.
28 per cent.
Here are the figures.
The population of Southern Nigeria, according to the 1911 census, is 7,750,000.
It is believed to be, and probably is, much greater.
It is, of course, not nearly so great, and this for several reasons.
The alcohol imported is not all drunk, to begin with.
A great deal of it is stored, sometimes for years, as banked wealth.
A great deal of it, in the Central Province and to some extent in the Eastern Province, circulates continuously as a sort of barter currency.
This system, a purely native one (in certain regions cloth and tobacco are also used as currency) will gradually fade away with the increased circulation of silver coin.
Then, again, a good deal of it is wasted, poured out on the ground as libations to the gods; how much it is impossible to say.
I will now conclude with a consideration of what other steps may be possible to adopt with a view to further controlling the traffic.
Some years ago a deputation waiting upon Mr. Chamberlain put forward a request for a 4s.
The duty to-day is 5s.
“Total prohibition” was officially demanded by the Native Races Committee shortly before the Commission was appointed.
That the demand for prohibition has been abandoned is significant.
Coupled with a cessation of the abusive tactics it would indicate the beginning of wisdom.
That the latter continue suggests the possibility that the demand for prohibition will be or may be revived.
The only concrete demands now put forward by the official spokesmen of the Committee (vide the deputation to Mr. Harcourt in July) are (1) an international conference; (2) what is described as a system of local option.
That is the somewhat feeble conclusion to the raging, tearing propaganda of the last ten years.
How the Native Races Committee can reconcile it with the furious attacks upon all and sundry in which they have indulged is not my affair.
At any rate, it is a confession of constructive impotence.
And for this reason.
International conferences on this subject are held regularly every few years, and much portentous talk is indulged in by grave gentlemen sitting round a table.
As a matter of fact, Britain, as already stated, leads in the matter of high duties and adjustment of duties to strike at spirits of higher potency.
We have difficulty, which is perennial, in getting the other Powers to agree to our level.
At the present moment the duty levied in the French territory of Dahomey, which borders Southern Nigeria, is much lower than ours, and smuggling is the result.
Therefore, [257] whatever good a Conference may do, that good will affect foreign territory, not Southern Nigeria.
As a practical policy the international conference is, thus, devoid of import so far as Southern Nigeria is concerned.
“Local option” is largely a catch word which appeals to the public—always influenced by the subjective point of view.
What is really meant by it is that a native community should be given the option of not buying spirits.
But it has that option now!
Any native community in Southern Nigeria is free, to-day, to buy or not to buy spirits, or cotton goods or tobacco or anything else.
But a native community consists not of one Chief, but of a Paramount Chief or King (when the native state form has developed to that extent which, in the Eastern Province, for example, is not yet the case), a number of ordinary Chiefs with their councillors, and the people.
It is one thing for a Native community to make up its mind not to buy spirits.
It is quite a different thing for a Chief to impose his caprice, which may be purely temporary in its action, upon his people.
If, for example, we suppose a Chief desirous to please the missionaries in his locality, or objecting to the present high price of imported spirits and wishing to pull it down, or for some other reason, forbidding his people to buy spirits; then the Administration would be clearly in the wrong in supporting that Chief if his views did not coincide with the views of his people.
Such action would amount to coercion and interference with the liberties of the people themselves.
The Chief so acting would be violating native law and assuming the powers of a dictator, which in Southern Nigeria under the native system of rule he does not possess.
The Native Races Committee’s suggestions carry us then no further.
The alternative line of action I suggest is the following:— The liquor traffic in Southern Nigeria (as everywhere else in Western Africa), must be carefully watched.
It is not now an active evil in Southern Nigeria.
Frequent analyses of the imported article.
Severe punishment if bad stuff is going in.
Continuation of the legislation, consistently followed since 1905, of taxing, over and above the general tax, higher degrees of alcoholic strength pro rata.
Perhaps pursuing that still further by prohibiting altogether the importation of liquor above a certain strength.
C. Keeping duties to the level of safety, raising them whenever possible, but never so highly that the population will altogether cease to buy, and take to distilling, which by the pot-still process is the easiest thing in the world.
D. Not permitting the proportion which the spirit trade now bears to the general trade to increase—that means watching, and increasing the duty when possible.
At every sign of the present proportion being increased, another increase of duty should be made.
E. Restricting, if possible, the present proportion, by degrees either by the policy of successive increases of duty; or by an arrangement with the merchants (very difficult to bring about, owing to the advent of new firms; but not, perhaps, impossible), whereby they would be precluded from exceeding in the spirit branch of their trade a certain fixed proportion to their general trade turn-over—the imports of each firm being calculated on a basis which would establish a decrease in the total volume of the spirit trade.
This arrangement, if it were possible, would have, really, the same effect as judicious increases of duty, by making the imported article dearer.
G. Standing instructions to every medical officer to give attention to the subject from the physiological point of view, within his area and to furnish a half-yearly report to the Principal Medical Officer.
These reports would be annotated by the P. M. O., who, reviewing the whole evidence, would give his report.
H. A yearly report to be furnished by the Chairman of the permanent committee, and by the P. M. O. respectively, to the local Government, and published in the Official Gazette.
Maintenance of the prohibitory line under amalgamation; and its deflection southwards in the Eastern Province in order to keep from the influence of the trade, the northern portions of the Eastern Province where the trade has, up to now, not, or barely, penetrated.
In the Western Province, where direct taxation by the British Government would be a violation of Native law and of Treaties and Arrangements, a policy (sketched in Part II.)
These respective proceedings being taken with the object of gradually making us independent, or virtually independent, of taxation on spirits as a source of revenue.
That is, broadly, the constructive policy I venture to recommend.
It might have to be modified here and there.
But in its main lines I believe it to be sound.
On the main issue I would say this.
The Southern Nigeria Administration stands for high ideals and good government, sound native policy, preservation of native authority and land tenure.
In my belief the untruthful and malignant charges brought against it are weakening that for which the Administration stands.
This is a grave danger, and one’s [260] sense of justice revolts at allegations made against an Administration the bulk of whose officials are doing good work under many difficulties.
It is bad for the Empire and for the forces making for just native government within the Empire, that public opinion should be led to believe that Southern Nigeria is a thing to be ashamed of rather than to be proud of—which ought legitimately, on the facts, to be the case.
It is bad for public policy and the integrity of public life that a Commission of Inquiry should be dragged in the mud when it has recorded the truth.
It is Imperially foolish, and essentially unjust in itself, that the natives of Nigeria should be represented as degraded and demoralized, helpless creatures, when they are nothing of the kind.
They resent it, and it is untrue.
The propagation of continuous untruths about a native race will sooner or later lead that native race to be held in such low estimation, that it will be persecuted and unjustly dealt by.
This picture drawn of this race, strengthens, in public opinion, the various forces which are bent upon perpetuating the legend of the African half-child and half-devil, which is so great an obstacle to sane public views at home, and, therefore, in the ultimate resort to sane policy in Africa.
If the Colonial Office is driven to prohibition or any violent step of that sort, direct taxation must immediately follow in order to raise revenue, and that will mean the massacre of thousands of innocent people.
It will also lead to the destruction of palm trees, which will impoverish the country and lower trade; to the stoppage of all export in cereals, the surplus crop being used to produce fermented liquors, and thus, again, to the impoverishment of the country and possibly to the shortage of crops, with the resultant scarcity of food supply; to the creation of illicit stills and the production of a crude liquor [261] full of impurities, and, consequently, very harmful in effects.
The Nigerian population of the south must have liquor of some sort.
It requires it, like every race does, that is not naturally a teetotal race, which the Nigerian race has never been.
Anyway, it cannot be done.
The Nigerians do not over-drink.
They are much more sober than we are—that is incontestable.
They occasionally drink more than is good for them at weddings, etc.
(just as many people do in this country), and at their religious feasts.
But they did that (since feasting and drinking has always been part and parcel of the religious stage of humanity the Nigerians are now in—part of the cult of the fertilizing spirit of nature) long before we knew they existed.
The danger of increasing over-indulgence in drink by “educated” natives is a very real one.
But “trade spirits” have nothing to do with this.
The establishment of the European licensing system away from the chief towns of the coast is, I consider, impossible for at least a generation—and undesirable if it were possible.
Among the imports, cotton goods amounted to £1,306,812.
Ten years ago the total import of the latter was only £605,146.
[4] Vide Part IV.
[6] Vide Part IV.
[9] The subject is discussed at greater length in Part IV.
[10] In the case of some of these companies, such as the West African Mines, Ltd., the Anglo-Continental Mines Company, Ltd., etc., only a part of their capital is invested in the tin mines.
[11] Perhaps the above remarks are a little too sweeping.
But I must adhere to the opinion that, speaking generally, the practice is objectionable, and lends itself to incidents which are calculated to impair the very high standard of public service of which Great Britain rightly makes a boast.
[12] Whose administration offers no problems comparable with the task of governing a Hausa province.
[13] Now the capital of the Niger province.
The official report of the Commercial Intelligence officer of Southern Nigeria, from which the figures here given are quoted, is thus somewhat misleading.
But the correction does not appreciably affect my general line of suggestion.
[16] It may, perhaps, be well to emphasize, in view of the printed statements describing the writer as the “champion of the liquor traffic” and so forth, which are so freely made in certain quarters, that the above remarks are concerned solely with the liquor traffic in Southern Nigeria—not in West Africa as a whole.
(See under British policy.)
Anthropological research, British indifference to, 185.
(See under British policy.)
(See under Cotton.)
(See under Nigerian.)
(See under Islam, and British policy.)
(See under Amalgamation and British policy.)
(See under Kano, Nigerian, British policy.)
(See under Mining.)
(See under British policy.)
(See under Education.)
Native Races and Liquor Traffic United Committee, 254, etc.
(See under Liquor.)
[266] (See under Trade.)
(See under Islam.)
Revenue, method of distribution in Northern Nigeria, 147-148.
(See under British policy and Amalgamation.)
(See under British policy and Fulani.)
(See under Mining.)
(See under Liquor traffic.)
With 2 Maps.
Large post 8vo.
Great Britain and the Congo: The Pillage of the Congo Basin.
With an Introduction by Sir A. CONAN DOYLE.
It is a model of what a work of the kind should be.
Morel has done more than any man living to expose the foul blot on the reputation of certain Belgian financiers.
The Future of the Congo.
An Analysis and Criticism of the Belgian Government’s proposals for a reform of the condition of affairs in the Congo, submitted to His Majesty’s Government on behalf of the Congo Reform Association.
With 72 Illustrations from Photographs by the Author, and a Map.
Small royal 8vo.
Uganda for a Holiday.
The Incas of Peru.
With a Map and 40 Full-page Illustrations.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!)
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement.
If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession.
“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.
It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.
There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.
There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.
Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States.
If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed.
Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work.
You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.
The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work.
Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change.
If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges.
Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that: • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.
The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.
Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns.
Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.” • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark.
Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from.
If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund.
If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.
If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.
Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.
To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States.
U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses.
Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.
IN THE GARDEN 29 III.
WHERE IS JERRY?
A NEW ACQUAINTANCE 67 V. THE VISIT 85 VI.
PLEASANT DREAMS 105 VII.
THE SUMMER LONG 141 IX.
NEWS 157 X.
PLANS 175 XI.
THE SURPRISE 191 XII.
She was a thin-faced, bright-eyed child, not pretty, but with an eager, wistful expression, and as her face lit up with a sudden [Pg 12] smile she looked unusually intelligent.
Jerry came nearer.
“I didn’t stick it in the ground myself to make believe; just see.” Jerry bent his sandy-colored head nearer to the object of his sister’s admiration.
“How do you know?” “I just believe it.” “Well, you don’t know, and I think it is just as good to believe it will grow to be a beautiful flower.” “I wouldn’t count on that,” Jerry said.
There was no love lost between Billy and the Law children.
He came over and peered around.
“You’re welcome to all you find in them.” Billy turned one over with his foot, looked among the scraps of iron and then said: “You’re just bluffin’, but I’ll find out.” And he climbed the fence into the next yard.
Jerry disengaged the strip of chicken wire from its surroundings and contrived a sort of coop-like structure which did not attract the eye, yet kept the small green shoots safely hidden without excluding the light and air.
Mrs. Law glanced up from her sewing as they entered.
“What do you mean?” inquired her mother, breaking off her thread with a snap.
We’re so afraid Billy Miles will pull it up.
Jerry thinks maybe it’s a weed, but we’re going to hope it’s a flower, a real flower.
We can tell very soon.
I know the leaves of a morning-glory, and when I get time I will go down and look at your plant.
Yes, I know morning-glories well enough.
There used to be a great mass of them over the back fence where we used to live; all colors, blue and pink and lovely white ones striped.
“Don’t go out, Jerry,” she said presently.
Her mother hesitated and then replied, “Yes, but don’t stay.” [Pg 18] Spring was well on its way as open windows and doorsteps swarming with children showed, but in this narrow street there were no perfume-laden airs; it seemed instead that all the foul odors were made more evident by the warmer weather, and as the brother and sister made their way through the slovenly groups of loungers, there was little to make them realize the beauty of a world where green trees and sweetly smelling orchards made the heart glad.
They took their way along soberly enough, Jerry lugging the big bundle and his sister trotting along by his side.
From the narrow street they turned into a broader one where shops of all kinds were arrayed along the way.
Into one of these the children turned, delivered their bundle and hurried out.
They never tarried long at the place, for they did not feel comfortable under the old Jew’s sharp eyes, and did not enjoy being stared at by the two big boys who were always there, too.
I have always wanted so much to [Pg 19] see what was behind that wall.
Can’t we walk around that way now?
Was ever anything ever so beautiful?
The gardener looked suspiciously at Jerry.
He had reasons for not thinking well of small boys.
“If you’ll keep right there by the gate I guess you’ll do no harm,” he told Jerry, and the two [Pg 21] children stepped inside.
Such a waft of sweet odors as met them, and such a glory of color.
“You like it pretty well, don’t you?” he said.
“If I had time I’d show you about, but I’ve got to get some plants potted before night, and I’ve got to shut the gate now,” he added regretfully.
I’d love that.
The cook planted them, and I guess they’ll come up again this summer too plentiful for my use.
“But I want to.” She turned away as the gardener made ready to shut the gate, and all the way home she had scarcely a word to say.
“It was like the garden of Eden,” she said under her breath once.
“I think he might have given us some flowers,” said Jerry.
I think he was very good to let us go in.
The little green shoots had stretched further up out of the dry earth, to the child’s delight.
Lifting the chair with a cautious look around she poured the water upon the earth and watched it sink into the ground.
She crouched there for some time as if she would discover the plant’s manner of growing.
Such a poor little garden compared to the one she had seen yesterday, but what possibilities did it not hold?
This tiny plant might yet show gorgeous blooms of red and yellow, or send forth big bunches of pink.
Her thoughts went rioting along when they were interrupted by a hoarse laugh, and looking up startled, she saw the grinning face of Billy Miles peering over the fence.
“Yer another,” retorted Billy, clambering over the fence.
He came threateningly [Pg 24] towards her, taking no heed of where he was stepping.
Billy looked down.
“Ye tried to fool me,” he cried, seeing the moist circle out of which stretched the green shoots.
“I didn’t, either.” Billy for answer gave a savage kick and snap went the little stalk.
She laid the tiny stalk before her mother, and hiding her face in her hands sobbed bitterly.
For answer Mrs. Law held up the broken stalk, and Jerry looked his sympathy.
“Never mind, don’t cry so, dear,” Mrs. Law said at last.
“Very likely it wouldn’t have [Pg 25] lived anyhow.” “How did it happen?” whispered Jerry.
Oh, my poor little flower that was going to be a morning-glory.
“I think perhaps it was,” she replied.
I will, honest, I will.
If that gardener should but once appear Jerry knew well what he meant to do.
He did not come home even to dinner, but munched a crust he had stuffed in his pocket, and kept his eye on the gate.
“He might just be coming out to dinner now,” the boy murmured to himself, “and I’d be sure to miss him if I left.” But no gardener appeared till late.
The clock had struck six and the streets were full of workmen returning to their homes when the gate did open and out stepped the gardener, dinner bucket in hand.
He had no sooner appeared than Jerry met him, outwardly as bold as a lion, but inwardly anxious.
The man scowled down at him.
We don’t often open this gate, only to take in loads of dirt and such, and when I am late I go out this way.
“You can’t guess,” he returned.
“Down by the wharf?” Jerry shook his head.
“Yes, really.” Jerry winked at his mother.
That was not all there was to tell, but he meant to keep the rest a secret.
“I remember it a little,” said Jerry.
I saw a shiny carriage stop at the door and a lady and a boy got out.
“No, lots bigger, but he looked friendly; he kind of smiled when he saw me there.” “Come, children, it’s cleaning up time,” said Mrs. Law.
Jerry approached the little stove where something was simmering and sending out savory odors.
He lifted the lid.
“Stew!” he cried.
“My, but it smells good,” said Jerry with much satisfaction.
I’ll bet some people do.
“We were not rich at all, but we were very comfortable and very content.” Mrs. Law gave a little sigh.
“Just wait till I grow up, and we will be again,” said Jerry, pausing with a big piece of dumpling on his fork.
“Well, no it isn’t,” she agreed; “it won’t be any time, and I’ll be grown up, too, and [Pg 35] mother won’t have a thing to do but——” “‘Sit on a cushion and sew a fine seam,’” Mrs. Law put in.
“I saw strawberries in one of the shops yesterday.” “I’d rather have dumplings any day,” Jerry decided, having finished eating his stew, and being now ready to attack the dumplings and molasses.
To tell the truth, the dumplings formed the principal part of the stew and the meat was very scarce, but the children rather rejoiced at that, and completed their meal with much satisfaction.
Then there were many little duties to be done, and of all the rooms in the tenement it is safe to say that Mrs. Law’s was in decidedly the best order for Sunday.
At last twelve o’clock came, and she found Jerry waiting outside the school door.
“Come along,” he cried.
“We don’t want to lose any time.” And catching her by the arm he hurried her along the street till they reached the long wall.
He looked up as they came near.
“Well, here you are,” he greeted them cordially.
Sun’s noon high and a few minutes past.
[Pg 37] “You’re a sly little lad,” he said, pinching Jerry’s ear.
I slipped a lot of geraniums a while ago; they’re easy cared for and are good bloomers; no trouble if you give them a sunny window and a little water.
“Take your pick,” he said.
How could she decide among so many?
However, finally, after changing her mind frequently, she halted between a crimson and a lovely pink.
“How good you are,” she said.
“Oh, Mr. McClure, what a lovely father you must be.” [Pg 38] John McClure threw back his head and laughed.
“You would?” Mr. McClure looked pleased.
Just then they saw a boy coming down the path.
This young lass here says she’d rather look at the flowers than eat her dinner.
“Because we couldn’t get home and back to school in time and see the flowers too, and I do so want to see the flowers.” She looked wistfully at Jerry.
“And I suppose your brother would rather eat his dinner,” said Rock.
“That’s just like Mr. Rock,” said John McClure.
“I—mother——Do you think mother would like it, Jerry?” “What?” John interrupted.
Just make yourselves easy, and if you think there’ll be any trouble I’ll go and explain it to her myself.
By the way, you won’t want to take your geranium to school, sis; you’d better leave it here and call for it on your way home.
He set the tray down on a bench under a spreading tree.
I’ve a mind to bring something for myself.
Pitch in, youngsters.
I went to the country for over Sunday and when I got back this morning it was too late for school; the train was an hour late.
I found mother wasn’t going to be at home to lunch, so, if you hadn’t been here to keep me company, I’d have eaten a solitary meal indoors.
“Then you’ll have to scamper,” he cried.
“Those are nice little things,” said Rock as he watched the two children depart.
“That they are, Mr. Rock,” returned John.
“I wonder where they live,” said Rock.
“I’m going to learn more about them,” Rock declared.
“Where do you live?” he asked them.
“On Orchard Street,” they told him.
I believe I’ve some seed in the tool-house.
You’re welcome to ’em, and if you plant ’em they’ll be likely to grow, and you can train ’em over your window.
Rock and John listened gravely.
I wasn’t three years old, and Jerry was about five.
You must come around again some day and tell me how the morning-glories are coming on.
Isn’t it lovely?
And look at these violets.
Oh, mother, we’ve had the loveliest time, and Jerry has some morning-glory seeds in his pocket.
You don’t know all we’ve been doing.
Were you worried that we didn’t come home to dinner?
We had—oh, mother, it’s just like a story.
Truly the gay pink blossom did brighten up the bare room, while the scent of the violets filled the air.
“I never had such a lovely day.” “And how about the lessons?” asked Mrs. Law.
Are you tired, you poor mother, sitting here stitching, stitching all day long?
That is the old Dallas place, you know, where the garden is, and Rock—Mr.
No doubt the boy might think his father would be interested, but that was only his idea, and I couldn’t think of calling on Mr. Dallas upon such an invitation.
She had dreamed that great things would come of it, and now her hopes were blasted.
But it did not take from the memory of the day’s pleasure, and she went about the room, setting the table for supper, and attending to her little duties, singing softly.
The house was an old one, and was let out in rooms to tenants who could afford only a small rent, consequently the neighborhood was now none of the best.
There was an ill smell of cooking in the halls, and the sound of a constant banging of doors, and the shuffle of heavy feet on the bare stairs could always be heard.
The top floor Mrs. Law thought by far the most desirable, although it was the cheapest, and with her children near her, away from the confusion and noise below, she felt that it was as much of a home as she could hope for.
She would rather stay with her mother.
Her principal playmate was a battered doll, which she had owned since she was a baby.
It was the last gift from her father, and she prized it above all her possessions.
The next afternoon she established herself in a corner with her doll, Flora, and carried on a long whispered conversation with her.
At last the daylight waned and Mrs. Law moved nearer the window.
“Didn’t she get rather tired of that?” she asked.
Come, Flora, you must go to bed.
She looked up and down the dingy street, but saw nothing of her brother.
She ran down the steps looking to right and left.
At the corner she saw Billy Miles with a group of boys.
“Who ye lookin’ fer?” asked Billy.
“You know where he is,” she said positively.
“I think you might tell me.” “I don’t have to,” said Billy teasingly.
She well knew that to go home and tell her mother or to get the policeman on the beat to help her would be a sure means of bringing future trouble upon [Pg 59] both herself and Jerry, so she determined to hunt for him herself.
She ran down the street calling, “Jerry, Jerry, where are you?” But after making a long search and finding no sign of her brother, she went back home discouraged.
“Jerry isn’t anywhere,” she announced to her mother.
He does that sometimes, you know.
Somehow the recollection of Billy’s teasing grin remained with her, and she ate her supper very soberly.
First she stopped a moment before the gate in the wall, thinking she might hear voices, but all was silent.
“I can’t hear even the daffodils ringing their bells,” said the child to herself as she ran around to the other side of the house.
“Miss Morning-Glory, oh, Miss Morning-Glory!” Looking up she saw Rock Hardy [Pg 61] standing on the steps.
“Is Jerry lost?” he asked, smiling.
To have such a big boy as champion meant a great deal.
He wondered why such a very nice little girl should be living in such a dirty street, and he wondered more as they mounted the steps and went from flight to flight.
She looked like her mother and had just such a way of speaking.
“I suppose Jerry hasn’t come yet,” said Rock.
“No,” Mrs. Law replied.
“Oh, I don’t believe that,” said Rock in an assured tone.
Rock’s first move was to inquire of the big policeman at the corner if he had seen Jerry Law since four o’clock.
I’ve not seen um.
I know he wouldn’t let any one hurt it if he could help it.
They looked around but could not seem to discover the spot from which the answer came.
“Where are you?” called Rock.
[Pg 65] “In the cellar,” was the reply.
I’ve banged and banged, but I couldn’t budge it.
The boy was battered and dirty, and bore the marks of a hard fight.
“How long ago was that?” asked Rock.
“Not long after I came home from school.” “You’ve had a long wait,” Rock remarked.
“They’d better not try it,” said Jerry, looking up confidently into the bigger boy’s face.
But the puppy, now that it had escaped from its safe retreat, felt itself to be in the land of the Philistines, and had confidence in [Pg 71] no one but the sharer of its imprisonment; therefore Jerry carefully hid it under his jacket, and they traveled back to where Mrs. Law was anxiously watching for them.
At Rock’s suggestion they stopped to get some milk for the puppy, and then Rock left them safe at their own door.
“You will let us keep the puppy, won’t you, mother?” the children begged.
“If it should get away, and anything should happen to it, you would grieve for it, and you know those spiteful boys would be only too glad to hurt it,” she told them.
“How can they be so cruel!” she cried.
“See, Jerry, it is going to sleep.” If anything, Jerry was the more interested of the two, for had he not snatched him from a dreadful fate?
And the two children vied with each other in paying this new member of the family such attentions as they could.
They were never able to get over the fact that she was not afraid of mice, and that once she had spent the whole of her recess watching a colony of ants.
“What?” asked Miss Adams sharply, keen to discover some misdemeanor.
“She’s been playing with ants; she won’t play with us.” And the girls around giggled.
A girl who preferred to play with ants to romping with her schoolmates was something unusual, so they avoided her, and she, feeling that they had little in common, withdrew more and more.
Although she longed for a real playmate, a girl after her own heart, none came her [Pg 75] way, and finally she invented one.
It was a great day when her imagination created Miss Morning-Glory.
Then came the thought, “I’ll make believe a friend, and I’ll call her Miss Morning-Glory,” and forthwith she started up a conversation with this imaginary comrade, to whom she was talking animatedly when several of the schoolgirls passed her.
They stopped, stared, and nudged each other.
“She’s talking to herself,” they whispered.
What could not this new friend say and do?
Her mother smiled, and then she sighed.
You mean them, don’t you?
“No, I mean her.” She spoke a little shyly.
I made her up like— like a story, you know, and she likes all the things I do.
She is here now; she walked [Pg 77] home with me, and she plays with me at recess.
“She has lovely blue eyes and pink cheeks and golden hair all in curls, not tight curls, but the kind that angels have.” “What do you know about angels’ curls?” her mother asked, laughing.
You know he brings his milk direct from his farm, and he is a kind man who has children of his own, and I know they will be good to the little doggie.
She had hoped that the puppy might be allowed to stay altogether, although from the first her mother had declared that it could not.
The rag man?
Did you sell the rags?
Oh, how perfectly fine.
I am so glad.
“She wouldn’t go without being invited,” which adjusted the matter very satisfactorily.
If she is as well-behaved as you say, I should think we might ask her.
The prospect of this visit did much towards comforting the children after the milkman had borne away the little dog, and they made it their chief subject of conversation.
They hoped it would be a pleasant day, that the little girl would be just like Rock, that John McClure would not be too busy, and that they would be allowed to play in the garden.
“Yes, you will have to; it is growing too small for you anyhow.” Mrs. Law sighed.
Her plaid frock was the best she had; it was not of very good material, [Pg 89] but it was simply made, and so did not look as badly as it would have done if it had been fussy and showy.
She wondered if the little girl she was going to see would be very finely dressed, and she found as the time approached that she rather dreaded the visit.
But for the fact that she knew and liked Rock and John McClure, she would almost have [Pg 90] preferred to stay at home with Flora and Miss Morning-Glory; and when at last she did set out it was with many misgivings.
She was very conscious of the shortness of her sleeves, and the shabbiness of her shoes, though Jerry had blackened up these latter to the best of his ability, and they both agreed that the little cracks in the sides did not show so very much.
The little girl’s heart was beating very fast as she approached the old Dallas place.
Was she to go up the front steps and ring the bell, or was she to go around to the side gate and enter that way?
She had not thought to ask, and not to do the proper thing would be dreadful.
If she were going to see a little girl whose uncle’s house this was, she must surely enter as did other visitors, her judgment very wisely told her.
Eleanor hoped you’d come early.
Come right in.
“I’m so glad to see you,” said Eleanor sweetly.
Her hat seemed such a very, very insignificant thing beside all this grandeur, but she took it off and held it in her lap.
Eleanor gently took it from her.
“I will hang it up here in the hall,” she said, “and you will know where it is when you want it.” This done the two little girls sat looking at each other, feeling rather embarrassed.
[Pg 92] “Are you the only girl?” Eleanor asked.
She would like to have told Eleanor of the new friend of her fancy, Miss Morning-Glory, but she did not feel well enough acquainted yet, and for a little while the two children sat looking at each other wondering what to say next.
Then Rock came in.
“How is the puppy?” he asked.
“Yes, you know, Jerry saved him from that pack of boys,” he made answer.
There was a big table, covered with magazines, in the middle of the floor; the window held flowering plants; a number of comfortable chairs and a wide, soft lounge looked as if they were meant for every-day use, while the room had just enough pretty trifles in it to make it look well.
Sitting by the window was a pretty woman, as charming as the room itself.
What do you say to having this room to play in this morning?
You are going to have luncheon in the garden, or at least Rock has a little scheme that he and John are carrying out, and unless you would specially like to play there, I have my suspicions that they would rather you would keep out of the way this morning, and let them give you a surprise.
She felt rather shy as yet, and stood somewhat in awe of this pretty lady in her dainty morning gown.
Rock was always fonder of his own doll when he was a little fellow.
He used to say he felt more at home with him.
You know where the piece bag is, Eleanor, and if you want to make doll’s clothes you can help yourselves.
It was not long before they were playing like old friends.
[Pg 96] Eleanor comforted her upon this last score.
“It is just as easy to make believe that she is here as to make believe that the dolls can talk,” she declared.
“Oh, then, I’ll be Miss Morning-Glory,” declared Eleanor.
About one o’clock Rock appeared.
“What time is it?” “One o’clock.” “Oh, then he can’t be long, for he is generally at home by half-past twelve, at the latest, on Saturdays.” “Are you all ready for us, Rock?” asked Eleanor.
“I am just wild to see what you have been doing.” Rock smiled.
[Pg 98] “There he is now,” cried Rock.
“Come, girls.” And the three rushed down-stairs and into the garden to meet Jerry, who was standing with John McClure waiting for them.
“You want to see what we have been doing, don’t you, Miss Eleanor?” said John, smiling at Eleanor’s eagerness.
“Well, come along.” And he led the way down to the foot of the garden where stood a small brick building that was used in winter for the storage of flower-pots, bulbs and such like things.
Along the shelves at each side were ranged flowering plants, and pots of trailing vines.
On the floor reaching up to the shelves were boxes of blooming shrubs and palms; two canary birds, in their cages swung in the windows, were singing blithely.
In the middle of the floor a table was spread; a centerpiece of ferns and pansies ornamented it, and at each one’s place was a little bunch of sweet violets tied with green and purple ribbons.
A pretty basket at each end of the table was tied with the same colors; one basket was filled with sticks of chocolate tied with the lilac and green, and the other held delicate green and purple candies.
“It is just lovely, Rock!” cried Eleanor.
When the luncheon was over they played all sorts of games, up and down the garden walks and in among the trees and shrubbery.
The two girls were hiding in the tool-house, when Eleanor caught sight of a chrysalis swinging from above them.
Eleanor, as distressed as her visitor, was at her side in an instant.
I am afraid it won’t come out.
It was all my fault.
My foot slipped, Aunt Dora.
I am afraid it will not take it out altogether, and that it will leave a stain, but we will try it.
She could hardly keep back her tears when Mrs. Dallas and Eleanor left her in the latter’s room while they went off to air the unfortunate frock.
Eleanor feels so badly about having spoiled your frock, and I know her mother would wish that she should in some way make good the loss.
Please don’t mind taking this; it is one that Eleanor has almost outgrown, and it is only a little long in the sleeves and skirt [Pg 108] for you.
“I will send the other one home when it is thoroughly aired,” Mrs. Dallas told her.
I knew it was a girl’s name.
They ought to have done that, but Mrs. Law hadn’t the money to get a lawyer, and railroads are hard to fight, Jerry says.
She listened to the account of the day’s doings with much interest, and was well pleased that [Pg 110] they should have had such a good time.
“Rock Hardy is the splendidest boy I ever saw,” Jerry confided to her, and his mother gave him a kiss assuring him that no boy could be dearer than hers no matter how splendid he was.
Jerry had worked hard to earn his holiday, and he had proudly poured his earnings, sixty cents, into his mother’s lap when he came home from market that Saturday morning.
Nor did she know that Mrs. Dallas handed her mother two cunning baskets as she left the room, and that Mr. Dallas set down something in the corner of the room when he came in.
Yet she had pleasant dreams, and the first thing when she woke in the morning she remembered that it was Easter Day, and then she sat up in bed very wide awake.
They would have eggs for breakfast, and they would have biscuits; she smelled them baking.
She popped up out of bed and looked towards the window where the sun came streaming in; then she gave a glad cry and her bare feet pattered across the floor, for, standing by the side of her treasured geranium and casting it quite in the shade, was a tall white lily, and on the other side a pot of pansies.
“Oh, angel lily, angel lily, where did you come from?” she cried.
[Pg 112] “Why, daughter, don’t you know it is Easter Day?” said her mother, watching her delight with a pleased smile.
“Perhaps he did,” she answered, softly.
Hurry now and get dressed.
What a wonderful Easter morning for her.
She remembered that Eleanor had said that John would send to the church the flowers which had decorated the room where they had lunched.
She wished that she had asked if it was the same church to which she and her mother went, if so, how pleasant it would be to see the flowers again.
She viewed herself with much satisfaction in the little mirror over the bureau, and then she went out to where her mother was setting the breakfast on the table.
Wasn’t it lovely of them to bring these to us?
“Rock and Eleanor sent them to you,” she told the children as she handed each of them a little box.
They had never had more than one egg apiece on Easter and this rich supply was something delightful.
Hot biscuits were much more to his liking.
It seemed treating it with scorn, and before she went out she turned to the closet where it hung and touched it lovingly.
She did not tell her mother of her feelings on this subject.
There were many things which little Miss Oddity said and did which few persons would understand, and she was aware of it.
Her world of [Pg 116] fancy was a very different one from that in which most persons live.
She stood rapt and thoughtful before her lily till her brother should be ready.
She was wondering if it would be right to allow Miss Morning-Glory to go to church with her, and then she decided that it would be better that she should remain at home to keep the lily company, for maybe the lily would be lonely in a strange place with no acquaintances but the pansies and the geranium.
She thought she could distinguish them from the stranger ones, and she nodded gravely to them as she left the church.
In consequence of sitting on the other side of the church she had no opportunity of speaking to Eleanor unless she should wait outside, and this she asked to be allowed to do.
“I want to thank her,” she told her mother.
After a while she saw Eleanor coming along ahead of her aunt.
She wore a pretty new frock and a hat trimmed with wild flowers.
“I didn’t know you came here to church,” she said.
“I never, never thought I should have one of [Pg 118] my very own.” She wanted to thank Mrs. Dallas for it, but felt too shy to go up to her before all that crowd of people.
“Please tell Mrs. Dallas I think it is so beautiful, and I think when she is an angel she will look like one of my lilies.” Eleanor laughed.
“I will surely tell her,” she said.
And when she repeated the message Mrs. Dallas smiled, and then her eyes grew very moist.
“I have come to take you to drive,” she said.
“Come in,” she said, “and I will ask mother.” Eleanor stepped into the room.
She had not [Pg 122] realized that this little new friend was so very poor, although Rock had told her so.
But it was pleasanter up on this top floor than it was below, she reflected.
I shall be glad to have her go, and I know she will enjoy it.
I must finish [Pg 123] this work this evening.
Won’t you sit down and wait?
“Could I see Flora?” she asked after a few moments’ silence.
Mrs. Law smiled.
For the moment she was a creature further removed from them than ever.
No wonder she was queer, if she could have friends like the pretty little girl at her side.
What a wonderful drive that was!
The dogwood was in [Pg 125] blossom, and wild flowers were beginning to spring up along the woodland roads.
It was one Saturday morning two or three weeks later when the glory of the lilies had departed and the pansies were dwindling in size, and only the geranium held its own, showing new blossoms and new buds.
Early summer was at hand; the streets were resounding with cries of “Red-ripe strawberries!” or “Rags, bones, old bottles!” and the hand organs were out in force.
From time to time the little girl [Pg 126] addressed a remark to the invisible Miss Morning-Glory, or to Flora, who stared at her with round black eyes from her corner.
Now she was a little tired and was resting in the big rocking-chair, swinging herself back and forth and chanting a little song to herself, which she made up as she went along: “There once was a lily that died, And it was a lady, a lady, But it went to heaven one night And now it’s an angel, an angel.” She sang the song very softly, looking over to where her pot of lilies stood.
I wonder if I can.
There was a plate of cold corn-bread, little dish of beef stew, and a small, a very small plate of cheese.
We are going to have—to have—chicken sandwiches, and green peas, and fried potatoes, and little long rolls, and strawberries and ice-cream and cake.
Going to the stove she took off the lids and looked in.
She had never made a fire, for Jerry or her mother always did that, and she was a little dubious about the matter.
So she stuffed in some paper and piled some sticks of wood on top of it, then shut it all up tight after lighting it.
In a few minutes she looked at it, but it was dead out.
She tried a second time, but with no better success.
How in the world did her mother manage to do it so easily?
She stood looking at it, puzzled what to do next, then she remembered that some chips and light kindling must go in on top of the paper.
She tried to get off some little slivers, and by so doing managed first to get a splinter in her forefinger and then to cut a gash in her thumb.
She was ready to cry, and indeed the tears were standing in her eyes, for the time was going and Jerry would be at home very soon.
She could not bear to confess to him that she could not make fire, for Jerry, like all boys, was ready to tease.
So she took off the lids again to make a last effort.
Just then there was a knock at the door, and when it was opened there stood Rock Hardy.
He [Pg 129] caught sight of her thumb tied up with a rag.
Here, let me see.
I’ll get that splinter out, and tie up that thumb properly, and make the fire, too.
She smiled and tried to wink away the drops.
Now for the fire.
Why, you haven’t opened any of the drafts.
See, you must pull out this one, and open this thing in front; that will make a blaze.
Now, there she goes.
Rock was silent for a moment.
“I wish you would invite me to dinner,” at last he said very gravely.
Do you mind if we make a sort of picnic of this and let every fellow bring his own basket?
It suited her exactly to call it a picnic.
“You have an imagination of your own,” he said.
Then she turned to her work of setting the table.
“We are going to have a picnic, Flora,” she said.
Won’t Jerry be surprised?
I must go into the other room and tell Miss Morning-Glory that she can stay to dinner.
He carried a basket which he set down on the chest.
Oh, yes, the chocolate.
Here’s a box of strawberries; they looked tempting; you can cap them while I make the chocolate.
What is in this bag?
Oh, yes, that’s sugar, and this is cake and biscuits and stuff.
Nobody ever heard of a picnic without cake.
Besides, you furnish the picnic grounds; all these rocks and that grove over there, and the fire and the dishes.
They were in the midst of these performances when Jerry came in.
“My, that’s a jolly good feed,” cried Jerry, his eyes roaming over the table.
“I’m tired of it; I’d a lot rather have the sardines.” “All right, it’s a go,” said Rock.
Wouldn’t you rather have the sardines, too?
“Not very; I only made thirty cents.” Rock looked at him.
“To think of this little fellow helping to support his family,” was his thought, and he gave Jerry an admiring glance.
“That’s more than I ever earned in one day,” he said, soberly.
“Oh, but you don’t have to,” Jerry replied.
I tell you when a fellow shows what he is willing to do and that he isn’t going to shirk, it goes a great way.
John McClure is a fine man.
Father says he is one of the most intelligent fellows he knows.
He’d always been fond of gardening, so he applied for the place as gardener with us, and has been there ever since we’ve lived here.
“I think he’s a brick,” said Jerry.
It really belongs to old Mr. Dallas, but he and his wife are obliged to go south every year, and so when my mother and Mr. Heath Dallas were married, his father wanted them to take the place and keep it from running down.
So that suited everybody, and we’ve been living there two years.
Father had no brothers or sisters, and mother’s people lived in England.
He had wondered why Mrs. Law had been left with no one to give her a helping hand.
“Then we’ll save them and the rest of the things for mother,” she said with a satisfied air.
“Unless,” she looked at Rock with sudden misgiving, “unless you meant to carry them home.” Rock laughed.
I’ve no notion of doing any such thing.
I am too lazy to move and the thought of having to burden myself with a basket is too much for me.
“I’d like to see myself calling him my friend.” “Well, you’ll get rid of him soon, I hope,” Rock told her.
Polly bites, too, and is so cross.
“And you’ll have a dog and a cat.” “And chickens,” Jerry broke in.
“And pigeons, maybe,” from Jerry.
“And we’ll have picnics whenever we want them,” Rock went on.
I almost thought it was going to be really.
I must travel.
John McClure has consented to sleep in the coachman’s quarters at the stable; we take our horses with us, you know, and I think John would be mightily pleased if you would board him; it [Pg 149] might help out with your table expenses if you could do that.
The back rooms are really the most agreeable in summer, for they look out on the garden, and the porch at that side is very cool.
We always find a breeze there, if there is any stirring.
“Oh, mother!” cried the child in an imploring tone.
She understands that, for she is paid half her wages while we are away, and it is an understood thing that she holds herself in readiness to do anything we exact of her.
John will see to it that the pavements are kept clean; there is a boy who comes to do that.
The upshot of the whole matter was that Mrs. Law agreed to accept Mrs. Dallas’s offer, and in a few days the Law family found a summer home at the old Dallas place, with John as their boarder.
She had a little room next her mother’s; both rooms opened on a porch and overlooked the garden.
Those were morning- [Pg 151] glories surely, blue and pink and purple and pearly white, opening now as the light touched them.
“Oh!” whispered the child in ecstasy.
“You darlings!” She reached out her hand and drew a bit of the vine towards her, gazing into the frail cups and touching with gentle finger the curling tendrils.
She was so happy that her eyes filled with tears, and she stood there whispering to herself till she heard her mother stir, and then she scampered back to bed again, but not to sleep; the robins were too lively, and when in the course of an hour she heard the click of a grass-mower in the garden, she jumped up and dressed herself, then groped her way down-stairs and let herself out the door into the morning sunshine.
“Hello!” cried John, looking up from his grass-cutting.
I doubt if any you ever saw were fit to eat.
As soon as I get through this lawn I’ll get you some.
She thought it looked very pretty among the green leaves.
They did seem to be enjoying themselves so much that the little girl felt sorry that the cherries must be picked, and they be left without any, but she remembered that the cherries would not last very long anyhow, and that the robins would have their share first.
The best of the blossoming was over, but there were a number of flowers still to be seen; marigolds, and larkspurs, and snap-dragons, phlox and mignonette and monthly roses, not to mention the geraniums.
After a while the grass was cut and lay in sweet smelling heaps upon the lawn.
“Try ’em,” he said.
Afraid to try the [Pg 154] ladder?
She came lightly and with perfect confidence.
“That’s right,” he said.
“You weren’t a bit scared, were you?” “No, indeed.” He put out his arm and drew her to a safe seat near him.
“There now, help yourself,” he told her.
She gave a merry glance at John.
“Here I am,” came the answer.
Jerry looked mystified.
He hunted the garden over, and finally spied the ladder leaning against the tree.
“Oho!” he cried peering up into the green; and just then a bunch of ripe cherries came [Pg 155] pelting against his upturned face and a merry laugh sounded from above.
“Want to come up?” said John.
Then Jerry was given permission to go up.
This was a treat he had not expected, to be allowed the freedom of a cherry tree full of ripe cherries.
The boy gave a sigh of great content as he settled himself astride a huge bough.
“Isn’t it splendid?” she called up to him.
“I should say so,” came the answer, rather indistinctly by reason of a mouthful of [Pg 156] cherries.
She ran lightly across the freshly cut grass to the kitchen where her mother was getting breakfast.
“Breakfast is ready,” she told her.
“Call Jerry and Mr. McClure.” And Jerry regretfully was obliged to come down.
“You shall help me to pick them to-morrow,” John told him, and this prospect was enough to satisfy him.
She dreaded the probable removal back to Orchard Street, next door to the parrot and old Mrs. Finnegan and Billy Miles; she dreaded the girls who at school looked askance at her and called her Miss Oddity.
“We don’t want to go back, do we?” she said to Flora.
“We’d like to live here in this [Pg 160] garden forever’n ever.” But one day Mr. Dallas came.
She found her standing by a table; she was gazing half-dazed at a piece of paper in her hand.
She looked down at the child with a little wistful smile.
“It is a check from the railroad people,” she said.
Are we rich now?
Shall we have nice clothes and a pretty new home?
I must have time to think it all over.
I am very glad to have this dear quiet place as a refuge until I decide how best to take my place in the world.
The summer was passing and John was getting ready for the fall; transplanting, cutting down, thinning out, to make room for chrysanthemums, asters, dahlias and cosmos.
“What do you think?” she cried.
“What is it?” asked the latter.
Yes, it is about that and some other things.
Mother doesn’t know yet.
Jerry looked disappointed.
“I hope it is good news,” said Mrs. Law, smiling at John across the table.
“It’s good and bad,” returned John slowly.
“I’ve had word that my grandfather has died, but I come in for the property he left.” Mrs. Law looked up a little surprised.
“How strange!” she exclaimed.
“Is it Grandfather Kennedy who is dead?” Jerry asked.
“Why, mother——” John dropped his knife and covered his face with one hand.
Mrs. Law sat gazing at him.
“It can’t be; it can’t be!” she whispered, half rising from her chair.
“Will you tell me your maiden name?” said John, in a queer, strained voice.
“Kennedy was my maiden name,” Mrs. Law answered.
“Where were you born?” John asked, in the same queer way.
I quarreled with my grandfather, who wanted me to marry a wealthy woman, and because I chose the dearest girl in the world who could win no favor from him because she was poor, he refused to see me again.
I went to Australia, and there my wife died a year later.
I could not go back to my old home.
It seems straight enough.
She was brought up by my mother’s sister, my aunt Agnes Matthews, and I was left with my grandfather, Alexander Kennedy.
If those facts fit, you are my own little niece.
I wrote to my aunt when I first came to the States, but the letter came back to me from the dead-letter office.
“And the little fat roly-poly girl whom I remember as my sister was very unlike the lady who is your mother,” said John.
“I suppose you couldn’t know each other, but I can’t believe yet that I would ever forget Jerry or that I wouldn’t know him a hundred years from now.” “I think you’d all better eat your dinners,” said Jerry, nothing if not practical, his plate being the only one that was empty.
“And leave my children?” “Why not take them?” Mrs. Law shook her head.
“And will you always live with us?” “Indeed I will if you’ll not get tired of me.” He turned to his sister.
I am told there is a customer for it, [Pg 173] the man who has been managing the place for grandfather all these years.
However, that is all past now.
Grandfather no doubt thought he was doing right.
In his severe way of looking at life and his strict ideas of what a young man should do; what he called my disobedience was a very terrible thing to him.
Jerry followed him out into the garden.
She chattered like a magpie while they were washing the dishes, and she heard many things which had never been told her before.
What a strange day it had been!
She felt as if she were living in a story-book, but she stayed by her mother till the last dish was put [Pg 174] away, and then she was left alone while her mother went up-stairs to write some important letters.
So she stole down the long path to a little corner sheltered by trees on one side and by tall bushes on the other.
Into this little hiding-place she crept and lay down with face upturned towards the leaves and branches overhead.
There was an empty nest among the branches, and there were all sorts of creeping, crawling things at hand to amuse and interest her.
John had told her many things about the ants, and he had been as interested as she in a family of spiders.
You couldn’t have as nice a one as my Uncle John if you tried.
Uncle John, Uncle John; how nice that sounds.
What will Rock say?
And Eleanor, and oh dear, there’s so much I haven’t heard about yet.
I wish they’d hurry up and tell me.
I wish little girls could hear every blessed thing that grown people talk about.
I wonder if my mouse is at home.
After opening the door softly she stood inside whistling and chirruping in a gentle way, and after some patient waiting she saw a little mouse come creeping out.
Then she gently opened a small tin box and took some crumbs from it; these she held in her hand, crouching on the ground as she did so, and after a little while the mouse came nearer, and finally crept upon her hand, eating the crumbs confidently and stopping once in a while to look at her with round bright eyes.
“Well, Miss Oddity,” cried a voice.
I wish I had crept up softly to see you feed it.
How tame it is, but ugh!
“I came down with papa this morning,” she said.
About the money?
Yes, but isn’t it too bad that it isn’t more?
“You are not going back to Orchard Street, I hope,” said the latter.
“No, indeed, mother says we are not.” “I know something, too,” said Eleanor.
“I have so many things to do, and I think she’s in the country a great deal in the summer.” She spoke very seriously, and Eleanor laughed.
You are as funny as Bubbles.
I wish you could see Bubbles, our little colored girl, you know; and I wish—oh, dear, I was so in hopes you were going to have a cottage near us.
It is a country town, you know, with trees and gardens, and there are woods very near the cottage, and it has a big field next to it.
Mother said—oh, dear, there I go again.
Come, I want to show you such a dear little hiding-place I have under the bushes.
I don’t believe you ever found it.
“Here we are,” cried Eleanor.
“Father told me.” “No, I don’t believe you do know it,” Eleanor declared.
“John McClure is my truly uncle.” “I don’t believe it,” cried Eleanor.
“He isn’t my father’s brother; he is my mother’s.” “You told me your name was Catherine Kennedy after your grandmother, and that your [Pg 184] mother’s name was Kennedy before she was married,” said Eleanor severely.
“He might be a stepbrother,” suggested Rock.
“But he isn’t; he is my mother’s own brother, and his real name is Kennedy.” “Not McClure?” exclaimed Rock and Eleanor at once.
Oh, it’s a long story.
“Whew!” exclaimed Rock, when she had concluded.
Isn’t it the queerest thing, Dimple?
“I can tell you,” Rock informed her.
It goes down from father to son, and it can’t be sold by one person because it has to go to his son.
I am mighty glad for John.
I must go and tell him so.
It is a good deal to happen in one day.
Where is Jerry?
I don’t know just where he is.
He does stay in a great deal more than he used to, but he gets tired of not having boys to play with.
To her mind if Flora and Miss Morning-Glory were not girls she would like to know who were.
“I think I’ll go hunt up Jerry after I have seen John,” said Rock, as he walked off.
Left to themselves the two little girls talked till Mrs. Law called them.
They found Martha on hand, Mr. Dallas having very thoughtfully sent for her.
Long after every one else in the house was fast asleep she lay with wide open eyes.
She put on her shoes and stockings and wrapping a blanket around her, for the September night was chill, she crept out on the porch.
The moon was on the wane and was not shining very brightly.
In the trees the insects were keeping up a noisy chirping.
The large white moon-flowers shone out of the green around her and sent up a faint sweet odor.
“That is what I should call you.” Presently she saw down in the garden below her a man’s figure, pacing up and down the long walk.
He came and stood under where she was.
“What are you doing up this time of night, you little witch?” he asked.
You will be too sleepy to get up to-morrow and Miss Eleanor is here, so you will not want to lie abed.
But finally, seeing that the child actually suffered at the thought, her mother decided that she might be sent to another school not very much further away, and the little girl was highly pleased to think that she would be known as Catherine Law and not as Miss Oddity.
She missed her uncle very much, but as time went on they heard frequently from him, and he wrote that he hoped to be with them again in November.
Before he went away he had had many long talks with his sister, and they had made many plans.
She also knew that her mother was very bright and happy and that her uncle had said that his sister ought by rights to have a share in his good fortune, and that he should consider the half of it belonged to her.
Jerry thought it over.
“It isn’t much of a trip,” Mrs. Law told them; “about an hour by train.” “I could stand that, I reckon,” said Jerry.
And you’ll wear your new suit and Jerry will wear his.
How nice we will all look.
Oh, isn’t it fine to be able to get things when you need them?
Even if we’re not rich we can have ever so much more than we used to.
The experience of going shopping was a rare one, and to see her mother with any money to spend was such a pleasure that the child enjoyed her afternoon hugely.
They started about nine o’clock the next morning upon their little journey.
After an hour’s ride, which was by no means a dull one to the children, they left the train and [Pg 198] found themselves at a small station.
Their feet had hardly touched the platform before they heard a voice call, “There they are!” And who should appear but Rock and Eleanor.
“Yes will answer both those questions,” Eleanor replied.
Then you don’t know the rest, and I’ll not tell you.
“I never knew the country was so lovely at this time of year,” she said.
“It doesn’t look bare and ugly at all, and Miss Morning-Glory said it would.” Eleanor laughed.
“If she doesn’t like the country all the year around I think she’d better not come,” she said.
I am so glad.
There is room enough for them, as you’ll see.
Mrs. Law looked around critically.
A hall ran through the middle of the house, and on each side were two rooms.
Rock watched Mrs. Law’s face.
This place was his special discovery, and he was very anxious that it should be appreciated.
He showed off the various good points with the air of one who has a personal interest.
The view from the windows, the advantage of a porch both front and back, the dry cellar, the closets in each room; all these things were pointed out and Mrs. Law declared that, so far as she was concerned, the house would be all that one could wish when certain repairs had been made.
If that suits John’s purpose I am more than satisfied.
“You are coming to our house to lunch, you know,” said Eleanor.
She did so very much want to see all these people and the things of which she [Pg 203] had heard Eleanor talk so much.
“There comes mamma now,” cried Eleanor.
“I don’t believe Miss Morning-Glory will want to come,” she said with conviction.
“And please say you will not go till the late train,” Eleanor begged Mrs. Law.
“We’ve got so much to do.” “And it will not keep till another time, I suppose,” returned Mrs. Law.
[Pg 204] “Your Aunt Dora promised to come over this afternoon; she wants to see Mrs. Law, and I think we can persuade these friends to stay,” said Eleanor’s mother.
“Please,” added Rock and Eleanor.
And Mrs. Dallas smiling, repeated, “Please.” So Mrs. Law declared herself more than persuaded, and that matter was settled.
“I think you’d better take your drive first,” suggested her mother.
Just then a smiling little colored girl appeared at the door.
Bubbles was so [Pg 205] overcome with pleasure that she ducked her head and giggled as she disappeared.
“Why?” said Eleanor.
“I would be, if I had all these things and this lovely place to live in and a papa.” Eleanor put her arm around her.
So off they set, the little pony’s short quick steps taking them along at a good rate.
As May Garland lived in the next house to the Dallas’s they had not far to go, and arrived to find Mrs. Law ready to start for the train.
He was not one to waste his time, and he had been able to arrange his affairs more quickly than Mrs. Law had dared to hope, for he wrote that they might look for him the latter part of November, and Mrs. Law busied herself in making her preparations to leave the Dallas place.
There had been a sharp frost, which even the chrysanthemums had not withstood, so the garden looked bare and dreary.
The prospect of that other garden near to Eleanor and to May Garland, that cottage which overlooked a shining strip of river, and in sight of which were the purple hills, all this made her feel [Pg 212] that she was to gain more than she was to lose.
“Although I am going away, I shall always love you very, very much, you dear garden,” she whispered.
Sure enough, that was why Jerry had called, for before she had reached the porch steps she was caught up by a pair of strong arms and her own clasped her uncle’s neck.
“I am so glad, so glad to see you, you dear, dearest uncle,” she said.
There was much to talk about, so much to do and to see that for the next week they seemed in a whirl.
The very next day after his arrival Uncle John went to look at the place upon which they had all set their hearts.
“I can scarcely wait till he comes back, can you, mother?” said Jerry.
“And what am I to have?” asked her uncle.
“Which do you like best?” she asked.
[Pg 216] “Yours,” he returned.
“You can have the other,” she cried, for here were morning-glories, delicately trailing up a creamy white paper; curling tendrils, heart shaped leaves, and all, looked so very natural.
“I’ll agree,” said her uncle.
“I will take the roses,” and so with buttercups for Jerry and chrysanthemums for Mrs. Law they were all satisfied.
Then came the buying of furniture, for Mrs. Law’s poor little stock would go only a very little way towards being enough, and next there were carpets and curtains and many other things, and finally there came a day when Mrs. Law went up to the cottage with her brother to set up the furniture which had been unpacked and stood ready to be placed in the different rooms.
At last came the time when they were to leave the Dallas place to take possession of their new home.
“You are getting very top-lofty,” returned her mother.
Her mother watched her for a little while.
“A penny for your thoughts,” she said, gaily.
She was often quite gay and smiling these days, different from that quiet, patient, gentle mother who had always smiled so sadly [Pg 218] and who had to work so hard for her children.
“The penny, please,” she said.
“I believe you know, mother.” She hung her head.
It is perfectly natural that you should feel so, but after all I think I wouldn’t do it.
Mrs. Law laid her hand gently on the child’s.
She understood the excitable, intense nature.
John Kennedy, looking over his shoulder at the back seat, missed his little niece.
Jerry was the first to scramble down.
He viewed the [Pg 220] house now spick and span in its new coat of paint.
“My, doesn’t it look fine?” he cried.
And he made a rush for the porch.
She only looked from one to the other smiling.
“We haven’t been all over the house yet,” Eleanor went on to say.
It was all neat and comfortable with no attempt at show, but very cheerful and homelike, “just as a cottage should be,” Mrs. Law had said.
Just wait a minute, you and Jerry, and then come out there.
“It’s five minutes,” said Jerry, looking at his new watch.
“Come on,” and they ran out to the stable, but, before they reached it, out came Rock bearing a Skye-terrier puppy in his arms.
“It’s for you, old fellow,” said Rock, and then, boy-like, he turned away before Jerry could say a word of thanks.
After Rock came Eleanor carrying in her arms a dear little kitten with the bluest eyes and with soft gray fur.
“Miss Morning-Glory told me that she thought you would like to have a kitty,” she [Pg 222] said, laughing.
Then came May Garland, a little shy, but with eyes full of laughter.
She had a basket in her hand.
There was a scrambling and a scurrying inside.
“Hold it for me,” she said, “and don’t let it go.” She took the box, but too late heeded Bubbles’ warning.
But [Pg 223] Bubbles threw up her hands and brought them together with a shout of delight.
It was just the kind of sensation that she enjoyed.
“All right,” said Jerry, glad for some excuse to exercise his energies.
I tell you, he is a dandy.
A shining line of silver showed through the trees, telling where the river was.
Behind the purple hills the sun had set, and there was a gorgeous western sky.
“The sun has walked through his garden,” she said.
Isn’t it good of Uncle John to want me to go to that school?
I must go and tell him.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!)
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement.
If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession.
“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.
It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.
There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.
Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States.
If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed.
Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work.
You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.
The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work.
Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change.
If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges.
Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that: • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.
The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.
Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns.
Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.” • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark.
Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from.
If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund.
If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.
If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come.
In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.
Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.
To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States.
U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.
PRINTED IN THE U. S. A.
In each case there has been revision and for the most part rewriting.
Whatever quality of lucidity the volume may have is due to several thousand young men and women with whom I have been associated during many years at the University of California.
Without their unwitting but real co-authorship the book might never have been written, or would certainly have been written less simply.
A. L. K. Berkeley, California, January 22, 1923.
Anthropology, biology, history.—2.
Organic and social elements.—3.
Age of anthropological science.
The “Missing Link.”—8.
Family tree of the Primates.—9.
Geological and glacial time.—10.
Place of man’s origin and development.—11.
The Grimaldi race: Neolithic races.—19.
The metric expression of human evolution.
Traits on which classification rests.—23.
The grand divisions or primary stocks.—24.
Peoples of doubtful position.—28.
Continents and oceans.—29.
The history of race classifications.—30.
Emergence of the three-fold classification.—31.
Principles and conclusions common to all classifications.—33.
Race, nationality, and language.
Questions of endowment and their validity.—35.
Plan of inquiry.—36.
Anatomical evidence on evolutionary rank.—37.
Comparative physiological data.
Causes of cancer incidence.—40.
Mental achievement and social environment.—41.
Psychological tests on the sense faculties.—42.
Status of hybrids.—44.
Evidence from the cultural record of races.—45.
Linguistic relationship: the speech family.—48.
Criteria of relationship.—49.
Sound equivalences and phonetic laws.—50.
The principal speech families.—51.
Classification of language by types.—52.
Permanence of language and race.—53.
The biological and historical nature of language.—54.
Problems of the relation of language and culture.—55.
Period of the origin of language.—56.
Culture, speech, [vi] and nationality.—57.
Relative worth of languages.—58.
Size of vocabulary.—59.
Quality of speech sounds.—60.
Diffusion and parallelism in language and culture.
Unconscious factors in language and culture.— 63.
Linguistic and cultural standards.—64.
Rapidity of linguistic change.
Fossils of the body and of the mind.—66.
Stone and metals.—67.
The old and the new stone ages.—68.
Other materials: bone and horn.—74.
Harpoons and weapons.—76.
The magic flight.—93.
The double-headed eagle.—95.
Universal elements.— 103.
Secondary parallelism in the Indo-European languages.—104.
Textile patterns and processes.—105.
Primary parallelism: the beginnings of writing.—106.
Scale and pitch of Pan’s pipes.—108.
Parallels and psychology.—112.
House building and architecture.—114.
The problem of spanning.—115.
The column and beam.—116.
The true arch.—118.
Babylonian and Etruscan beginnings.—119.
The Roman arch and dome.—120.
The Arabs: India: modern architecture.—122.
The week: holy numbers.—123.
Babylonian discovery of the planets.—124.
Greek and Egyptian contributions: the astrological combination.—125.
The names of the days and the Sabbath.—126.
The week in Christianity, Islam, and eastern Asia.—127.
Summary of the diffusion.—128.
Month-thirds and market weeks.—129.
Leap days as parallels.
Kinds of writing: pictographic and mixed phonetic.—131.
Deficiencies of transitional systems.—132.
Presumptive origins of transitional systems.—134.
Phonetic writing: the primitive Semitic alphabet.—135.
The Greek alphabet: invention of the vowels.—136.
Slowness of the invention.—137.
The Roman alphabet.—138.
Letters as numeral signs.—139.
Reform in institutions.—140.
The sixth and seventh letters.—141.
The tail of the alphabet.—142.
Capitals and minuscules.—143.
Conservatism and rationalization.—144.
Hebrew and Arabic.—146.
The spread eastward: the writing of India.—147.
The East Indies: Philippine alphabets.—149.
Northern Asia: the conflict of systems in Korea.
Regional variation of culture.—151.
Plains, Southwest, Northwest areas.— 152.
California and its sub-areas.—153.
The shaping of a problem.—154.
Girls’ Adolescence Rite.—155.
The First Period.—156.
The Second Period: Mourning Anniversary and First-salmon rite.—157.
Era of regional differentiation.—158.
Third and Fourth Periods on the Lower Colorado: Dream Singing.—161.
Northwestern California: world-renewal and wealth display.—162.
Summary of religious development.—163.
Other phases of culture.—164.
Outline of the culture history of California.—165.
The question of dating.—166.
Age of the shell mounds.—168.
General serviceability of the method.
Limitations on the diffusion principle.—171.
Diagrammatic representation of accumulation and diffusion of culture traits.—176.
Representation showing contemporaneity and narrative representation.—177.
Racial origin of the American Indians.—178.
The time of the peopling of America.—179.
The primitive culture of the immigrants.—181.
The route of entry into the western hemisphere.—182.
The spread over two continents.—183.
Emergence of middle American culture: maize.—184.
The sequence of social institutions.—186.
Rise of political institutions: confederacy and empire.—187.
Developments in weaving.—188.
Progress in spinning: cotton.— 189.
Crisis rites and initiations.— 192.
Secret societies and masks.—193.
Temples and sacrifice.— 195.
Architecture, sculpture, towns.—196.
Calendars and [viii] astronomy.—198.
The several provincial developments: Mexico.— 200.
The Andean area.—201.
The Tropical Forest.—203.
North America: the Southwest.—205.
The Northern Woodland.—207.
The Northwest Coast.—209.
Northern marginal areas.—210.
Later Asiatic influences.
Sources of knowledge.—212.
Chronology of the grand divisions of culture history.—213.
Pottery and the bow.—219.
The dog.— 221.
The hewn ax.—222.
The Full Neolithic.—223.
Origin of domesticated animals and plants.—224.
Other traits of the Full Neolithic.—225.
The Bronze Age: Copper and Bronze phases.—226.
Traits associated with bronze.—227.
First use and spread of iron.—229.
Summary of Development: Regional differentiation.—231.
The Scandinavian area as an example.—232.
The Full Neolithic and its subdivisions in Scandinavia.—235.
The Bronze Age and its periods in Scandinavia.
Problems of chronology.—237.
Principles of the prehistoric spread of culture.
The early focal area.—239.
Culture growth in dynastic Egypt.—242.
The Sumerian development.—243.
The Sumerian hinterland.—244.
Iranian peoples and cultures.—246.
The composite culture of the Near East.—247.
Other contributing nationalities.—249.
Growth and spread of Chinese civilization.—253.
Central and northern Asia.—257.
Indian caste and religion.—259.
Relations between India and the outer world.—260.
The East Indies.—263.
Melanesia and Polynesia.—264.
The influence of other cultures.—269.
The West African culture-area and its meaning.—271.
Civilization, race, and the future.
The descent of man: diagram 12 2.
The descent of man, elaborated 14 3.
The descent of man in detail, according to Gregory 16 4.
The descent of man in detail, according to Keith 17 5.
Antiquity of man: diagram 20 6.
Fossil and modern skull outlines superposed 25 7.
Measurements made on fossil skulls 31 8.
Relationship of the races: diagram 47 9.
Family tree of the human races 48 10.
Map: distribution of primary racial stocks 50 11.
Map: circumpolar distribution of the races 51 12.
Map: linguistic families of Asia and Europe (facing) 94 13.
Map: linguistic families of Africa 97 14.
Map: principal linguistic families of North America 99 15.
Map: principal linguistic families of South America 101 16.
Earliest prehistory of Europe: diagram 156 18.
Flint core with reassembled flakes 163 20.
Culture distribution and history in the Southwest: diagram 191 27.
Map: diffusion of the Magic Flight tale 201 28.
Maya symbols for zero 230 29.
Map: types of exogamic institutions in Australia 233 30.
Map: the spread of alphabetic writing (facing) 284 31.
Map: culture-areas of native California 297 32.
Map: the growth of rituals in native California 308 [x] 33.
Distribution of culture elements indicative of their history: diagram 328 34.
Map: culture-areas of America 337 35.
Occurrence of elements in the culture-areas of America: diagram (facing) 340 36.
Anthropology, biology, history.—2.
Organic and social elements.—3.
Age of anthropological science.
This broad and literal definition takes on more meaning when it is expanded to “the science of man and his works.” Even then it may seem heterogeneous and too inclusive.
The products of the human mind are something different from the body.
And these products, as well as the human body, are the subjects of firmly established sciences, which would seem to leave little room for anthropology except as a less organized duplication.
Ordinary political history, economics, literary criticism, and the history of art all deal with the works and doings of man; biology and medicine study his body.
It is evident that these various branches of learning cannot be relegated to the position of mere subdivisions of anthropology and this be exalted to the rank of a sort of holding corporation for them.
There must be some definite and workable relation.
One way in which this relation can be pictured follows to some extent the course of anthropology as it grew into self-consciousness and recognition.
Biology, medicine, history, economies were all tilling their fields of knowledge in the nineteenth century, some with long occupancy, when anthropology shyly entered the scene and began to cultivate a corner here and a patch there.
It examined some of the most special and non- [2] utilitarian aspects of the human body: the shape of the head, the complexion, the texture of the hair, the differences between one variety of man and another, points of negligible import in medicine and of quite narrow interest as against the broad principles which biology was trying to found and fortify as the science of all life.
Anthropology modestly turned its attention to nations without records, to histories without notable events, to institutions strange in flavor and inventions hanging in their infancy, to languages that had never been written.
Yet obviously the heterogeneous leavings of several sciences will never weld into an organized and useful body of knowledge.
A science becomes such only when it learns to discover relations and a meaning in facts.
As a co-laborer on the edifice of fuller understanding, anthropology must find more of a task than filling with rubble the temporarily vacant spaces in the masonry that the sciences are rearing.
The other manner in which the subject of anthropology can be conceived is that this is neither so vast as to include everything human, nor is it the unappropriated odds and ends of other sciences, but rather some particular aspect of human phenomena.
If such an aspect exists, anthropology vindicates its unity and attains to integrity of aim.
He was born so.
As dogs produce pups, and lions cubs, so negro springs from negro and [3] Caucasian from Caucasian.
We call the force at work, heredity.
The same negro is lazy by repute, easy going at his labor.
Off-hand, most of us would reply: Yes.
He sings at his corn-hoeing more frequently than the white man across the fence.
Is this also because of his heredity?
“Of course: he is made so,” might be a common answer; “Probably: why not?” a more cautious one.
But now our negro is singing Suwanee River, which his great-grandfather in Africa assuredly did not sing.
As regards the specific song, heredity is obviously no longer the cause.
Our negro may have learned it from an uncle, perhaps from his schoolmates; he can have acquired it from human beings not his ancestors, acquired it as part of his customs, like being a member of the Baptist church and wearing overalls, and the thousand other things that come to him from without instead of from within.
The efficient forces now are quite different from those that made his skin black and his lips thick.
They are causes of another order.
The particular song of the negro and his complexion represent the clear-cut extremes of the matter.
Between them lie the sloth and the inclination to melody.
Obviously these traits may also be the result of human example, of social environment, of contemporary tradition.
There are those that so believe, as well as those who see in them only the effects of inborn biological impulse.
Perhaps these intermediate dubious traits are the results of a blending of nature and nurture, the strength of each factor varying according to each trait or individual examined.
Clearly, at any rate, there is room here for debate and evidence.
A genuine problem exists.
This problem cannot be solved by the historical sciences alone because they do not concern themselves with heredity.
Nor can it be solved by biology which deals with heredity and allied factors but does not go on to operate with the non-biological principle of tradition.
Here, then, is a specific task and place in the sun for anthropology: the interpretation of those phenomena into which both organic and social causes enter.
The untangling and determination and reconciling of these two sets of forces are anthropology’s own.
They [4] constitute, whatever else it may undertake, the focus of its attention and an ultimate goal.
No other science has grappled with this set of problems as its primary end.
Nor has anthropology as yet much of a solution to offer.
It may be said to have cleared the ground of brush, rather than begun the felling of its tree.
But, in the terminology of science, it has at least defined its problem.
It must be able to recognize them with surety before it endeavors to analyze and resynthesize them.
It must therefore effect close contact with the organic and the social sciences respectively, with “biology” and “history,” and derive all possible aid from their contributions to knowledge.
Up to the present time, a large part of the work of anthropology has consisted in acquiring the fruits of the activity of these sister sciences and applying them for its own ends; or, where the needed biological and historical data were not available, securing them.
They are more directly “natural.” Anthropology has therefore found valuable general principles in biology: laws of heredity, the doctrines of cell development and evolution, for instance, based on facts from the whole range of life.
Its business has been to ascertain how far these principles apply to man, what forms they take in his particular case.
This has meant a concentration of attention, the devising of special methods of inquiry.
Many biological problems, including most physiological and hereditary ones, can be most profitably attacked in the laboratory, or at least under experimental conditions.
The phenomena concerning man have to be taken as they come and laboriously sifted and re- sifted afterward, instead of being artificially simplified in advance, as by the experimental method.
Also, as these data had to be used in the gross, unmodifiable by artificially varied conditions, it has been necessary to secure them from all possible varieties of men, different races, sexes, ages, and their nearest brute analogues.
Men’s bodies and natural equipment are back of their deeds and accomplishments as transmitted by tradition, primary to their culture or civilization.
The relation of anthropology to historical science has therefore been in a sense the opposite of its relation to biological science.
Instead of specializing, anthropology has been occupied with trying to generalize the findings of history.
Historians cannot experiment.
They deal with the concrete, with the unique; for in a degree every historical event has something unparalleled about it.
They may paint with a broad sweep, but they do not lay down exact laws.
Moreover, history inevitably begins with an interest in the present and in ourselves.
In proportion as it reaches back in time and to wholly foreign peoples, its interest tends to flag and its materials become scant and unreliable.
It is commonly considered useful for a man to know that Napoleon was a Corsican and was defeated at Waterloo in 1815, but a rather pedantic piece of knowledge that Shi Hwang-ti was born in northwestern China and unified the rule of China in 221 B.C.
From a theoretical or general point of view, however, one of these facts is presumably as important as the other, for if we wish to [6] know the principles that go into the shaping of human social life or civilization, China counts for as much as France, and the ancient past for as much as the nearby present.
In fact, the foreign and the old are likely to be inquired into with even more assiduity by the theoretically minded, since they may furnish wholly new clues to insight, whereas the subjects of conventional history have been so familiarized as to hold out less hope of novel conclusions still to be extricated from them.
Here, then, is the cause of the seeming preoccupation of social or cultural anthropology with ancient and savage and exotic and extinct peoples: the desire to understand better all civilizations, irrespective of time and place, in the abstract or in form of generalized principle if possible.
It is not that cave men are more illuminating than Romans, or flint knives more interesting than fine porcelains or the art of printing, that has led anthropology to bear so heavily on the former, but the fact that it wanted to know about cave men and flint knives as well as about Romans and printing presses.
It would be irrational to prefer the former to the latter, and anthropology has never accepted the adjudication sometimes tacitly rendered that its proper field is the primitive, as such.
It is probably true that many researches into early and savage history have sprung from an emotional predilection for the forgotten or neglected, the obscure and strange, the unwonted and mysterious.
Innumerable historians have been inveterate gossips.
One does not therefore insist that the only proper subject of history is backstairs intimacies.
[1] [7] 5.
He added a new faculty by transforming part of an old one.
The sum total of his parts or organs was not greater than before.
The change was transmitted only to the blood descendants of the altered individuals.
The reptile line went on as it had been before, or if it altered, did so for causes unconnected with the evolution of the birds.
It led to no visible bodily changes, nor alterations of mental capacity.
The invention has been transmitted to individuals and groups not derived by descent from the inventors; in fact, has already influenced their careers.
Theoretically, it is transmissible to ancestors if they happen to be still living.
In sum, it represents an accretion to the stock of existing culture rather than a transformation.
Once the broad implications of the distinction which this example illustrates have been grasped, many common errors are guarded against.
The program of eugenics, for instance, loses much of its force.
There is certainly much to be said in favor of intelligence and discrimination in mating, as in everything else.
There is need for the acquisition of exacter knowledge on human heredity.
But, in the main, the claims sometimes made that eugenics is necessary to preserve civilization from dissolution, or to maintain the flourishing of this or that nationality, rest on the fallacy of recognizing only organic causes as operative, when social as well as organic ones are active—when indeed [8] the social factors may be much the more powerful ones.
So, in what are miscalled race problems, the average thought of the day still reasons largely from social effects to organic causes and perhaps vice versa.
Anthropology is by no means yet in a position to state just where the boundary between the contributing organic and social causes of such phenomena lies.
But it does hold to their fundamental distinctness and to the importance of this distinctness, if true understanding is the aim.
Without sure grasp of this principle, many of the arguments and conclusions in the present volume will lose their significance.
Accordingly, the designation of anthropology as “the child of Darwin” is most misleading.
Darwin’s essential achievement was that he imagined, and substantiated by much indirect evidence, a mechanism through which organic evolution appeared to be taking place.
The whole history of man however being much more than an organic matter, a pure Darwinian anthropology would be largely misapplied biology.
One might almost as justly speak of a Copernican or Newtonian anthropology.
It became common practice in social anthropology to “explain” any part of human civilization by arranging its several forms in an evolutionary sequence from lowest to highest and allowing each successive stage to flow spontaneously from the preceding—in other words, without specific cause.
At bottom this logical procedure was astonishingly naïve.
We of our land and day stood at the summit of the ascent, in these schemes.
The relative occurrence of phenomena in time and space was disregarded in favor of their logical fitting into a plan.
It was argued that since we hold to definitely monogamous marriage, the beginnings of human sexual union probably lay in indiscriminate promiscuity.
Since we accord precedence to descent from the father, and generally know him, early society must have reckoned descent from the mother and [9] no one knew his father.
We abhor incest; therefore the most primitive men normally married their sisters.
Needless to say, these men tempered the basic crudity of their opinions by wide knowledge, acuity or charm of presentation, and frequent insight and sound sense in concrete particulars.
In their day, a generation or two ago, under the spell of the concept of evolution in its first flush, such methods of reasoning were almost inevitable.
To-day they are long threadbare, descended to material for newspaper science or idle speculation, and evidence of a tendency toward the easy smugness of feeling oneself superior to all the past.
These ways of thought are mentioned here only as an example of the beclouding that results from baldly transferring biologically legitimate concepts into the realm of history, or viewing this as unfolding according to a simple plan of progress.
As an organized science, with a program and a method of its own, it is necessarily recent because it could not arise until the biological and social sciences had both attained enough organized development to come into serious contact.
On the other hand, as an unmethodical body of knowledge, as an interest, anthropology is plainly one of the oldest of the sisterhood of sciences.
Every savage is a bit of an ethnologist about neighboring tribes and knows a legend of the origin of mankind.
Herodotus, the “father of history,” devoted half of his nine books to pure ethnology, and Lucretius, a few centuries later, tried to solve by philosophical deduction and poetical imagination many of the same problems [10] that modern anthropology is more cautiously attacking with the methods of science.
In neither chemistry nor geology nor biology was so serious an interest developed as in anthropology, until nearly two thousand years after these ancients.
In the pages that follow, the central anthropological problems that concern the relations of the organic and cultural factors in man will be defined and solutions offered to the degree that they seem to have been validly determined.
On each side of this goal, however, stretches an array of more or less authenticated formulations, of which some of the more important will be reviewed.
On the side of the organic, consideration will tend largely to matters of fact; in the sphere of culture, processes can here and there be illustrated; in accord with the fact that anthropology rests upon biological and underlies purely historical science.
The “Missing Link.”—8.
Family tree of the Primates.—9.
Geological and glacial time.
Place of man’s origin and development.—11.
The Grimaldi race: Neolithic races.—19.
The metric expression of human evolution.
There is also no question as to where in a general way man’s ancestry is to be sought.
He is a mammal closely allied to the other mammals, and therefore has sprung from some mammalian type.
His origin can be specified even more accurately.
The mammals fall into a number of fairly distinct groups, such as the Carnivores or flesh-eating animals, the Ungulates or hoofed animals, the Rodents or gnawing animals, the Cetaceans or whales, and several others.
The highest of these mammalian groups, as usually reckoned, is the Primate or “first” order of the animal kingdom.
This Primate group includes the various monkeys and apes and man.
The ancestors of the human race are therefore to be sought somewhere in the order of Primates, past or present.
The popular but inaccurate expression of this scientific conviction is that “man is descended from the monkeys,” but that a link has been lost in the chain of descent: the famous “missing link.” In a loose way this statement reflects modern scientific opinion; but it certainly is partly erroneous.
Probably not a single authority maintains to-day that man is descended from any species of monkey now living.
What students during the past sixty years have more and more come to be convinced of, was already foreshadowed by Darwin: namely that man and the apes are both descended from a common ancestor.
This [12] common ancestor may be described as a primitive Primate, who differed in a good many details both from the monkeys and from man, and who has probably long since become extinct.
Erroneous (left) and more valid (right) representation of the descent of man.
The first diagram represents the inaccurate view which puts the monkey at the bottom of the line of descent, man at the top, and the missing link in the middle of the straight line.
The illogicality of believing that our origin occurred in this manner is apparent as soon as one reflects that according to this scheme the monkey at the beginning and man at the end of the line still survive, whereas the “missing link,” which is supposed to have connected them, has become extinct.
Clearly the relation must be different.
Whatever the missing link may have been, the mere fact that he is not now alive on earth means that we must construct our diagram so that it will indicate his past existence as compared with the survival of man and the apes.
This means that the missing link must be put lower in the figure than man and the apes, and our illustration therefore takes on the form shown in the right half of figure 1, which may be described as Y-shaped.
The stem of the Y denotes the pre-ancestral forms leading [13] back into other mammalian groups and through them—if carried far enough down—to the amphibians and invertebrates.
The missing link comes at the fork of the Y.
He represents the last point at which man and the monkeys were still one, and beyond which they separated and became different.
It is just because the missing link represented the last common form that he was the link between man and the monkeys.
From him onwards, the monkeys followed their own course, as indicated by the left-hand branch of the Y, and man went his separate way along the right-hand branch.
To make the diagram at all precise, the left fork of the Y, which here stands for the monkeys as a group—in other words, represents all the living Primates other than man—would have to be denoted by a number of branching and subdividing lines.
The finer branches would stand for the several genera and species in each of these families.
There is some doubt whether these human fossil types are to be reckoned as direct ancestors of modern man, and therefore as mere points in the main human line of our diagram; or whether they are to be considered as having been ancient collateral relatives who split off from the main line of human development.
The descent of man, elaborated over Figure 1.
For further ramifications, see Figures 3, 4, 9.
This subject quickly becomes a technical problem requiring rather refined evidence to answer.
Since he is recognized, however, as a form more or less ancestral to man, and somewhat less ancestral to the apes, he should probably be placed a short distance up on the human stem of the Y, or close alongside it.
For accuracy, therefore, figure 2 might be revised by the addition of other short lines to represent the several earlier fossil types: these would successively spring from the main human line at higher and higher levels.
In order not to complicate unnecessarily the fundamental facts of the case—especially since many data are still interpreted somewhat variously—no attempt will be made here to construct such a complete diagram as authoritative.
It is clear that these two family trees are in substantial accord as regards their main conclusions, but that they show some variability in details.
This condition reflects the present state of knowledge.
The record of life on earth, as known from the fossils in stratified rocks, is divided into four great periods.
In the Secondary or Mesozoic period, evolution progressed to the point where reptiles were the highest and dominant type, and the first feeble bird and mammal forms appeared.
The descent of man in detail, according to Gregory (somewhat simplified).
The descent of man in detail, according to Keith (somewhat simplified).
These last five million years or so of the earth’s history are divided unequally between [18] the Tertiary or Age of Mammals, and the Quaternary or Age of Man.
About four million years are usually assigned to the Tertiary with its subdivisions, the Eocene, Oligocene, Miocene, and Pliocene.
The Quaternary was formerly reckoned by geologists to have lasted only about a hundred thousand years.
Later this estimate was raised to four or five hundred thousand, and at present the prevailing opinion tends to put it at about a million years.
There are to be recognized, then, a four million year Age of Mammals before man, or even any definitely pre-human form, had appeared; and a final period of about a million years during which man gradually assumed his present bodily and mental type.
In this Quaternary period fall all the forms which are treated in the following pages.
The Quaternary is usually subdivided into two periods, the Pleistocene and the Recent.
The Recent is very short, perhaps not more than ten thousand years.
It represents, geologically speaking, the mere instant which has elapsed since the final disappearance of the great glaciers.
It is but little longer than historic time; and throughout the Recent there are encountered only modern forms of man.
Back of it, the much longer Pleistocene is often described as the Ice Age or Glacial Epoch; and both in Europe and North America careful research has succeeded in demonstrating four successive periods of increase of the ice.
Between each of these four came a warmer period when the ice melted and its sheets receded.
These are the “interglacial periods” and are designated as the first, second, and third.
Africa, Asia, and Australia may quite conceivably contain untold scientific treasures which have not yet been excavated.
One cannot assert that they are lying in the soil or rocks of these continents; but one also cannot affirm that they are not there.
North and South America have been somewhat more carefully examined, at least in certain of their areas, but with such regularly negative results that the prevailing opinion now is that these two continents— possibly through being shut off by oceans or ice masses from the eastern hemisphere— were not inhabited by man during the Pleistocene.
The origin of the human species cannot then be sought in the western hemisphere.
This substantially leaves Europe as the one continent in which excavations have been carried on with prospects of success; and it is in the more thoroughly explored western half of Europe that all but two of the unquestioned discoveries of ancient man have been made.
One of these exceptional finds is from Africa.
Now it might conceivably prove true that man originated in Europe and that this is the reason that the discoveries of his most ancient remains have to date been so largely confined to that continent.
On the other hand, it does seem much more reasonable to believe that this smallest of the continents, with its temperate or cold climate, and its poverty of ancient and modern species of monkeys, is likely not to have been the true home, or at any rate not the only home, of the human family.
The safest statement of the case would be that it is not known in what part of the earth man originated; that next to nothing is known of the history of his development on most of the continents; and that that portion of his history which chiefly is known is the fragment which happened to take place in Europe.
Antiquity of man.
This diagram is drawn to scale, proportionate to the number of years estimated to have elapsed, as far down as 100,000.
The skull and the thigh lay some distance apart but at the same level and probably are from the same individual.
Java was then a part of the mainland of Asia.
The jaws are believed to have projected almost like a snout; but as they remain undiscovered, this part of the reconstruction is conjectural.
He seems to have been slightly more similar to modern man than to any ape, and is the most primitive manlike type yet discovered.
The jaw is larger and heavier than any modern human jaw.
The chin is completely lacking; but this area does not recede so much as in the apes.
The contour of the jaw as seen from above is human (oval), not simian (narrow and oblong).
The teeth, although large, are essentially human.
They are set close together, with their tops flush, as in man; the canines lack the tusk-like character which they retain in the apes.
Since the skull and the limb bones of this form are wholly unknown, it is somewhat difficult to picture the type as it appeared in life.
This relationship is expressed by the name, Homo Heidelbergensis, which recognizes the type as belonging to the genus man.
Great importance has been ascribed to this skull, but too many of its features remain uncertain to render it safe to build large conclusions upon the discovery.
The age cannot be fixed with positiveness; the deposit is only a few feet below the surface, and in the open; the associated fossils have been washed or rolled into the layer; some of them are certainly much older than the skull, belonging to animals characteristic of the Pliocene, that is, the [23] Tertiary.
The skull capacity has been variously estimated at 1,170, nearly 1,300, and nearly 1,500 c.c.
Except for unusual thickness of the bone, the skull is not particularly primitive.
The jaw and the teeth, on the other hand, are scarcely distinguishable from those of a chimpanzee.
They are certainly far less human than the Heidelberg jaw and teeth, which are presumably earlier.
This human skull and simian jaw are an almost incompatible combination.
More than one expert has got over the difficulty by assuming that the skull of a contemporary human being and the jaw of a chimpanzee happened to be deposited in the same gravel.
Some authorities do regard it as both more primitive and earlier.
All his bones are thickset: his musculature must have been powerful.
The chest was large, the neck bull-like, the head hung forward upon it.
The jaws were prognathous, though not more than in many Australians and Negroes; the chin receded but existed.
5 ft. 4 (or 1) in.
Spy I 1550 c.c.
5 ft. 4 in.
Spy II 1700 c.c.
5 ft. 3 (or 2) in.
5 ft. 4 (or 3) in.
Average of modern European males 1550 c.c.
5 ft. 5 to 8 in.
Average—modern mankind 1450 c.c.
5 ft. 5 in.
Gibraltar 1300 c.c.
Average of modern European females 1400 c.c.
5 ft. 1 to 3 in.
It may be assumed as almost certain that he spoke some sort of language.
Combined from Keith.
This occurred in 1921 at Broken Hill Bone Cave in northern Rhodesia.
A nearly complete skull was found, though without [26] lower jaw; a small piece of the upper jaw of a second individual; and several other bones, including a tibia.
The remains were ninety feet deep in a cave, associated with vast quantities of mineralized animal bones.
Their age however is unknown.
The associated fauna is one of living species only; but this does not imply the same recency as in Europe, since the animal life of Africa has altered relatively little since well back in the Pleistocene.
Measurements of Rhodesian man have not yet been published.
The same inference is derivable from the long, straight shin-bone.
If these were known, the Rhodesian face might seem less impressively ape-like.
It is also important to observe that relatively primitive and advanced features exist side by side in Rhodesian man; the face and eyebrow ridges are somewhat off-set by the prominent nose, erect posture, and long clean limb bones.
Its place in the history of the human species can probably be fixed only after the age of the bones is determined.
Yet it is already clear that the discovery is important in at least three respects.
It reveals the most ape-like face yet found in a human variety; it extends the record of fossil man to [27] a new continent; and that continent is the home of the two living apes—the gorilla and chimpanzee—recognized as most similar to man.
In years, this was the time from 25,000 to 10,000 B.C.
The tallest men now on earth, certain Scots and Negroes, average less than 5 feet [28] 11 inches.
A girl at Grimaldi measured 5 feet 5 inches.
Their brains were equally large.
Those of the five male skulls from Grimaldi contain from over 1,700 to nearly 1,900 c.c.—an average of 1,800 c.c.
The cephalic index is low—that is, the skull was long and narrow, as in all the types here considered; but the face was particularly broad.
Their statures run 4 feet 7 inches, 5 feet 1 inch, 5 feet 1 inch, which would indicate a corresponding normal height for men not far from that of the average European of to-day.
The skull is somewhat higher and better vaulted.
The statures are 5 feet 2 inches and 5 feet 1 inch—the youth was not fully grown; the skull capacities 1,375 and nearly 1,600 c.c.
The outstanding feature of both skeletons is that they bear a number of Negroid [30] characteristics.
The forearm and lower leg are long as compared with the upper arm and thigh; the pelvis high and small; the jaws prognathous, the nose flat, the eye orbits narrow.
All these are Negro traits.
No fossil remains of any ancestral Mongolian type have yet been discovered.
In the Neolithic period, broad heads are for the first time encountered, as they occur at present in Europe and other continents, alongside of narrow ones.
The virtual fixity of the human type for these last ten thousand years is by no means incredible.
Egyptian mummies and skeletons prove that the type of that country has changed little in five thousand years except as the result of invasions and admixture.
The anthropometric criteria that are of most importance in the study of living races, more or less fail in regard to prehistoric man.
The hair, complexion, and eye-color are not preserved.
Stature on the other hand varies from one to another ancient race without evincing much tendency to grow or to diminish consistently.
Often, too, there is only part of a skull preserved.
Three anatomical points on the surface of the skull are the pivots on which these [31] special indexes and angles rest.
One is the Glabella (G in figure 7), the slight swelling situated between the eyebrows and above the root of the nose.
Indices and angles of special significance in the change from fossil to living man.
Frontal angle, FGI.
The “frontal angle,” finally, is determined by drawing a line GF from the glabella tangent to the most protruding part of the frontal bone and measuring the angle between this and the horizontal GI.
A small frontal angle obviously means a receding forehead.
The table, which compiles some of the most important findings, shows that progress has been fairly steadily continuous in the direction of greater cerebral development.
Traits on which classification rests.—23.
The grand divisions or primary stocks.—24.
Peoples of doubtful position.—28.
Continents and oceans.—29.
The history of race classifications.—30.
Emergence of the threefold classification.—31.
Principles and conclusions common to all classifications.—33.
Race, nationality, and language.
We see mankind divided into a number of varieties that differ strikingly in appearance.
If these varieties are modifications of a single ancestral form, what caused them to alter, and what has been the history of the change?
In the present state of science, we cannot wholly answer these important questions.
We know very little about the causes that change human types; and we possess only incomplete information as to the history of races.
Stray bits of evidence here and there are too scattered to afford many helpful clues.
The very earliest men, as we know them from fossils, are too far removed from any of the living varieties, are too primitive, to link very definitely with the existing races, which can all be regarded as intergrading varieties of a single species, Homo sapiens.
But we know neither the origin nor the precise descendants of these fossil races.
[3] [35] They appear and then vanish from the scene.
About all that we can conclude from this fragment of evidence is that the races of man as they are spread over the earth to-day must have been at least some tens of thousands of years in forming.
What caused them to differentiate, on which part of the earth’s surface each took on its peculiarities, how they further subdivided, what were the connecting links between them, and what happened to these lost links—on all these points the answer of anthropology is as yet incomplete.
It is no different in other fields of biology.
There is, then, nothing unusual in the situation of partial bafflement in which anthropology still finds itself as regards the human races.
If for instance it could be established that the Ainu or aborigines of Japan are closely similar in their bodies to the peoples of Europe, we would then infer that they are a branch of the Caucasian stock, that their origin took place far to the west of their present habitat, and that they have no connection with the Mongolian Japanese among whom they now live.
This is working by indirect evidence, it is true; but sooner or later that is the method to which science always finds itself reduced.
But the making of such a classification proves to be more difficult than might be imagined.
Popular impression exaggerates the differences, accurate measurements reduce them.
It is true that a Negro and a north European cannot possibly be confused: they happen to represent extreme types.
Yet as soon as we operate with less divergent races we find that variations between individuals of the same race are often greater than differences between the races.
The tallest individuals of a short race are taller than the shortest individuals of a tall race.
In addition, the lines of demarcation between races have time and again been obliterated by interbreeding.
Adjacent peoples, even hostile ones, intermarry.
The number of marriages in one generation may be small; but the cumulative effect of a thousand years is often quite disconcerting.
The half-breeds or hybrids are also as fertile as each of the original types.
There is no question but that some populations are nothing but the product of such race crossing.
If we construct a racial map and represent the demarcation between Negro and Caucasian by a line, we are really misrepresenting the situation.
The truth could be expressed only by inserting a transition zone of mixed color.
Yet as soon as we allow such transitions, the definiteness of our classification begins to crumble.
In spite of these difficulties, some general truths can be discovered from a careful race classification, and certain constant principles of importance emerge from all the diversity.
The most striking of all traits probably is stature or bodily height.
The imagination is easily impressed by a few inches when they show at the top of a man and make him half a head taller or shorter than oneself.
Except for a few groups which numerically are rather insignificant, there is no human race that averages less than 5 feet in height.
There is none at all that averages taller than 5 feet 10 inches.
This means that practically the whole range of human variability in height, from the race standpoint, falls within less than a foot.
The majority of averages of populations do not differ more than 2 inches from the general human average of 5 feet 5 inches.
Then, too, stature has been proved to be rather readily influenced by environment.
Each of us is a fraction of an inch taller when he gets up in the morning than when he goes to bed at night.
Two races might differ by as much as a couple of inches in their heredity, and yet if all the individuals of the shorter race were well nourished in a favorable environment, and all those of the taller group were underfed and overworked, the naturally shorter race might well be actually the taller one.
The cephalic index, which expresses in percentage form the ratio of the length and the breadth of the head, is perhaps the most commonly used anthropological measurement.
[4] It has certain definite advantages.
The head measurements are easily made with accuracy.
The index is nearly the same on the living head and on the dead skull; or one is easily converted into the other.
This enables present and past generations to be compared.
The [38] index is also virtually the same for men and for women, for children and for adults.
Finally, it seems to be little affected by environment.
The consequence is that head form has been widely investigated.
There are few groups of people of consequence whose average cephalic index we do not know fairly accurately.
This index is often useful in distinguishing subtypes, nation from nation, or tribe from tribe; but the primary races are not uniform.
There is, for instance, no typical head form for the Caucasian race.
There are narrow headed, medium headed, and broad headed Caucasians.
The same is true of the American Indians, who are on the whole rather uniform, yet vary much in head form.
The nasal index, which expresses the relation of length and breadth of nose, runs much more constant in the great races.
But the nasal index varies according to the age of the person; it is utterly different in a living individual and a skull;[5] it seems to reflect heredity less directly than the cephalic index; and finally it tells us nothing about the elevation or profile or general formation of the nose.
The trait also has a general correlation with the fundamental racial types.
Negroes are almost all prognathous, people of Mongolian type moderately so, Caucasians very slightly.
Various apparatuses have been devised without wholly satisfactory results.
The capacity of the skull is measured by filling it with shot or millet seed.
The latter yields figures that are lower by 50 or 100 c.c.
The average, by shot measure, for males the world over is about 1,450 to 1,500 c.c., for females about 10 per cent lower.
These last groups are all small bodied.
It appears that cranial capacity is considerably dependent on bodily size.
Slender as well as short races run to small capacities.
The heavy Bantu surpass the slighter framed Sudanese, and Hindus stand well below European Caucasians; just as the shorter Japanese average less than the Chinese.
Broad headed populations show greater cranial capacity than narrow headed ones: Alpine Europeans (§ 24) generally surpass Nordics in spite of their shorter stature.
Individual variability is also unusually great in this measurement.
Overlapping between races is accordingly particularly marked in cranial capacity.
Furthermore, the measurement obviously cannot be taken on the living.
In spite of its interest as an alleged and perhaps partially valid index of mental faculty, cranial capacity is thus of restricted value in distinguishing races.
The texture of the hair is now universally regarded as one of the most valuable criteria for classifying races, possibly the most significant of all.
Hair is distinguished as woolly in the Negro, straight in the Mongolian, and wavy or intermediate in the Caucasian.
This texture depends principally on the diameters of each individual hair, as they are revealed in cross-section under the microscope; in part also on the degree of straightness or curvature of the root sacs of the hair in the skin.
Hair texture seems to run rather rigidly along hereditary racial lines, and to be uninfluenced by factors of age, sex, climate, or nourishment.
Hairiness of the body as a whole is another trait to which more and more attention is coming to be paid.
The fullness or scantiness of the beard, and the degree of development of the down which covers the body, are its most conspicuous manifestations.
Except possibly for stature, color is probably the most conspicuous trait of any race.
Under color must be included the complexion of the skin, the color of the hair, and the color of the eyes.
We have therefore a complete series of transition shades, and it is difficult to express these differences of shade quantitatively.
They readily impress the eye, but it is far from easy to denote them accurately in numbers.
Environment also affects skin color markedly.
A day’s exposure to the sun will darken an individual’s complexion by several shades.
In spite of these drawbacks, however, complexion remains sufficiently important to have to be considered in every classification.
Hair color and eye color are practically immune against direct change by environment.
They unquestionably are excellent hereditary criteria, although they offer much the same resistance to measurement as does complexion.
The utility of these two traits is however limited by another factor: their narrow distribution.
Obviously it would be easiest to arrive at a clear-cut classification by grouping all the peoples of the earth according to a single trait, such as the shape of the nose, or color.
But any such classification must be artificial and largely unsound, just because it disregards the majority of traits.
The only classification that can claim to rest upon a true or natural basis is one which takes into consideration as many traits as possible, and weights the important more heavily than the unimportant features.
If the outcome of such a grouping is to leave some peoples intermediate or of doubtful place in the classification, this result is unfortunate but must be accepted.
Australoid admixture in South.
“Mongolian” eye, broad face.
Hair and eyes are “black” unless otherwise stated in Remarks.
These three primary classes are generally called Caucasian, Negroid, and Mongoloid.
The color terms, White, Black, and Yellow, are also often used, but it is necessary to remember that they are employed merely as brief convenient labels, and that they have no descriptive value.
There are millions of Caucasians who are darker in complexion than millions of Mongoloids.
These three main groups account for more than nine-tenths of all the nations and tribes of the world.
As to the number of individuals, they comprise probably 99 per cent of all human beings.
The aberrant forms are best kept separate.
Other groups, such as the Polynesians, seem to be, at least in part, the result of a mixture of races.
Their constituent elements are so blended, and perhaps so far modified after the blending, as to be difficult to disentangle.
Each of the three great primary stocks falls into several natural subdivisions.
[6] The three European races are the Nordic, the Alpine, and the Mediterranean.
Some authorities recognize a greater number, but all admit at least these [43] three.
They occupy horizontal belts on the map.
Beginning with the Nordic and ending with the Mediterranean they may be described as successively darker skinned, darker eyed, darker haired, and shorter in stature.
The Alpine race, which lies between the two others, is however more than a mere transition; for it is broad headed, whereas the Nordic and Mediterranean are both narrow or long headed.
The Nordic type is essentially distributed around the Baltic and North seas.
The Mediterranean race occupies the shores of the Mediterranean Sea, in Asia and Africa as well as in Europe.
In ancient times it seems to have prevailed everywhere along these coasts.
At present the Balkan peninsula and Asia Minor are mostly occupied by broad headed peoples of more or less close affinity to the Alpines.
This Alpine race is perhaps less homogeneous than the two others.
They have enough in common, however, to warrant their being put in the one larger group.
It must be clearly understood that these races have nothing to do with the modern political nationalities of Europe.
Northern Italy is Alpine, the rest of the peninsula Mediterranean.
All three races are definitely represented in France.
The average north Frenchman stands racially nearer to the north German than to his countryman from central France, whereas the latter links up in physical type with the south German.
Nationality is determined by speech, customs, religion, and political affiliations.
Its boundary lines and those of race cut right across one another.
The British Isles did not escape the process of race blending that has gone on in Europe for thousands of years.
The bulk of the blood of their inhabitants during the past thousand years has been Nordic, but there is an Alpine strain, and most authorities recognize a definite “Iberian,” that is, Mediterranean element.
Scandinavians and north Germans have added to the Nordic component in the population of the United States; south Germans, Austro-Hungarians, Russians, and Jews to the Alpine; the Italians have injected a definite Mediterranean [44] element.
The Negro alone has not been admitted into the make-up of our white society; but the reverse holds: a considerable and growing percentage of the “colored” people in the United States are from one-sixteenth to fifteen-sixteenths Caucasian.
The Hindu is in the main a narrow headed, dark skinned Caucasian, not very different from the Mediterranean.
The definite Caucasian type is best preserved in the north; the traces of the dark skinned aboriginal race are strongest in southern India.
The differences between these three types are not very great.
The Mongolian proper is the most extreme or pronounced form.
It was probably the latest to develop its present characteristics.
For instance, the oblique or “Mongolian” eye is a peculiarity restricted to the people of eastern Asia.
The original Mongoloid stock must be looked upon as having been more like present-day Malaysians or American Indians, or intermediate between them.
Within the East Indies, a more and a less specifically Mongoloid strain can at times be distinguished.
The latter has often been called Indonesian.
Perhaps the most conspicuous difference is that the broad nose of the African Negro is flat, the broad nose of the Melanesian often aquiline.
How these two so similar Negroid branches came to be located on the opposite sides of a great ocean is a fact that remains unexplained.
These peoples are the true pygmies of the human species.
Wherever they are racially pure the adult males are less than 5 feet in stature.
They also differ from other Negroids in being relatively broad headed.
Their skin color, hair texture, nose form, and most other traits are, however, the same as those of the other Negroids.
Their scattered distribution is difficult to account for.
It is possible that they are an ancient and primitive type which once inhabited much wider stretches of territory than now in Africa, Asia, and Oceania.
On the whole Negroid characteristics prevail among them.
They are, for instance, frizzy-haired.
The brows are knit, the eyes deep set, the mouth large, beard development medium.
Resemblances are on the one hand toward the Caucasian type, on the other toward the Australian, just as the geographical position is intermediate.
These are almost invariably hill or jungle people, who evidently represent an old stratum of population, pushed back by Caucasians or Mongoloids, or almost absorbed by them.
The dark strain in India seems more probably due to these people than to any true Negroid infusion.
In the lapse of ages the greater number of the Caucasians in and near Europe took on, more and more, their present characteristics, whereas this backward branch in the region of the Indian Ocean kept its primitive and undifferentiated traits.
This is a tempting theory to pursue, but it extends so far into the realm of the [47] hypothetical that its just appraisal must be left to the specialist.
Relationship of the human races.
Distances between the centers of circles are indicative of the degree of similarity.
Figure 8 attempts to represent graphically the degree of resemblance and difference between the principal physical types as they have been summarized in the table and preceding discussion; the genealogical tree in figure 9 is an endeavor to suggest how these types may have diverged from one another in their development.
Tentative family tree of the human races.
It is true that the center of gravity of the Caucasians is in or near Europe, that the biggest block of Negroids is situated in Africa, and the largest mass of Mongoloids in Asia.
It is even possible that these three types evolved on these three continents.
Western Asia and northern Africa as well as Europe are Caucasian.
There are Negroids in Oceania as well as in Africa, and the Mongoloids are found over Oceania, Asia, and both Americas.
The Caucasian parts of Europe, Asia, and Africa surround the Mediterranean Sea.
The African and the Oceanic branches of the Negroid race are situated on the left and right sides of the Indian Ocean.
The Mongoloid habitat in Oceania, in eastern Asia, and in North and South America almost encloses the Pacific Ocean.
A larger map with more shadings would be required to do even approximate justice to the intricacies of a complete race classification.
Circumpolar map of primary race distribution (legend as in Figure 10).
As time went on, the continental principle of race classification came to be recognized as inadequate, and there was a tendency among anthropologists to accept the distinctness of certain specialized groups like the Australians, Bushmen, Eskimo, and Ainu, which were often elevated into races substantially equal in rank with the great races like the Mongoloid.
Those who adopted this principle tried to fit divergent types like the Australians and Polynesians into one or the other of these three great groups.
Some little doctoring had to be done in this process, and some salient facts estimated rather lightly.
It is for this reason that it has seemed best here not to make our tripartite classification too exhaustive.
This threefold classification clearly absorbs the great mass of mankind without straining, but it is soundest to recognize that this same basic classification requires a certain margin of extensions along the lines indicated in our table.
It recognizes 6 grand divisions, 17 minor divisions, and 29 separate races.
The primary criterion of classification is hair texture.
Hair woolly, with broad nose.
Hair curly to wavy.
Dravidian (southern India).
C. Hair Wavy.
Arab or Semite.
Berber (N. Africa).
Littoral (W. Mediterranean).
Adriatic (N. Italy, Balkans).
D. Hair wavy to straight, with light eyes.
Indonesian (East Indies).
F. Hair straight.
Mongol (E. Asia).
In spite of its apparent complexity, this classification coincides quite closely with the classification which is followed in this book.
Of his two remaining grand divisions, B is intermediate between A and C, that is, between Negroid and Caucasian, and consists of peoples which are either, like the East Africans, the probable result of a [54] historical mixture of Negroids and Caucasians, or which, like the Australians, share the traits of both, and are therefore admitted to have a doubtful status.
The other grand division, E, is transitional between Caucasian D and Mongoloid F, and the peoples of which it consists are those whom we too have recognized as difficult to assign positively to either stock.
The distinction here made between the Tuft and Fleecy-haired groups is unsound.
It rests on a false observation: that a few races, like the Bushmen, had their head-hair growing out of the scalp only in spots or tufts.
With the elimination of this group, its members would fall into the Fleecy or Woolly-haired one, which would thus comprise all admitted Negroids; whereas the two remaining groups, the Stiff and Wavy-haired, obviously correspond to the Mongoloid and Caucasian.
The only remaining peculiarity of the classification—and in this point also it is unquestionably wrong—is the inclusion of the Australians in the Stiff or Straight-haired group.
But even this error reflects an element of truth: it emphasizes the fact that in spite of their black skins, broad noses, and protruding jaws, the Australians are not straight-out Negroids.
This basic idea has been advocated by others.
Boas, for instance, reckons Mongoloids and Caucasians as at bottom only subtypes of a single stock with which the Negroids and Australians are to be contrasted.
Somewhat different in plan is Huxley’s scheme, which recognizes four main races, or five including a transitional one.
First, any valid classification must rest on a combination of as many traits or features as possible.
Second, several features of the human body are of definite significance for the discrimination of races.
Hair and hairiness are unquestionably of great importance; stature, except in extreme cases, much less so.
Color differences in the skin, hair, or eyes [56] are important but difficult to handle.
The cephalic index possesses an exceptional utility in making the finer discriminations.
Third, it is clearly impossible to find a simple and consistent scheme within which all the varieties of man can be placed.
We must not attempt more than nature allows.
On the other hand the vast bulk of mankind does fall naturally into three great divisions, each of which again subdivides into three or four principal branches, in regard to whose distinctness there is no serious difference of opinion.
From such a classification as this, especially after the accumulation of large series of accurate measurements which will permit its being worked out to greater exactness, we may hope ultimately to reconstruct the full and true history of the races of men, or, in any event, some reasonable hypothesis as to their development.
As yet, however, we are not in a position to account for the origin of the races except speculatively.
A race is a subdivision of a species and corresponds to a breed in domestic animals.
Popularly, the word is used in a different sense, namely that of a population having any traits in common, be they hereditary or non-hereditary, biological or social (Chapter I).
It is customary, but scientifically inaccurate, to speak of the French race, the Anglo-Saxon race, the Gypsy race, the Jewish race.
Anglo-Saxon refers primarily to speech, incidentally to a set of customs, traditions, and points of view that are more or less associated with the language.
The Gypsies are a self-constituted caste, with folkways, occupations, and a speech of their own.
The Jews, who were once a nationality, [57] at present, of course, form a religious body, which somewhat variably, in part from inner cohesion and in part from outer pressure, tends also to constitute a caste.
They evince little hereditary racial type, measurements indicating that in each country they approximate the physical type of the gentile population.
It may seem of little moment whether the word race is restricted to its strict biological sense or used more loosely.
In fact, however, untold loose reasoning has resulted from the loose terminology.
When one has spoken a dozen times of “the French race,” one tends inevitably to think of the inhabitants of France as a biological unit, which they are not.
That civilizations, languages, and nationalities go on for generations is obviously a different thing from their being caused by generation.
Slovenly thought, tending to deal with results rather than causes or processes, does not trouble to make this discrimination, and every-day speech, dating from a pre-scientific period, is ambiguous about it.
We say not only “generation,” when there is no intent to imply the reproductive process, but “good breeding” (literally, good brooding or hatching or birth), when we mean good home training or education; just as we “inherit” a fortune or a name—social things—as well as ineradicable traits like brown eye-color.
Biology has secured for its processes the exclusive use of the term “heredity”; and biologists employ the term “race” only with reference to a hereditary subdivision of a species.
It is equally important that the word be used with the same exact denotation in anthropology, else all discussion of race degenerates irretrievably into illogical sliding in and out between organic and social factors.
The inherently great difficulties which beset the understanding and solution of what are generally called race problems, as discussed in the next chapter, are considerably increased by a confusion between what is and what is not racial and organic and hereditary.
Questions of endowment and their validity.—35.
Plan of inquiry.—36.
Anatomical evidence on evolutionary rank.—37.
Comparative physiological data.—38.
Causes of cancer incidence.—40.
Mental achievement and social environment.—41.
Psychological tests on the sense faculties.—42.
Status of hybrids.—44.
Evidence from the cultural record of races.—45.
Are some lower than others, or are they all on a plane as regards potentiality?
The answers to these questions are of theoretical import, and naturally also bear on the solution of the practical race problems with which many nations are confronted.
As long as an inquiry remains sufficiently abstract or remote, the desirability of such inquiry is likely to go unquestioned.
As soon, however, as investigation touches conduct —for instance, our actual relations with other races—a sentiment has a way of rising, to the effect that perhaps after all the problem does not so much call for knowledge as for action.
Thus, in regard to the negro problem in the United States, it is likely to be said that the immediate issue is what may be the best attitude toward “Jim Crow” cars and other forms of segregation.
Are these desirable or undesirable, fair or unfair?
Here are specific problems which an actual condition presses to have answered.
Under the circumstances, it will be said, is not an inquiry into the innate capacity of the negro rather remote, especially when every one can see by a thousand examples that the negro is obviously inferior to the Caucasian?
He is poorer, more shiftless, less successful.
He has made no inventions, produced no geniuses.
He clearly feels himself inferior and comports himself accordingly.
Why then raise the issue of capacity at all, unless from a desire to [59] befog it, to subvert the conclusions of common sense and every-day experience by special pleading which substitutes adroitness for sincerity?
When a prisoner has been found guilty it is the judge’s business to determine the length of sentence, to decide how far justice should be tempered with mercy.
Were he to reopen the case from the beginning, he would be showing partiality.
In some such form as this, objections may rise in the minds of some.
The answer to such criticism is first of all that racial inferiority and superiority are by no means self-evident truths.
Secondly, the belief in race inequalities is founded in emotion and action and then justified by reasoning.
That is, the belief is rationalized, not primarily inferred by pure reason.
It may be true, but it is not proved true.
As to what is self-evident, there is nothing so misleading as direct observation.
We see the sun move and the earth stand still.
It is “self-evident” that the sun revolves around the earth.
Yet after thousands of years the civilized portion of mankind finally came to believe that it was the earth that spun.
Science had no perverse interest, no insidious motive, in advocating the Copernican instead of the Ptolemaic system; in fact, was driven to its new belief gradually and reluctantly.
It was pre-scientific humanity, with its direct, homespun, every-day observation, which had really prejudged the matter, and which, because it had always assumed that the earth was flat and stationary, and because every idiot could see that it was so, long combated the idea that it could be otherwise.
They are true in the sense of being verifiable, but they are unaccompanied by that profound feeling of truth which belief possesses, and, therefore, we have no sense of reluctance in admitting inquiry into them.
That heavy bodies tend to fall to the earth and that fire burns fingers are truths verifiable and verified every day, but we do not hold them with impassioned certitude, and we do not resent or resist inquiry into their basis; whereas in such a question as that of the survival of death by human personality we hold the favorable or the adverse view with a quality of feeling entirely different, and of such a kind that inquiry into the matter is looked upon as disreputable by orthodox science and as wicked by orthodox religion.
In short, the apparently theoretical beliefs held as to race capacity by people who are actually confronted by a race conflict or problem are by no means the outcome of impartial examination and verification, but are the result of the decisions taken and emotions experienced in the course of acts performed toward the other race.
The beliefs rest ultimately on impulse and feeling; their reasoned support is a subsequent bolstering up.
Of course, the fact that a belief springs from emotion does not render that belief [61] untrue, but does leave it scientifically unproved, and calling for investigation.
These conclusions may vindicate inquiry into the relative capacity of races from the charge of being finespun, insidious, impractical, or immoral.
If the human races are identical in capacity, or if, though not absolutely alike, they average substantially the same in the sum total of their capacities, then such differences as they have shown in their history or show in their present condition must evidently be the result mainly of circumstances external to heredity.
In that case, knowledge of the historical or environmental circumstances, and analysis of the latter, become all-important to understanding.
On the other hand, if hereditary racial inequalities exist, one can expect that the historical or cultural influences, however great they may be, will nevertheless tend to have their origin in the hereditary factors and to reinforce them.
In that case, differences between two groups would be due partly to underlying heredity and partly to overlying cultural forces tending on the whole in the same direction.
Yet even in that case, before one could begin to estimate the strength of the true racial factors, the historical ones would have to be subtracted.
Thus, in either event, the first crux of the problem lies in the recognition and stripping off of cultural, social, or environmental factors, so far as possible, from the complex mass of phenomena which living human groups present.
In proportion as these social or acquired traits can be determined and discounted, the innate and truly racial ones will be isolated, and can then be examined, weighed, and compared.
We are looking for the inherent, ineradicable elements in a social animal that has everywhere built up around himself an environment —namely, his culture—in which he mentally lives and breathes.
It is precisely because in the present inquiry we wish to get below the effects of culture that we must be ready to [62] concern ourselves considerably with these effects, actual or possible.
If one human race should prove definitely nearer to the apes in its anatomy than the other races, there would be reason to believe that it had lagged in evolution.
But the facts do not run consistently.
One thinks of the Negro as simian.
His jaws are prognathous; his forehead recedes; his nose is both broad and low.
Further, it is among Caucasians that the antithetical traits occur.
In straightness of jaws and forehead, prominence and narrowness of nose, Caucasians in general exceed the Mongoloids.
With ourselves at one end and the monkey at the other, the scale somehow seems right.
It appeals, and seems significant.
Facts of this sort are therefore readily observed, come to be remembered, and rise spontaneously to mind in an argument on race differences.
However, there are numerous items that conflict with this sequence.
Of the three main stocks, however, it is the Caucasian that is the most hairy.
Both Mongoloids and Negroids are more smooth-skinned on face and on body.
In the length of head hair, in which man differs notably from the monkeys, the relatively short-haired Negro once more approximates most closely to the ape, but the long-haired Mongoloid surpasses the intermediate Caucasian in degree of departure.
Lip color reverses this order.
It is unnecessary to multiply examples.
If one human racial stock falls below others in certain traits, it rises above them in other features, insofar as “below” and “above” may be measurable in terms of degree of resemblance to the apes.
It is possible that in such a reckoning the Caucasian would emerge with a lead.
But it is even more clear that whichever way the majority fell, it would be a well divided count.
If the Negro were more apelike than the Caucasian in all of his features, or in eight out of ten, the fact would be heavily significant.
With his simian resemblances aggregating to those of the Caucasian in a ratio of say four to three, the margin would be so close as to lose nearly all its meaning.
It is apparently some such ratio as this, or an even more balanced one, that would emerge, so far as we can judge, if it were feasible to take a census of all features.
It should be added that such a method of comparison as this suffers from two drawbacks.
Compared however with the fossil human forms, the Negro is the most primitive in this feature, and the Mongoloid and Alpine Caucasian could be said to have evolved the farthest because their heads are the roundest.
To which criterion shall be given precedence?
It is impossible to say.
It is even clearer that other traits have been acquired independently, have been secondarily evolved over again.
Yet there is an array of contradicting facts.
The male gorilla has his powerful brows for the same reason that he has the crest along the top of his skull: they are needed as attachments for his powerful musculature.
They are evidently a secondary sex character developed within the species.
Perhaps these instances will suffice to show that even the mere physical rating of human races is far from a simple or easy task.
It is doubtful whether as yet it is valid to speak of one race as physically higher or more advanced, or more human and less brutish, than another.
This is not an outright denial of the possibility of such differential ratings: it is a denial only of the belief that such differentials have been established as [65] demonstrable.
This consists in abandoning the direct attempt to rate the races in anatomical terms, and inquiring instead whether they show any physiological differences.
If such differences can be found, they may then perhaps be interpretable as differences in activity, responsiveness, endurance, or similar constitutional qualities.
If the bodies of two races behave differently, we should have considerable reason to believe that their minds also behaved differently.
Unfortunately, we possess fewer data on comparative physiology than on comparative anatomy.
The evidence is more fluctuating and intricate, and requires more patience to assemble.
Unfortunately, too, for the purposes of our inquiry, the races come out almost exactly alike in the simpler physiological reactions.
The normal body temperature for Caucasian adults is 37° (98.5 F.), the pulse about 70, the respiration rate around 17 or 18 per minute.
If the Negro’s temperature averaged even a degree higher, one might expect him to behave, normally, a little more feverishly, to respond to stimulus with more vehemence, to move more quickly or more restlessly.
Or, if the pulse rate of Mongolians were definitely lower, they might be expected to react more sluggishly, more sedately, like aging Caucasians.
Certainly if there existed any important racial peculiarities, they would have been noted by the physicians who at one time or another have examined millions of Negroes, Chinese, Japanese, and thousands of Indians and Polynesians.
Apparently there is only one record that even hints at anything significant.
This [66] would seem to accord with the general impression of Indian mentality as stolid, reserved, slow, and steady.
But the number of observations is after all rather small; the part of the race represented by them is limited; and the habitat of the group of tribes is mostly a high plateau, and altitude notoriously affects heart action.
Considerable corroboration will therefore be needed before any serious conclusions can be built upon this suggestive set of data.
There are other physiological functions that are likely to mean more than the rather gross ones just considered: for instance, the activity of the endocrines or glands of internal secretion.
An excess or deficiency of activity of the thyroid, pituitary, adrenals, and sex glands affects not only health, but the type of personality and its emotional and intellectual reactions.
For example, cretinism with its accompaniment of near-idiocy is the result of thyroidal under-development or under-functioning, and is often cured by supplying the lack of thyroidal substance and secretion.
But this subject is as difficult as it is interesting; to date, absolutely nothing is known about endocrine race differences.
It would be a relatively simple matter to secure first-hand information on the anatomy of the endocrine glands in Negroes as compared with whites; to ascertain whether these differed normally in size, weight, shape, or structure, and how.
But this knowledge has scarcely been attempted systematically, and still less is any knowledge available in the more delicate and complex field of the workings of the organs.
To be sure, theories have been advanced that race differentiation itself may be mainly the result of endocrine differentiations.
There is something fascinating about such conjectures, but it is well to remember that they are unmitigated guesses.
So far as mortality goes, there are enormous differences between races.
And the mortality is often largely the result of particular diseases.
Measles, for instance, has often been a deadly epidemic to uncivilized peoples, and smallpox has in some regions at times taken toll of a quarter of the population in a year or two.
Yet it is short-sighted to infer from such cases any racial [67] predisposition or lack of resistance.
The peoples in question have been free for generations, perhaps for their entire history, from these diseases, and have therefore not maintained or acquired immunity.
Their difference from us is thus essentially in experience, not hereditary or racial.
This is confirmed by the fact that after a generation or two the same epidemics that at first were so deadly to Polynesians or American Indians sink to almost the same level of mild virulence as they show among ourselves.
Then, too, immediate environment plays a part.
The savage often has no idea of contagion, and still less of guarding against it; he thinks in terms of magic instead of physiology—and succumbs.
How far heavy mortality is the result of lack of resistance or of fundamentally vicious treatment, is often hard to say.
If we tried to cure smallpox by subjecting patients to a steam-bath and then having them plunge into a wintry river, we should perhaps look upon the disease as a very nearly fatal one to the Caucasian race.
This dread disease appears to be not contagious, so that the factor of acquired immunity is eliminated.
If therefore significant differences in racial liability to cancer exist, they should emerge with unusual clearness and certainty.
At first sight they seem to.
It has been alleged that the white race is the most susceptible to this affliction.
The supporting figures are as follows: cancer deaths per year per 100,000 population.
In fact, this has been asserted.
Let us however continue with figures.
Another factor enters: occupation.
The following data give the death rate per 100,000 population among males of 45-54 in England and Wales.
In proportion as latitude and occupation influence the occurrence of cancer, race is diminished as a cause.
It is reduced still further by other considerations.
The rate for [69] Austria in 1906-10 was 78, for Hungary 44.
Here the race is the same: the difference must be social.
Austria averaged higher in wealth, education, medical development.
This fact would tend to have a double effect.
First, among the more backward population, a certain proportion would die of internal cancers difficult to diagnose, without the cause being recognized, owing to insufficient medical treatment.
Second, the general death rate would be higher.
More children and young people would die of infectious or preventable disease, leaving fewer survivors to die of cancer in middle and old age.
Wherever, on the other hand, a public is medically educated, and typhoid, smallpox, diphtheria, tuberculosis claim fewer victims, the proportion of those dying of cancer, nephritis, heart diseases, increases.
Such an increase is noted everywhere, and goes hand in hand with a longer average life.
The alarm sometimes felt at the modern “increase” of cancer is therefore unfounded, because it is perhaps mainly apparent.
If a larger percentage of the population each year died of old age, it would be a sign that sanitation and medicine were increasingly effective: evidence that more people lived to become old, not that age debility was spreading.
Consequently, a high degree of modern civilization must tend to raise the cancer rate; and any group of people will seem relatively immune from cancer in proportion as they remain removed from attaining to this civilization.
In Hungary, from 1901-04, the cancer deaths were 239 among the owners of large farms, 41 among the owners of small farms; 108 among employing blacksmiths, 25 among their employees; 114 among employing tailors, 32 among employed tailors.
Obviously these pairs of groups differ chiefly in their economic and cultural status.
In Tokyo and Kyoto the rate soars to 73 and 90 respectively, just as in the United States it is about 10 higher for the urban than for the rural population.
Within the United States, also, the rate rises and falls almost parallel for whites and [70] Negroes according to locality; as, 1906-10 White Negro Memphis 59 34 Charleston 73 37 Nashville 74 55 New Orleans 86 73 If allowance is made for the facts that the negro population of the United States is poorer and less educated than the white; that it lives mainly in lower latitudes; and that it tends to be rural rather than urban, the comparative cancer death rates for the country of negro 56 and white 77 would appear to be accounted for, without bringing race into consideration.
In short, what at first glance, or to a partisan pleader, would seem to be a notable race difference in cancer liability, turns out so overwhelmingly due to environmental and social causes as to leave it doubtful whether racial heredity enters as a factor at all.
This is not an assertion that race has nothing whatever to do with the disease; it is an assertion that in the present state of knowledge an inherent or permanent connection between race and cancer incidence has not been demonstrated.
If there is such a connection, it is evidently a slight one, heavily overlaid by non-racial influences; and it may be wholly lacking.
Racial medical science is not impossible; in fact it should have an important future as a study; but its foundations are not yet laid.
The environmental factors are themselves a composite of geographical influences and of the economic, cultural, and other social influences that human beings [71] exert upon each other.
If this intermingling of distinct kinds of causes is true of races when considered from the side of physiology and medicine, it is evident that the intermingling will be even more intricate in the mental sphere.
After all, bodily functioning varies only within fairly definite limits.
When external influences press too strongly upon the innate nature of the organism, the latter ceases to function and dies.
The mind, on the other hand, however much its structure may be given by heredity, depends for its content wholly on experience, and this experience can be thoroughly varied.
Individuals of the same organic endowment may conceivably be born either in the uppermost stratum of a highly refined civilization, or among the most backward and remote savages.
Whether this actually happens, and to what degree, is of course precisely the problem which we are trying to solve.
But that it is theoretically and logically possible cannot be denied; and here a vicious circle of reasoning begins.
One argument says: there have been no recognized geniuses among peoples like the Hottentots, and the sum total of their group achievement is ridiculously small; therefore it is clear that the Hottentot mind must be inferior.
The opposite argument runs: Hottentot cultural environment is so poor and limited that the finest mind in the world reared under its influence would grow up relatively sterile and atrophied; therefore it is probable that the mind of the Hottentot is intrinsically identical with our own, or at least of equivalent capacity, and that Hottentot geniuses have actually been born but have been unable to flourish as geniuses.
Evidently the same facts are before those who advocate these opposite views, but these facts are viewed from diametrically opposite sides.
If one starts to travel around the logical circle in one direction, one can keep revolving indefinitely and find ever fresh supporting evidence.
If, however, one begins to revolve around the same circle of opinion in the opposite direction, it is just as easy and just as compelling to continue to think in this fashion and to find all testimony corroborative.
In such a situation it is possible to realize that from the point of view of proof, or objective truth, one view is worth as much as the other: which is nothing.
It is an [72] emotional bias that inclines one man toward the conviction of race superiority and another to that of race equality.
The proofs in either case are for the most part a mere assembling of ex parte testimony.
It is easy enough to advocate impartiality.
The difficulty is in being impartial; because both the hereditary and the environmental factors are in reality unknown quantities.
What we have objectively before us is such and such a race or group of people, with such and such present traits and historical record.
These phenomena being the product of the interaction of the two sets of causes, we could of course, if we knew the strength of one, compute the strength of the other.
But as we have isolated neither, we are dealing with two indeterminate variables.
Evidently the only way out of the dilemma, at any rate the only scientific way, is to find situations in which one of the factors is, for the time being, fixed.
In that case the strength of the other factor will of course be proportionate to the attainments of the groups.
Actually, such instances are excessively difficult to find.
There are occasional individuals with identical heredity, namely, twins produced from the division of a single ovum.
In such twins, the strength of environmental influences can be gauged by the difference in their careers and achievements.
It is conceivable that heredity might on the whole be a more powerful cause than environment, and racial groups still average substantially alike in their heredity.
If, on the other hand, one sets out to discover cases of identical environment for distinct racial strains, the task quickly becomes even more difficult.
Very little analysis usually suffices to show that the environment is identical only up to a certain point, and that beyond this point important social divergences begin.
Thus, so far as geographical environment goes, the Negro and the white in the southern United States are under the same conditions.
Both Negroes and whites speak English; are Christians; plant corn; go to the circus; and so on.
But, just as obviously, there are aspects in which their social environment differs profoundly.
Educational opportunities are widely different.
The opportunity of attaining leadership or otherwise satisfying ambition is wide open to the white, and practically closed to the Negro.
The “color-line” inevitably cuts across the social environment and makes of it two different environments.
It might be said that the southern United States furnish an extreme case of a sharply drawn color-line.
This is true.
But on the other hand there is no place on earth where something corresponding to a color-line is not drawn between two races occupying the same territory.
It sometimes happens that distinctions are diminished and faintly or subtly enforced, as in modern Hawaii, where to outward appearances many races dwell together without discrimination.
Yet examination reveals that the absence of discrimination is only legal and perhaps economic.
As regards the relations and associations of human beings, the welcome which they extend or the aloofness which they show to one another, there is always a color-line.
This means not only difference in opportunity, but difference in experience, habit formation, practices, and interests.
Yet what do these results of measurements mean?
Vision is tested for its distance ability.
The farther off one can distinguish objects or marks, the higher one’s rating.
Civilized man reads—normally—at 14 inches.
He works with sharp knives, with machines that are exact; he is surrounded by things made with [74] such exact machines; he handles thin paper and filmy fabrics.
His women sew and embroider with the sharpest of needles, the finest of thread.
Everything about us tends toward close accuracy and away from the haziness of distant observation.
The savage, on the other hand, the half-civilized person even, inspects the horizon, watches for game or its dim tracks, tries to peer to the bottom of streams for fish.
He does not read, his needles are blunt, his thread is cord, his carving without precision even though decorative, the lines he makes are free-hand and far-apart.
He is trained, as it were, for the usual vision tests.
If the psychologist reversed his experiment and sought the degree of power to see fine differences at close range, it is possible that the savage might prove inferior because untrained by his experience.
Such tests seem not to have been made.
Until they are, and again show uncivilized man superior, there is no real proof that innate racial differences of serious moment exist.
The whole act of vision in fact involves more than we ordinarily think.
After all, seeing is done with the mind as well as with the eye.
There is the retinal image, but there is also the interpretation of this image.
To the city dweller a horse and a cow a mile off are indistinguishable.
Not so to the rancher.
There is something almost imperceptible about the profile of the feeding end of the animal, about its movement, that promptly and surely classes it.
An hour later when the herd is reached and proves to be as said, the astonished traveler from the metropolis is likely to credit his guide’s eyes with an intrinsic power greater than his field glasses—forgetting the influence of experience and training.
In keenness of hearing, on the contrary, one should expect the civilized white to come out ahead, as in fact he does; not because he is Caucasian but because he is civilized and because the instruments of experimentation, be they tuning forks or ticking watches or [75] balls dropped on metal plates, are implements of civilization.
Make the test the howl of a distant wolf, or the snapping of a twig as the boughs bend in the wind, and the college student’s hearing might prove duller than that of the Indian or Ainu.
There is a story of a woodsman on a busy thoroughfare, amid the roar of traffic and multifarious noise of a great city, hearing a cricket chirp, which was actually discovered in a near-by open cellar.
Extolled for his miraculous keenness of audition, the man in the fur cap dropped a small coin on the pavement: at the clink, passers-by across the street stopped and looked around.
As to the pain sense, an introspective, interpretative element necessarily enters into experiments.
What constitutes pain?
When the trial becomes disagreeable?
When it hurts?
When it is excruciating?
The savage may physiologically feel with his nerve ends precisely as we do.
But being reared to a life of chronic slight discomforts, he is likely to think nothing of the sensation until it hurts sharply; whereas we signal as soon as we are sure that the experience is becoming perceptibly unpleasant.
In short, until there shall have been more numerous, balanced, and searching tests made, it must be considered that nothing positive has been established as to the respective sensory faculties of the several human races.
The experiments performed are tests not so much of race as of the average experience and habits of groups of different culture.
These are arranged to determine the mental age of the subject.
Their most important function accordingly has been the detection of defective adults or backward children.
During the World War, psychological examinations were introduced on a scale unheard of before.
Men subject to dizziness were to be kept from flying; those unable to understand orders, out of active line service.
The tests throughout were practical.
They tried to decide whether a given man was fit or unfit.
They did not pretend to go into the causes of his fitness or unfitness.
This is an important point.
Whatever illumination the army intelligence tests shed on the problem of race intelligence is therefore indirect.
Different racial or national groups represented in the examinations attain different capacity ratings, but there is nothing in the results themselves to show whether they are due to racial or environmental factors.
The reason is that they flatter national and race egotism.
To be sure, the Englishmen in the American draft make a better showing than the drafted men at large; but this has been complacently explained by saying that the English represent in comparative purity the Anglo-Saxon or Nordic stock which is also the dominant strain among Americans, but which has been somewhat contaminated in their case by the immigration of Latins and Slavs, who rate much lower, as shown by the Italians and Poles tested.
Lowest of all, as might be expected, is the Negro.
So runs the superficial but satisfying interpretation of the figures—satisfying if one happens to be of [77] North European ancestry.
But there is one feature that raises suspicion.
The Italians and the Poles are too close to the Negroes.
They stand much nearer to them in intelligence, according to these figures, than they do to the white Americans.
Can this be so—at least, can it have racial significance?
Are these Mediterraneans, descendants of the Romans, and these Alpines, so large a strain of whose blood flows in the veins of many white Americans, only a shade superior to the Negro?
“Something must be wrong” with the figures: that is, they contain another factor besides race.
A little dissection of the lump results reveals this factor.
The northern Negro far surpasses the southern in his showing.
He gets ten times as high a proportion of individuals into the above-average grades, only half as many into the below-average.
Evidently the difference is due to increased schooling, improved earning capacity, larger opportunity and incentive: social environment, in short.
So strong is the influence of the environment that the northern Negro easily surpasses the Italian in America.
Negroes, 5 northern states, 4,705 46 51 3 Italians, 4,007 63 36 1 Negroes, 4 southern states, 6,846 86 14 (.3) Evidently the psychological tests are more a gauge of educational and social opportunity than of race, since the Italian, although brunet, is of course a pure Caucasian.
This conclusion is reinforced by another consideration.
The type of test first used in the army had been built up for reasonably literate people, speaking English.
Among such people it discriminated successfully between the more and the less fit.
But the illiterate and the foreigner knowing no English failed completely—not because their intelligence was zero, but because the test involved the use of non-congenital abilities which they had not acquired.
A second set of tests, known as Beta, was evolved for those who were obviously ineligible, or proved themselves so, for the old style of test, which was designated as Alpha.
The illiteracy of the subjects given the Beta test was in most cases [78] not an absolute one.
The point was to find the excellent man, and the unfit man, with the same degree of accuracy whether he was literate or illiterate.
When found, he was assigned to the same grade, such as A, or D—, whether his examination had been Alpha or Beta.
The New York negro is nearly on a par with the Alabama white, among literates, and a bit ahead of him among illiterates.
Approximately the two groups come out the same; which means that bringing up in a certain part of the country has as much to do with intelligence, even in the rough, as has Caucasian or colored parentage.
In every case the literate members of a race or nationality make a far better showing than the illiterate.
It is now clear also that the important factor of education enters so heavily into the first [79] figures cited that they can mean little if anything as to inherent capacity.
Of the Englishmen tested, nine-tenths fell in the literate group; of the Poles, a fifth; of the Italians, a seventh.
In short, in spite of the fact that the Beta test was intended to equalize conditions for the illiterate and semi-illiterate, the outstanding conclusion of the army examinations seems to be that education—cultural advantage—enormously develops faculty.
Is there anything left that can positively be assigned to race causation?
It may be alleged that within the same section the white recruits regularly surpass the colored.
But is this residuum of difference surely racial?
As long as the color-line remains drawn, a differential factor of cultural advantage is included; and how strong this is there is no present means of knowing.
But it is also possible that most or all of it is environmental.
Neither possibility can be demonstrated from the unrefined data at present available.
Suppose for instance that on a given examination whites scored an average of 100 and Negroes of 60.
In that event it would be clear that the major part of the Negro’s inferiority of record was due to environment; that the white man’s points from about 70 up to 100 were clearly the result of his superior social opportunities, whereas the range between 60 and 70 approximately represented the innate difference between Negro and Caucasian.
This is a hypothetical example, but it may serve to illustrate a possible method of attacking the problem.
There are however almost no data of this kind; and when they are obtained, they will be subject to certain cautions upon interpretation.
The light group made the better scores.
In the Alpha test for literates it attained a median score of 50, the dark Negroes only 30; in the Beta tests for illiterates, the respective figures were 36 and 29.
The caution is this.
It is impossible to predict what the social effect of miscegenation will be.
The effect undoubtedly varies and must be examined in each case.
This demoralization would, to be sure, affect character and not intelligence as such; but it might stand in the way of schooling, and otherwise indirectly react on measurable traits of mind.
In another tribe or section of a tribe, to the contrary, the half-breed might normally grow up in the house of a permanently settled white father, a squaw man, and in that event would learn English better, go to school earlier, and in case of a test therefore achieve a higher rating than the full blood.
While this approach is theoretically possible, and while it is often attempted, it is subject to little control and therefore unlikely to yield dependable conclusions.
The reason is that active civilization, as a productive process, is slow to grow up, slow to be acquired.
Mere momentum would normally keep the more advanced of two peoples ahead of the other for a long time.
In proportion as not nations but groups of nations were involved, the momentum would continue for still longer periods.
What had these barbarians ever done to lead one to think that they might yet do great things?
To-day we brush Negroes and Indians out of the reckoning with the same offhandedness.
In general, arguing from performance to potentiality, from accomplishment to achievement, is valid under conditions of set experiment—such as are impossible for races—or in proportion as the number and variety of observations is large.
A single matched competition may decide pretty reliably as between the respective speed capacities of two runners.
But it would be hazardous to form an opinion from a casual glimpse of them in action, when one might happen to be hastening and the other dallying.
Least of all would it be sound to infer that essential superiority rested with the one that was in advance at the moment of observation, without knowledge of their starting points, the difficulty of their routes, the motive or goal of their courses.
It is only as the number of circumstances grows, from which observations are available, that judgment begins to have any weight.
The runner who has led for a long time and is increasing his lead, or who has repeatedly passed others, or who carries a load and yet gains ground, may lay some claim to superiority.
In the same way, as between races, a long and intimate historical record, objectively analyzed, gives some legitimate basis for tentative conclusions as to their natural endowment.
The fallacy that is most commonly committed is to argue from what in the history of [83] great groups is only an instant: this instant being that at which one’s own race or nationality is dominant.
The Anglo-Saxon’s moment is the present; the Greek’s, the age of Pericles.
The Greek knew his venality, but looked down on the barbarian nevertheless.
Anglo-Saxon failure in the plastic and musical arts is notorious, but does not deter most Anglo-Saxons from believing that they are the elect in quality, and from buttressing this conviction with the evidences of present industrial, economic, and political achievements—and perhaps past literary ones.
Here a fallacy enters: the assumption that all geniuses born are recognized as such.
A great work naturally requires a great man, but it presupposes also a great culture.
It may be that, historically speaking, a great genius cannot arise in a primitive degree of civilization.
That is, the kind of concentrated accomplishment which [84] alone we recognize as a work of genius is culturally impossible below a certain level.
This conclusion has never been popular.
The same persons who eagerly accept the demonstration of a flaw in the argument in favor of Athenian superiority, generally become skeptical and resistive to the exposition of the same flaw in the current belief as to Negro inferiority.
It is remarkable how frequently and how soon, in making this exposition, one becomes aware of the hearer’s feeling that one’s attitude is sophistical, unreal, insincere, or motivated by something concealed.
It is not that (§ 271).
As a matter of fact, the bodily differences between races would appear to render it in the highest degree likely that corresponding congenital mental differences do exist.
These differences might not be profound, compared with the sum total of common human faculties, much as the physical variations of mankind fall within the limits of a single species.
Yet they would preclude identity.
As for the vexed question of superiority, lack of identity would involve at least some degree of greater power in certain respects in some races.
In either event, however, the fact of race difference, qualitative if not quantitative, would remain.
In short, it is a difficult task to establish any race as either superior or inferior to another, but relatively easy to prove that we entertain a strong prejudice in favor of our own racial superiority.
Progress in solution of the problems will be made gradually, and will be hastened by recognition of how few positive determinations have been made.
Most of the alleged existing evidence on race endowment is likely to be worthless.
The remainder probably has some value, but to what degree, and what it demonstrates, cannot yet be asserted.
The most definite determinations promise to eventuate from experiment.
If fully controlled experiments in breeding and rearing human beings could be carried out, the problems would soon begin to solve.
Experiments on animals would prove practically nothing because animals are cultureless—uninfluenced by social environment of their own making.
Progress will be aided by increasing shift of attention from the crude consideration of comparative lump rating of the races, that is, their gross superiority or inferiority, to a [86] consideration of such specific qualitative differences as they may prove to show.
Scientific inquiries into race are for the present best kept apart from so-called actual race problems.
These problems inevitably involve feeling, usually of considerable strength, which tends to vitiate objective approach.
On the other hand, the practical problems will no doubt continue to be met practically, that is, morally and emotionally.
Whether the Japanese should be forbidden to hold land and the Negro be legally disfranchised are problems of economics and of group ethics, which probably will for a long time be disposed of emotionally as at present, irrespective of the possible findings of science upon the innate endowment of Caucasian, Mongoloid, and Negroid strains.
Linguistic relationship: the speech family.—48.
Criteria of relationship.—49.
Sound equivalences and phonetic laws.—50.
The principal speech families.—51.
Classification of languages by types.—52.
Permanence of language and race.—53.
The biological and historical nature of language.—54.
Problems of the relation of language and culture.—55.
Period of the origin of language.—56.
Culture, speech, and nationality.—57.
Relative worth of languages.—58.
Size of vocabulary.—59.
Quality of speech sounds.—60.
Diffusion and parallelism in language and culture.— 61.
Unconscious factors in language and culture.—63.
Linguistic and cultural standards.—64.
Rapidity of linguistic change.
Relationship in such connection means descent from a common source, as two brothers are descended from the same father, or two cousins from a common grandfather.
If languages can be demonstrated to possess such common source, it is clear that the peoples who spoke them must at one time have been in close contact, or perhaps have constituted a single people.
If, on the other hand, the languages of two peoples prove wholly dissimilar, though their racial types and cultures be virtually identical, as indeed is sometimes found to be the case—witness the Hungarians and their neighbors—it is evident that an element of discontinuous development must somewhere be reckoned with.
Perhaps one part of an originally single racial group gradually modified its speech beyond recognition, or under the shock of conquest, migration, or other historical accident entirely discarded it in favor of a new and foreign tongue.
Or the opposite may be true: the two groups were originally distinct in all respects, but, being brought in contact, their cultures interpenetrated, intermarriage followed, and the two physical types became assimilated into one while the [88] languages remained dissimilar.
In short, if one wishes full understanding of a people, one must take its language into consideration.
This means that it must be classified.
In a word, it must be a genetic classification.
The term used to indicate that two or more languages have a common source but are unrelated to all others, or seem so in the present state of knowledge, is “linguistic family.” “Linguistic stock” is frequently used as a synonym.
This is the fundamental concept in the classification of languages.
Without a clear idea of its meaning one involves himself in confusion on attempting to use philology as an aid to other branches of human history.
There is no abstract reason against referring to a group of unrelated languages as a “family” because they are all spoken in one area, nor against denominating as “families,” as has sometimes been done, the major subdivisions of a group of languages admittedly of common origin.
Again, languages that show certain similarities of type or structure, such as inflection, might conceivably be put into one “family.” But there is this objection to all such usages: they do not commit themselves on the point of genetic relationship, or they contradict it, or only partially exhaust it.
Yet commonness of origin is so important in many connections that it is indispensable to have one term which denotes its ascertainable presence.
And for this quality there happens to be no generally understood designation other than “linguistic family,” or its synonym, “linguistic stock.” This phrase will therefore be used here strictly in the sense of the whole of a group of languages sprung from a single source, and only in that sense.
In brief, the method is one of comparison.
If a considerable proportion of the words and grammatical forms of two languages are [89] reasonably similar, similar enough to indicate that the resemblances cannot be due to mere accident, these similar words and forms must go back to a common source, and if this source is not borrowing, the two tongues are related.
If comparison fails to bring out any such degree of resemblance, the languages are classed in distinct families.
In that event true relationship would be obscured by its remoteness.
Theoretically there is high probability that many families of languages, customarily regarded as totally distinct, do go back in the far past to a common origin, and that ignorance of their history, or inability to analyze them deeply, prevents recognition of their relationship.
From time to time it happens that groups of languages which at first seemed unrelated are shown by more intensive study to possess elements enough in common to compel the recognition of their original unity.
In that case what were supposed to be several “families” become merged in one.
The scope of a particular family may be thus enlarged; but the scope of the generic concept of “family” is not altered.
Whether there is any hope that comparative philology may ultimately be prosecuted with sufficient success to lead all the varied forms of human speech back to a single origin, is an interesting speculation.
A fair statement is that such a possibility cannot be denied, but that the science is still far from such a realization, and that progress toward it is necessarily slow.
Of more immediate concern is an ordering and summarizing of the knowledge in hand with a view to such positive inferences as can be drawn.
This double requirement holds, whether full words or separable parts of words, roots or grammatical forms, are compared.
Such doubtful cases, of which a certain proportion are likely to be adjudged wrongly, are bound to come up in regard to the less investigated languages, particularly those of nations without writing, the earlier stages of whose speech have perished without trace.
In proportion as more is known of a language, or as careful analysis can reconstruct more of its past stages, the number of such borderline cases obviously becomes fewer.
Before genetic connection between two languages can be thought of, the number of their words similar in sound and sense must be reasonably large.
An isolated handful of resemblances obviously are either importations—loan words—or the result of coincidence.
It would therefore be absurd to dream of a connection: one swallow does not make a summer.
This lone pair of resemblances means nothing except that the mathematical law of probability has operated.
Among the thousands of words in one language, a number are likely to be similar in sound to words of another language; and of this number again a small fraction, perhaps one or two or five in all, will happen to bear some resemblance in meaning also.
At the same time it is not necessary that the similarities extend to the point of identity.
In fact, too close a resemblance between part of the stock of two languages immediately [91] raises a presumption of borrowing.
For every language is continually changing, and once a mother tongue has split into several branches, each of these goes on modifying its sounds, and gradually shifting the meaning of its words, generation after generation.
In short, where connection is real, it must be veiled by a certain degree of distortion.
To offhand inspection the sounds or forms of the two words do not seem similar.
All these words however possess almost exact equivalents in Latin.
To answer this seemingly innocent question with accuracy for this one word alone would involve a treatise on the whole group of languages in question, and even then the causes, as causes, could scarcely be set [92] down with certainty.
It is produced by closure of the lips for a fraction of a second during which there is an interruption of sound production, followed by a somewhat explosive release of the breath which has been impounded in the mouth cavity.
This explosion is of necessity instantaneous.
In both cases the breath is expelled with friction through a narrow passage.
D is a stop like t, but the vocal cords vibrate while it is being pronounced, whereas in t the vocal cords are silent.
This triple equivalence can be substantiated in other words.
Again the three classes of sounds run parallel; but the place of their appearance in the three languages has shifted.
It is evident that most of the sounds occur in all three groups of languages, but not in the same words.
This replacing is known as a “sound shift.” The sound shifts just enumerated constitute the famous Grimm’s Law.
This was the first discovered important phonetic law or system of sound substitutions.
Yet it is only one of a number of shifts that have been worked out for the Indo-European group of languages to which English, German, and [94] Latin belong.
So far, only stopped and fricative consonants have been reviewed here, and no vowels have been considered.
Other groups of languages also show shifts, but often different ones, as between l and n, or s and k, or p and k. The significance of a shift lies in the fact that its regularity cannot be explained on any other ground than that the words in which the law is operative must originally have been the same.
This example alone is of course insufficient evidence for the existence of such a common mother tongue.
But that each of the shifts discussed is substantiated by hundreds or thousands of words in which it holds true, puts the shift beyond the possibility of mere accident.
The explanation of coincidence is ruled out.
The resemblances therefore are both genuine and genetic.
The conclusion becomes inevitable that the languages thus linked are later modifications of a former single speech.
It is in this way that linguistic relationship is determined.
Where an ancient sound shift, a law of phonetic change, can be established by a sufficient number of cases, argument ceases.
The indications may be strong enough to warrant a tentative assumption of relationship.
But the final test is always the establishment of laws of sound equivalence that hold good with predominating regularity.
From what has already been said it appears that the number can perhaps never be determined with absolute accuracy.
As knowledge accumulates and dissection is carried to greater refinements, new phonetic laws will uncover and serve to unite what now seem to be separate stocks.
Yet for the practical purpose of classification and tracing relationship the [95] linguistic family will remain a valuable tool.
Linguistic Families of Asia and Europe.
3, Caucasian (perhaps two families).
In Asia and Europe, which must be considered a unit in this connection, the number of stocks, according to conservative reckoning, does not exceed twenty-five.
From Europe various Indo-European languages, such as English, Spanish, French, Russian, have in recent centuries been carried to other continents, until in some, such as the Americas and Australia, the greater area is now inhabited by peoples speaking Indo-European.
As the accompanying maps are intended to depict the historic or native distribution of languages they do not show this diffusion.
Turkish peoples displaced Indo-Europeans there about a thousand years ago, thus breaking the territorial continuity.
Here also there are Turks now.
In extent of territory occupied the Altaic stock rivals the Indo-European.
The Turks, as just noted, are the only stock that within the period of history has gained appreciable territory at Indo-European expense.
[96] This is a scattered stock.
Of the Semitic family, Arabic is the chief living representative, with Abyssinian in Africa as a little known half-sister.
Arabic is one of the most widely diffused of all languages, and as the orthodox vehicle of Mohammedanism has served an important function as a culture carrier.
Southern India is Dravidian.
While people of this family enter little into our customary thoughts, they number over fifty millions.
Japanese and Korean also merit mention as important stock tongues.
Several minor families will be found on the Asiatic map, most of them consisting of uncivilized peoples or limited in their territory or the number of their speakers.
Yet, so far as can be judged from present knowledge, they form units of the same order of independence as the great Indo-European, Semitic, and Ural-Altaic stocks.
Hamitic and Semitic, named after sons of Noah, probably derive from a common source, although the separation of the common mother tongue into the African Hamitic and the Asiatic Semitic divisions must have occurred very anciently.
In the past thousand years Hamitic has yielded ground before Semitic, due to the spread of Arabic in Mohammedan Africa.
Africa south of the equator is the home of the great Bantu family, except in the extreme southwest of the continent.
Linguistic Families of Africa.
X, the Sudan, not consistently classified.
Between the equator and latitude ten north, in the belt known as the Sudan, there is much greater speech diversity than elsewhere in Africa.
The languages of the Sudan fall [97] into several families, perhaps into a fairly large number.
Opinion conflicts or is unsettled as to their classification.
They are, at least in the main, non-Hamitic and non-Bantu; but this negative fact does not preclude their having had either a single or a dozen origins.
It has usually been easier to throw them all into a vague group designated as non-Hamitic [98] and non-Bantu than to compare them in detail.
Indeed, superficially this variety is the outstanding linguistic feature of New Guinea.
However, it is inconceivable that so small a population should time and again have evolved totally new forms of speech.
What the circumstances were that favored this tendency to segregation and change can be only conjectured.
The Australian idioms have been imperfectly recorded.
They were numerous and locally much varied, but seem to derive from a single mother tongue.
From Madagascar to Easter Island this speech stretches more than half-way around our planet.
SA1, Arawak, No.
SA8, Chibcha, No.
8 on South American map.
The white areas are occupied by nearly seventy smaller families, according to the classification usually accepted.
North and South America, according to the usual reckoning, contain more native [100] language families than all the remainder of the world.
The orthodox classification allots about seventy-five families to North America (some fifty of them represented within the borders of the United States) and another seventy-five to South America.
They varied greatly in size at the time of discovery, some being confined to a few hundred souls, whereas others stretched through tribe after tribe over enormous areas.
Their distribution is so irregular and their areas so disproportionate as to be impossible of vivid representation except on a large-scale map in colors.
14, 15) that these sixteen groups held the greater part of the area of the double continent, the remaining smaller areas being crowded with about ten times as many stocks.
Obviously, as in New Guinea, there cannot well have been such an original multiplicity; in fact, recent studies are tending to consolidate the hundred and fifty New World families into considerably fewer groups.
But the evidence for such reductions is necessarily difficult to bring and much of it is still incomplete.
The stocks mentioned above have been long determined and generally accepted.
About a third of humanity to-day speaks some form of Indo-European.
The languages included in these eight families form the speech of approximately ninety per cent of living human beings.
The white areas are occupied by about seventy smaller families, according to the usually accepted classification.
(Based on Chamberlain.)
An inflecting language expresses relations or grammatical form by adding prefixes or [102] suffixes which cannot stand alone, or if they stood alone would mean nothing; or that operates by internal modifications of the stem, which also can have no independent existence.
An isolating language expresses such relations or forms by separate words or isolated particles.
An agglutinative language glues together into solid words elements for which a definite meaning of their own can be traced.
Incorporating languages embody the object noun, or the pronoun representing it, into the word that contains the verb stem.
This construction is totally foreign to English.
[7] Each of these classes evidently defines one or more distinctive linguistic processes.
The distinction is therefore both valid and valuable.
Its abuse lies in trying to slap the label of one type on a whole language.
The instances given show that English employs most of the several distinct processes.
Obviously it would be arbitrary to classify English as outright of one [103] type.
This is also the situation for most other languages.
But they form a small minority, and most of them contain certain processes of types other than their predominating ones.
Therefore, so long as these concepts are used to picture a language in detail, with balanced recognition of the different processes employed by it, they are valuable tools to philological description.
When on the other hand the concepts are degraded into catchwords designating three or four compartments into one of which every language is somehow to be stuffed, they grossly misrepresent most of the facts.
The concepts, in short, apply usefully to types of linguistic processes, inadequately to types of languages.
The mind craves simplicity and the three or four supposedly all-embracing types are a temptation.
A second reason lies deeper.
As philology grew up into a systematic body of knowledge, it centered its first interests on Latin and Greek, then on Sanskrit and the other older Indo-European languages.
They also happened to be the languages from which the native speech of the philologists was derived.
As a sort of after-thought, Semitic, which includes Hebrew, the language of part of our Scriptures, was included.
Then Chinese, which follows an unusually simple plan of structure that is the opposite in many ways of the complex structure of old Indo-European, and which was the speech of a civilized people, was set apart as a class of the second rank.
This left the majority of human languages to be dumped into a third class, or a third and fourth [104] class, with the pleasing implication that they were less capable of abstraction, more materialistic, cruder, and generally inferior.
Philologists are customarily regarded as extreme examples of passionless, dry, objective human beings.
It is necessary to guard against two fallacies in this connection.
The first is to argue from individuals to societies; the second, that because change is possible, it takes place.
It has withstood the influence of two thousand years of contact, first with Latin, then with Frankish German, at last with French.
Its Welsh sister-tongue flourishes in spite of the Anglo-Saxon speech of the remainder of Great Britain.
The original inhabitants of Spain were mostly of non-Aryan stock.
Finally, the Arab came and brought with him a new religion, which entailed use of the Arabic language.
Egypt has at last become Arabic-speaking, but until a century or two ago the Coptic language, the daughter of the ancient Egyptian tongue of five thousand years ago, was kept alive by the native Christians along the Nile, and even to- [105] day it survives in ritual.
The boundary between French on the one side and German, Dutch, and Flemish on the other, has been accurately known for over six hundred years.
With all the wars and conquests back and forth across the speech line, endless political changes and cultural influences, this line has scarcely anywhere shifted more than a few dozen miles, and in places has not moved by a comfortable afternoon’s stroll.
While populations can learn and unlearn languages, they tend to do so with reluctance and infinite slowness, especially while they remain in their inherited territories.
Speech tends to be one of the most persistent ethnic characters.
A wide gap in culture may overcome the influence of the majority, yet the speech of a culturally more active and advanced population ordinarily wrests permanent territory to itself slowly except where there is an actual crowding out or numerical swamping of the natives.
As to the relative permanence of race and speech, everything depends on the side from which the question is approached.
From the point of view of hereditary strains, race must be the more conservative, because it can change rapidly only through admixture with another race, whereas a language may be completely exchanged in a short time.
From the point of view of history, however, which regards human actions within given territories, speech is often more stable.
Wars or trade or migration may bring one racial element after another into an area until the type has become altered or diluted, and yet the original language, or one directly descended from it, remains.
The introduction of the negro from Africa to America illustrates this distinction.
From the point of view of biology, the negro has at least partially preserved his type, although he has taken on a wholly new language.
[106] As a matter of history, the reverse is true: English continues to be the speech of the southern United States, whereas the population now consists of two races instead of one, and the negro element has been altered by the infusion of white blood.
It is a fallacy to think, because one can learn French or become a Christian and yet is powerless to change his eye color or head shape, that language and culture are altogether less stable than race.
Speech and culture have an existence of their own, whose integrity does not depend on hereditary integrity.
The two may move together or separately.
Moreover, the environment of which languages are the product is not a natural one, that is, geographic or climatic, but social.
All words and speech forms that are learned—and they constitute almost the complete mass of language—are imitated directly from other human beings.
Those new forms that from time to time come into use rest on existing speech material, are shaped according to tendencies already operative although perhaps more or less hidden, cannot generally be attributed, as regards origin, or at least entire origin, to single individuals; in short, present a history similar to that of inventions and new institutions.
The “speech” of the animals other than man has something in common with human languages.
It consists of sounds produced by the body, accompanied by certain mental activities or conditions, and capable of arousing certain definite responses in other individuals of the species.
It differs from human speech in several fundamental particulars.
A fowl raised alone in an incubator will peep and crow or cluck as it will scratch and peck.
A dog reared by a foster cat will bark, or growl, or whine, or yelp, when it has attained the requisite age, and on application of the proper stimulus, as he will wag [107] or crouch or hunt or dig, and no differently from the dog brought up in association with other dogs.
By contrast, the Japanese infant turned over to American foster parents never utters or knows a single Japanese word, learns only English, and learns that as well as do his Caucasian step-brothers.
If this summary is not absolutely exact, it departs from the truth only infinitesimally.
Further, animal speech has no “meaning,” does not serve as a vehicle of “communication.” The opposite is often assumed popularly, because we anthropomorphize.
If it is said that a dog’s growl “means” anger, and that his bark “communicates” suspicion or excitement to his fellows, the words are used in a sense different from their significance when we say that the term red “means” the color at one end of the spectrum, or that a message of departure “communicates” information.
The animal sounds convey knowledge only of subjective states.
They are immediate reflex responses to a feeling.
They may be “understood” in the sense that a sympathetic feeling is evoked or at any rate mobilized; and thereby they may lead or tend to lead to action by the hearers.
In the same way, any man instinctively “understands” the moan of a fellow human being.
But the moan does not tell whether the pain is of a second’s or a week’s duration, due to a blow or to gas in the bowel, to an ulcerated tooth or to mental anguish.
There is no communication of anything objective, of ideas as distinct from feelings, as when we say red or break or up or water.
Not one of these simple concepts can be communicated as such by any brute speech.
One consequence is the “arbitrariness” of human speech.
Why does the same word often designate quite distinct ideas in different languages—the approximate sound group lay meaning “milk” in French; lass “a girl” in English, “tired” in French, “allow” in German?
Such facts are physiologically arbitrary; just as it is physiologically arbitrary and organically meaningless that Americans live in a republic and Britons under a monarchy, [108] or that they turn respectively to the right and left on the road.
In the light of such antecedents, viewed on the level of history, these phenomena are intelligible: we know why the United States is a republic, we can trace the development of words like lay and lass.
It is only from the biological plane that such facts seem insignificant or arbitrary.
Actually, of course, no such case is known.
Speculatively, different conclusions might be reached.
It is difficult to imagine any generalized thinking taking place without words or symbols derived from words.
Religious beliefs and certain phases of social organization also seem dependent on speech: caste ranking, marriage regulations, kinship recognition, law, and the like.
On the other hand, it is conceivable that a considerable series of inventions might be made, and the applied arts might be developed in a fair measure by imitation, among a speechless people.
For the converse, a cultureless species of animal might conceivably develop and use a form of true speech.
Such communications as “The river is rising,” “Bite it off,” “What do you find inside?” would be within the range of thought of such a species.
Why then have even the most intelligent of the brutes failed to develop a language?
Possibly because such a language would lack a definite survival value for the species, in the absence of accompanying culture.
On the whole, however, it would seem that language and culture rest, in a way which is not yet fully understood, on the same set of faculties, and that these, for some reason that is still more obscure, developed in the ancestors of man, while remaining in abeyance in [109] other species.
Even the anthropoid apes seem virtually devoid of the impulse to communicate, in spite of freely expressing their affective states of mind by voice, facial gesture, and bodily movement.
The most responsive to man of all species, the dog, learns to accept a considerable stock of culture in the sense of fitting himself to it: he develops conscience and manners, for example.
Yet, however highly bred, he does not hand on his accomplishments to his progeny, who again depend on their human masters for what they acquire.
In short, the culture impulse is lacking in the dog except so far as it is instilled by man; and in most animals it can notoriously be instilled only to a very limited degree.
In the same way, the impulse toward communication can be said to be wanting.
A dog may understand a hundred words of command and express in his behavior fifty shades of emotion; only rarely does he seem to try to communicate information of objective fact.
Very likely we are attributing to him even in these rare cases the impulse which we should feel.
In the event of a member of the family being injured or lost, it is certain that a good dog expresses his agitation, uneasiness, disturbed attachment; but much less certain is it that he intends to summon help, as we spontaneously incline to believe because such summoning would be our own reaction to the situation.
The history and causes of the development in incipient man of the group of traits that may be called the faculties for speech and civilization remain one of the darkest areas in the field of knowledge.
It is plain that these faculties lie essentially in the sphere of what is ordinarily called the mind, rather than in the body, since men and the apes are far more similar in their general physiques than they are in the degree of their ability to use their physiques for non-physiological purposes.
Or, if this antithesis of physical and mental seem unfortunate, it might be said that the growth of the faculties for speech and culture was connected more with special developments of the central nervous system than with those of the remainder of the body.
It is difficult to be positive, because words perish like beliefs and institutions, whereas stone tools endure as direct evidence.
On the whole, however, it would appear that the first rudiments of what deserves to be called language are about as ancient as the first culture manifestations, not only because of the theoretically close association of the two phases, but in the light of circumstantial testimony, namely the skull interiors of fossil men.
The general frontal region, the largest area of the cortex believed to be devoted to associative functions—in loose parlance, to thought—is also greater than in any known ape.
More than one authority has therefore felt justified in attributing speech to the ancestors of man that lived well back in the Pleistocene.
But this factor is probably of less importance than the one of mental facultative development.
The parrot is lipless and yet can reproduce the sounds of human speech.
What he lacks is language faculty; and this, it seems, fossil man already had in some measure.
So far as the process of their transmission is concerned, and the type of mechanism of their development, it is clear that language and culture are one.
For practical purposes it is generally convenient to keep them distinct.
The other way around, the northern Hindus and west Europeans are certainly different culturally, yet their languages go back to a common origin.
One can no more think correctly in terms of Aryan heads or a Semitic race, for instance, than of blond linguistic types, Catholic physiques, or inflecting social institutions.
At the same time, speech and culture tend to form something of a unit as opposed to race.
It is possible for a population to substitute a wholly new language and type of civilization for the old ones, as the American negro has done, and yet to remain relatively unmodified racially, or at least to carry on its former physical type unchanged in a large proportion of its members.
On the other hand, a change of speech without some change of culture seems impossible.
In a lower degree, the same principle probably holds true of every gain of one language at the expense of another, even when the spreading idiom is not associated with a great or active culture.
The linkage of speech and culture is further perceptible in the degree to which they both contribute, in most cases, to the idea of nationality.
What chiefly marks off the French nation from the Italian, the Dutch from the German, the Swedish from the Norwegian—their respective customs and ideals, or the language gap?
It would be difficult to say.
The cultural differences tend to crystallize around language differences, and then in turn are reinforced by language, so that the two factors interact complexly.
Yet however successfully Switzerland and Belgium maintain their national unity, it is clear that this is a composite of subnational elements, each of which possesses a certain [112] cultural as well as linguistic distinctness.
Similarly, both the history and the outlook and therefore the culture of the French and German cantons of Switzerland are definitely distinguishable.
Of course, even as regards culture, such rating is often a dubious procedure, meaning little more than that the person making the comparison assumes his own culture to be the highest and estimates other cultures low in proportion as they vary.
Although this is a subjective and uncritical procedure, nevertheless certain objective comparisons are possible.
Some cultures surpass others in their quantitative content: they possess more different arts, abilities, and items of knowledge.
Also, some culture traits may be considered intrinsically superior to others: metal tools against stone ones, for instance, since metal is adopted by all stone culture peoples who can secure it, whereas the reverse is not true.
Further, in most cases a new addition does not wholly obliterate an older element, this retaining a subsidiary place, or perhaps serving some more special function than before.
In this way the culture becomes more differentiated.
In general, accretion is the process typical of culture growth.
Older elements come to function in a more limited sphere as new ones are added, but are not extirpated by them.
In the senses then that a culture has a larger content of elements, that these elements are more differentiated, and that a greater proportion of these elements are of the kind that inherently tend to supersede related elements, the culture may be considered superior.
As regards languages, there are also quantitative differences.
Some contain several [113] times as many words as others.
But vocabulary is largely a cultural matter.
A people that uses more materials, manufactures more objects, possesses knowledge of a larger array of facts, and makes finer discriminations in thought, must inevitably have more words.
Yet even notable increases in size of speech content appear not to be accompanied by appreciable changes in form.
A larger vocabulary does not mean a different type of structure.
Grammar seems to be little influenced by culture status.
No clear correspondence has yet been traceable between type or degree of civilization and type of language.
Neither the presence nor the absence of particular features of tense, number, case, reduplication, or the like seems ever to have been of demonstrable advantage toward the attainment of higher culture.
The speech of the former and modern nations most active in the propagation of culture has been of quite diverse type.
The languages of the Egyptians (Hamitic); Sumerians; Babylonians and Arabs (Semitic); Hindus and Greeks (ancient Indo-European); Anglo-Saxons (modern Indo-European); Chinese; and Mayas, are about as different as exist.
The Sumerian type of civilization was taken over bodily and successfully by the Semitic Babylonians.
The bulk of Japanese culture is Chinese; yet Japanese speech is built on wholly different principles.
Then, it is impossible to rate one speech trait or type as inherently or objectively superior to another on any basis like that which justifies the placing of a metal culture above a stone culture.
If wealth of grammatical apparatus is a criterion of superiority, Latin is a higher language than French, and Anglo-Saxon than English.
But if lack of declensions and conjugations is a virtue, then Chinese surpasses English almost as much as English surpasses Latin.
There is no reason favoring one of these possible judgments rather than its opposite.
The one is more compact, the other more plastic.
There are times when compactness is a virtue, occasions when plasticity has advantages.
By the Latin or synthetic standard, the English expression is loose jointed, lacking in structure; by the English or analytic standard, the Latin form is over-condensed, adhering [114] unnecessarily to form.
One cannot similarly balance the merits of a steel and a flint knife, of a medical and a shamanistic phase of society.
The one cuts or cures better than the other.
So, from the point of view of civilization, language does not matter.
Language will always keep up with whatever pace culture sets it.
If a thousand or ten thousand new words are required, they are developed.
When it desires to express abstractions like futurity or plurality, any language is capable of doing so, even if it does not habitually express them.
If a language is unprovided with formal means for the purpose, such as a grammatical suffix, it falls back on content and uses a word or circumlocution.
If the life of a people changes and comes to be conducted along lines that render it frequently important to express an idea like futurity to which previously little attention has been paid, the appropriate circumlocution soon becomes standardized, conveniently brief, and unambiguous.
In general, every language is capable of indefinite modification and expansion and thereby is enabled to meet cultural demands almost at once.
This is shown by the fact that virtually anything spoken or written can be translated into almost every other language without serious impairment of substance.
Similar misconceptions are current as to the number of words actually used by single individuals of civilized communities.
It is true that no one, not even the [115] most learned and prolific writer, uses all the words of the English language as they are found in an unabridged dictionary.
All of us understand many words which we habitually encounter in reading and may even hear frequently spoken, but of which our utterance faculties for some reason have not made us master.
Added to this are a certain mental sluggishness, which restricts most of us to a greater or less degree, and the force of habit.
The degree to which all this affects the speech of the normal man has, however, been greatly exaggerated.
Because there are, all told, including technical terms, a hundred thousand or more words in our dictionaries, and because Shakespeare in his writings used 24,000 different words, Milton in his poems 17,000, and the English Bible contains 7,200, it has been concluded that the average man, whose range of thought and power of expression are so much less, must use an enormously smaller vocabulary.
It has been stated that many a peasant goes through life without using more than 300 or 400 words, that the vocabulary of Italian grand opera is about 600, and that he is a person above the average who employs more than 3,000 to 4,000 words.
But it is certain that the figures just cited are erroneous.
That is, his vocabulary contains so many concrete nouns.
To these must be added the abstract nouns, the verbs, adjectives, pronouns, and the other parts of speech, the short and familiar words that are indispensable to communication in any language.
It may thus be safely estimated that it is an exceptionally ignorant and [116] stupid person in a civilized country that has not at his command a vocabulary of several thousand words.
Test counts based on dictionaries show, for people of bookish tastes, a knowledge of about 30,000 to 35,000 words.
The carefully counted vocabulary of a five and a half year old American boy comprised 1,528 understandingly used words, besides participles and other inflected forms.
Two boys between two and three years used 642 and 677 different words.
It is therefore likely that statements as to the paucity of the speech of unlettered peoples are equally exaggerated.
He who professes to declare on the strength of his observation that a native language consists of only a few hundred terms, displays chiefly his ignorance.
He has either not taken the trouble to exhaust the vocabulary or has not known how to do so.
It is true that the traveler or settler can usually converse with natives to the satisfaction of his own needs with two or three hundred words.
Even the missionary can do a great deal with this stock, if it is properly chosen.
But it does not follow that because a civilized person has not learned more of a language, that there is no more.
On this point the testimony of the student is the evidence to be considered.
Dictionaries compiled by missionaries or philologists of languages previously unwritten run to surprising figures.
It may safely be said that every existing language, no matter how backward its speakers are in their general civilization, possesses a vocabulary of at least 5,000 words.
This belief is purely subjective.
When one has heard and uttered a language all his life, its sounds come to [117] one’s mouth with a minimum of effort; but unfamiliar vowels and consonants are formed awkwardly and inaccurately.
Conversely, the “rough” ch flows spontaneously out of the mouth of a German or Scotchman, whereas English, French, and Italians have to struggle long to master it, and are tempted to substitute k. German ö and French u trouble us, our “short” u is equally resistant to Continental tongues.
Even a novel position can make a familiar sound strange and forbidding.
Yet it is only sing pronounced backward.
A little practice makes possible the throwing on or off of these vibrations, the “voicing” of speech, for any sound, with as much ease as one would turn a faucet on or off.
When it comes at the beginning, however, as in the tribal name usually written Tlingit, Americans tend to substitute something more habitual, such as kl, which is familiar from clip, clean, clear, close, clam, and many other words.
Combinations of sounds, especially of consonants, are indeed of variable difficulty for [118] anatomical reasons.
Yet in these matters too, habit rather than anatomical functioning determines the reaction.
So far as degree of accumulation of consonants is concerned, English is one of the extremest of all languages.
Children’s speech in all languages shows that certain sounds are, as a rule, learned earlier than others, and are therefore presumably somewhat easier physiologically.
But so slight are the differences of effort or skill in all these cases, that as a rule only a few months separate the learning of the easier from that of the more difficult sounds; and adults no longer feel the differences.
The only sound or class of sounds seriously harder than others seems to be that denoted by the letter r. Not only do children usually acquire r late, but among all races there appears to be a certain percentage of individuals who never learn to form the sound right, but substitute one approaching g or w or j or l. The reason is that r stands alone among [119] speech sounds.
It is the only one produced by blowing the tongue into a few gross vibrations; which means that this organ must be held in a special condition of laxness and yet elevated so that the flow of breath may bear on it.
However, even this inherent difficulty has been insufficient to prevent many languages from changing easier sounds into r. 60.
Thus sex gender is an old part of Indo-European structure.
In English, by the way, it has wholly disappeared, so far as formal expression goes, from noun, adjective, and demonstrative and interrogative pronoun.
A grammar of living English that was genuinely practical and unbound by tradition would never mention gender except in discussing these three little words.
These are distinctions of form of which English possesses no equivalents.
The survival of distinction between he, she, and it, while this and the and which have become alike irrespective of the sex of the person or thing they denote, is therefore historically significant.
It points back to the past and to surviving Indo-European languages.
Besides, Indo-European, Semitic and Hamitic express sex by grammatical forms, although like French and Spanish and Italian, they know only two genders, the neuter being unrepresented.
These three are the only large language stocks in which sex gender finds expression.
How is this distribution to be accounted for?
Could they in the remote past have influenced one another?
That is, could grammatical sex gender have been invented, so to speak, by one of them, and borrowed by the others, as we know that cultural inventions are constantly diffused?
Few philologists would grant this as likely: there are too few authenticated cases of formal elements or concepts having been disseminated between unrelated languages.
Is it then possible that our three stocks are at bottom related?
Sex gender in that case would be part of their common inheritance.
For Semitic and Hamitic a number of specialists have accepted a common origin on other grounds.
But for Semitic and Indo-European, philologists, who are professionally exacting, are in the main quite dubious.
Positive evidence seems yet to be lacking.
Still, the territorial continuity of the three speech groups showing the trait is difficult to accept as mere coincidence.
In a parallel case in the realm of culture history, a common source would be accepted as highly probable.
Even Hottentot has been considered a remote Semitic-Hamitic offshoot, largely, it is true, because of the very fact that it expresses gender.
Philologists, accordingly, may consider the case still open; but it is at least conceivable that the phenomenon goes back to a single origin in these four Old World stocks.
Yet no stretch will account for sex gender in the three American languages as due to contact influence or diffusion, nor relate these tongues to the Old World ones.
Clearly here is a case of independent origin or parallel “invention.” Chinook and Coast Salish, indeed, are in contiguity, and one may therefore have taken up the trait in imitation of the other.
Here sex [121] gender is obviously an independent, secondary, and rather recent growth in the grammar.
In short, it remains doubtful whether sex gender originated three or four or five or six times among these seven language stocks; but it evidently originated repeatedly.
Other traits crop out the world over in much the same manner.
The growth in Romance is significant because of its historicity, and because it was surely not due to imitation of an unrelated language.
That is, French developed its articles independently and secondarily; a fact that makes it probable that many languages in other parts of the world, whose history we do not know, developed theirs in a parallel manner, as a product of wholly internal causes—“invented” them, in short, although wholly unconsciously.
A trait found in a large proportion of the American languages is the so-called incorporation of the object pronoun (§ 51).
The objective pronoun, or an element representing it, is prefixed or suffixed to the verb, made a part of it.
The -s in he love-s is the sole survival of the process in modern English.
Many other instances of parallel or convergent traits could be cited.
This greater frequency of parallel developments in language than in culture is perhaps in part due to easier demonstrability in the field of speech.
But in the main the higher frequency seems real.
Two reasons for the difference suggest themselves.
First, the number of possibilities is small in language, so far as structure is concerned.
The categories or concepts used for classifying and for the indication of relations are rigorously limited, and so are the means of expression.
If a language recognizes gender at all, it must have gender of one of these few types.
Similarly, for the kinds of number, and of case, and so on, that are denotable.
These larger categories, like gender and number and case, are not numerous.
There is position or relative order of words; compounding of them; accretions of elements to stems, namely prefixes, infixes, and suffixes; reduplication, the repetition of part or the whole of words; internal changes by shift of vowel or accent within words; and therewith the types of grammatical means are about exhausted.
The number of possible choices is so small that the law of accidental probability must cause many languages to hit upon the same devices.
A second reason for the greater frequency of parallelism in language is that structural traits appear to resist diffusion by imitation to a considerable degree.
Words are borrowed, sometimes freely, almost always to some degree, between contiguous languages; sounds considerably less; grammar least of all.
That is, linguistic content lends itself to diffusion readily, linguistic form with difficulty.
At bottom, the same holds of culture.
Specific elements of culture or groups of such elements diffuse very widely at times and may be said to be always tending to diffuse: [123] the wheel, for instance, smelting of metals, the crown as a symbol of royalty, the swastika, Buddhism.
The relations of elements among themselves, on the other hand, change by internal growth rather than external imitation.
Of this sort are the relations of the classes and members of societies, the fervor with which religion is felt, the esteem accorded to learning or wealth or tradition, the inclination toward this or that avenue of subsistence or economic development.
By conquest or peaceful pressure or penetration one people may shatter the political structure or social fabric of another, may undermine its conservatism, may swerve its economic habits.
But it is difficult to find cases of one people adopting such tendencies or schemes of cultural organization in mere imitation of the example of another, as it will adopt specific culture content—the wheel or crown or Buddhism, for instance—from outside, often readily.
The result is that culture relations or forms develop spontaneously or from within rather than as a result of direct taking over.
Also, the types of culture forms being limited in number, the same type is frequently evolved independently.
On the whole, comparative culture history more often deals with the specific contents of civilization, perhaps because events like the spread of an invention can be traced more definitely and exactly than the rather complex evolutions of say two feudal systems can be compared.
The result is that diffusions seem to outweigh parallels; as is set forth in several of the chapters that follow this one (§ 105, 111, 127).
In comparative linguistics, on the other hand, interest inclines to the side of form rather than content; hence the parallelisms or convergences are conspicuous.
If as much attention were generally given to words as to grammar, and if they could be traced in their prehistoric or unrecorded wanderings as reliably as many culture traits have been, it is probable that diffusion would loom larger as a principle shaping human speech.
There are words that have traveled almost as far as the objects they denote: tobacco and maize, for example.
It may affect whole languages.
Chinese a long time ago became an extremely analytical or “isolating” language.
That is, it lost all affixes and internal change.
Each word became an unalterable unit.
Sentences are built up by putting together these atoms.
Grammatical relations are expressed by the order of words: the subject precedes the predicate, for instance.
Other ideas that in many languages are treated formally, such as the plural or person, are expressed by content elements, that is, by other words: many for the plural, separate pronouns instead of affixes for person, and so on.
In the Indo-European family, as already mentioned, there has been a drift in the same direction during the last two thousand years.
This drift toward loss of formal mechanisms and toward the expression of grammar by material elements or their position only, has been evident in all branches of Indo-European, but has been most marked in English.
Compared with Latin, Sanskrit, or even primitive Germanic, this brief list represents a survival of possibly a tenth of the original synthetic inflectional apparatus.
That is, English has gone approximately nine tenths of the way towards attaining a grammar of the Chinese type.
A third language of independent origin, Polynesian, has traveled about the same distance in the same direction.
This then is a clear case of entire languages converging toward a similar type.
These would appear to be phenomena comparable to the growth of feudalism in China more than a thousand years earlier than in Europe, or the appearance of a great centrally governed empire in Peru similar to the ancient monarchies of the Orient.
The results of the change may rise to the recognition of the speakers; the act of change, and especially its causes, happen without awareness of those through whose minds and mouths they take place.
This holds of all departments of language: the phonetics, the structural form, largely even the meaning of words.
When a change has begun to creep in, it may be observed and be consciously resisted on the ground of being incorrect or vulgar or foreign.
But the underlying motives of the objectors are apparently as unknown to themselves as the impulses of the innovators.
An illiterate person will use such forms as child, child’s, children, children’s with the same “correctness” as a philologist, yet without being able to give an explanation of the grammatical ideas of singularity and plurality, absoluteness and possession, or to lay down rules as to the manner of expression of these ideas in English.
Grammar, in short, exists before grammarians, whose legitimate business is to uncover such rules as are already there.
It is an obviously hasty thought that because grammar happens to be taught in schools, speech can be grammatical only through such formal teaching.
The Sanskrit and Greek and Latin languages had their declensions and conjugations before Hindu and Greek and Roman scholars first analyzed and described them.
The languages of primitive peoples frequently abound with complicated forms and mechanisms which are used consistently and applied without suspicion of their existence.
It is much as the blood went round in our bodies quite healthily before Harvey’s discovery of its circulation.
The quality of unconsciousness seems not to be a trait specifically limited to linguistic causes and processes, but to hold in principle of culture generally.
It is only that the unconsciousness pervades speech farther.
A custom, a belief, an art, however deep down its springs, sooner or later rises into social consciousness.
It then seems deliberate, planned, willed, and is construed as arising from conscious motives and developing through conscious channels.
The whole class of changes in dress styles spring from unconscious causes.
Sleeves and skirts lengthen or shorten, trousers flare or tighten, and who can say why?
It is perhaps possible to trace a new fashion to Paris or London, and to a particular stratum of society there.
But what is it that in the winter of a particular year makes every woman—or man—of a certain social group wear, let us say, a high collared coat, or a shoe that does not come above the ankle, and the next year, or the tenth after, the reverse?
It is insufficient to say that this is imitation of a leader of fashion, of a professional creator of style.
Why does the group [127] follow him and think the innovation attractive and correct?
A year earlier the same innovation would have appeared senseless or extravagant to the same group.
A year after, it appeals as belated and ridiculous, and every one wonders that style was so tasteless so short a time ago.
It is difficult to say where the creative and imitative impulses of fashion come from; which, inasmuch as the impulses obviously reside somewhere in human minds, means that they spring from the unconscious portions of the mind.
Evidently then our justification of the dress styles we happen at any time to be following, our pronouncing them artistic or comfortable or sensible or what not, is secondary.
A low shoe may be more convenient than a high one, a brown one more practical than a black one.
That that is not the reason which determines the wearing of low brown shoes when they are customarily worn, is shown by the fact that at other times high black ones are put on by every one.
The reasons that can be and are given are so changeable and inconsistent that they evidently are not the real reasons, but the false secondary reasons that are best distinguished as rationalizations.
Excuses, we should call them with reference to individual conduct.
What applies to fashion holds also of manners, of morals, and of many religious observances.
Why we defer to women by rising in their presence and passing through a door behind them; why we refrain from eating fish with a knife or drinking soup out of a two handled cup, though drinking it from a single handled one is legitimate; why we do not marry close kin; why we remove our hats in the presence of the deity or his emblems but would feel it impious to pull off our shoes; all the thousands of prescriptions and taboos of which these are examples, possess an unconscious motivation.
Such cases are also illustrations of what is known as the relativity of morals.
The Jew sets his hat on to worship, the Oriental punctiliously slips out of his shoes.
Some people forbid the marriage of the most remote relatives, others encourage that of first cousins, still others permit the union of uncle and niece.
This in turn implies the unconscious causation of the mores, those products of the social environment in which one is reared and which one accepts as the ultimate authority of conduct.
As mores are those folkways or customs to which an emotional coloring has become attached, so that adherence to the custom or departure from it arouses a feeling respectively of approval or disapproval, it is evident that the origin of folkways generally is also unconscious, since there seems no reason why the emotions or ethical affect enveloping a customary action should incline more than the custom itself to spring up unconsciously.
It has become recognized that the average man’s convictions on social matters remote from him are not developed through examination of evidence and exercise of reason, but are taken over, by means of what is sometimes denominated the “herd instinct,” from the society or period in which he happens to have been born and nurtured.
His belief in democracy, in monotheism, in his right to charge profit and his freedom to change residence or occupation, have such origin.
Time alone would forbid: we should starve while making the necessary research.
And the difference between the average man’s attitude on such difficult points and the highly gifted individual’s attitude toward them or even toward simpler problems, would seem to be one of degree only.
Even on the material sides of culture, unconscious motivation plays a part.
In the propulsion of ships, oars and sails fluctuated as the prevalent means down almost to the period of steam vessels.
It would be impossible to say that one method was logically superior to the other, that it was recognized as such and then rationally adhered to.
The history of warfare shows similar changes between throwing and thrusting spears, stabbing and hewing swords, light and heavy armor.
The Greeks and Macedonians in the [129] days of their military superiority lengthened their lances and held them.
It no doubt seemed for a time that a definite superiority had been proved for this type of weapon over the shorter, hurled javelin.
But the Middle Ages again fell back on the thrusting lance.
The Macedonians reintroduced heavy armament, which held sway in Europe until after the prevalence of firearms.
But the last few years have brought the rebirth of the helmet.
These fashions in tools and practical appliances do not alter as fast as modern dress styles, and part of their causes can often be recognized.
Yet there seems no essential difference, as regards consciousness, between the fluctuation of fashions in weapons—or navigation or cooking or travel or house building—and, let us say, the fluctuation of mode between soft and stiff hats or high and low shoes.
But these initiating factors were not deliberate as regards the effects that came in their train; and in their turn they were the effects of more remote causes.
The whole chain of development in such cases is devious, unforeseen, mainly unforeseeable.
At most there is recognition of what is happening; in general the recognition seems to become full only after the change in tool or weapon or industrial process has become completed and is perhaps already being undermined once more.
Of course purely stylistic alterations—and linguistic innovations—also possess their causes.
The common causal element in all these changes may be called a shift in social values.
Perhaps practical chemical experience has grown, and gunpowder explodes more satisfactorily; or an economic readjustment has made it possible to equip more soldiers with guns.
Increasing wealth or schooling or city residence makes indiscriminate familiarity of manners seem less desirable than at an earlier period: brusque thou begins to yield to indirect plural you.
There is the same sort of causality in one of these phenomena as in another.
But it does not seem that there is an essential difference of process.
But in all cases change or innovation is due to a shift of values that are broader than the single phenomenon in question, and that are held to impulsively instead of reasonably.
They have sprung not from weighed or reasoned choices but from impulsive desires and emotionally colored habits.
The foregoing discussion may be summarized as follows.
Linguistic phenomena and processes are on the whole more deeply unconscious than cultural ones, without however differing in principle.
In both language and culture, content is more readily imparted and assimilated than form and enters farther into consciousness.
Organization or structure in both cases takes place according to unconscious patterns, such as grammatical categories, social standards, political or economic points of view, religious or intellectual assumptions.
These patterns attain recognition only in a late stage of sophistication, and even then continue to alter and to be influential without conscious control.
The number of such linguistic and social patterns being limited, they tend to be approximately repeated [131] without historic connection.
Partially similar combinations of such patterns sometimes recur, producing languages or cultures of similar type.
But established patterns, and still more their combinations, replace each other with difficulty.
Their spread therefore takes place through the integral substitution of one language or culture for another, rather than by piecemeal absorption.
This is in contrast to the specific elements of which language and culture consist—individual words, mechanical devices, institutional symbols, particular religious ideas or actions, and the like.
These elements absorb and diffuse readily.
They are therefore imitated more often than they are reinvented.
But linguistic and cultural patterns or structures growing up spontaneously may possess more general resemblance than historic connection.
The natural inclination of men being to regard their standards of taste, behavior, and social arrangement as wholly reasonable, perfect, and fixed, there follows a first inclination to regard these standards as valueless as soon as their emotionality and variability have been recognized.
But such a tendency is only a negative reaction against the previous illusion when this has disappointed by crumbling.
The reaction is therefore in a sense a further result of the illusion.
Once the fundamental and automatic assumption of fixity and inherent value of social patterns has been given up, and it is recognized that the motive power of behavior in man as in the other animals is affective and unconscious, there is nothing in institutions and codes to quarrel with.
They are neither despicable nor glorious; no more deserving in virtue of their existence to be uprooted and demolished than to be defended as absolute and eternal.
That this is a sane attitude is more easily shown in the field of language than of culture, because, language being primarily a mechanism or means, whereas in culture ends or purposes tend more to obtrude, it is easier to view linguistic phenomena dispassionately.
Grammars and dictionaries, for instance, are evidently the result of self-consciousness arising about speech which has previously been mainly unconscious.
They may be roughly compared to social formulations like law codes or written constitutions or philosophic systems or religious dogmas, which are also representations of usages or beliefs already in existence.
As a matter of actuality, the condemned form may or may not succeed in becoming established.
That a form departs from the canon of to-day of course no more proves that it will be accepted in future than that it will not.
What is certain is that if it wins sufficient usage, it will also win sanction, and will become part of the standard of its time.
Linguistic instances like these differ little if at all in principle, in their involved psychology, from the finding of the Supreme Court that a certain legislative enactment is unconstitutional and therefore void; or from the decision of a denomination that dancing or playing golf on Sunday is wicked; or from the widespread sentiment that breaking an unpopular law like that on liquor prohibition is morally justifiable.
The chief point of divergence would seem to be that a court is a constituted body endowed with an authority which is not paralleled on the linguistic side, at any rate in Anglo-Saxon countries; although the Latin nations possess Academies whose dicta on correctness of speech enjoy [133] a moral authority approximating the verdicts of a high court.
It is also of interest to remember that the power of nullifying legislation was not specifically granted the Supreme Court by the Constitution of the United States, but that the practice grew up gradually, quite like a speech innovation which becomes established.
Certain elements in the American population look upon this power as undesirable and therefore take satisfaction in pointing out its unsanctioned origin.
The majority on the other hand feel that the situation on the whole works out well, and that a Supreme Court with its present powers is better than the risk of a Court without power.
Still, it remains curiously illogical that the preservation of the Constitution should take place partly through the extra-constitutional functioning of a constitutional body.
In principle such a case is similar to that of grammarians who at the same time lay down a rule and exceptions to the rule, because the contradictory usages happen to be actually established.
Codes, dogmas, and grammars are thus normally reflections rather than causes.
Such influence as they have is mainly in outward crystallization.
They produce a superficial appearance of permanence.
In the field of speech, it is easy to recognize that it is not grammarians that make languages, but languages that make grammarians.
The analogous process evidently holds for culture.
Lawgivers, statesmen, religious leaders, discoverers, inventors, therefore only seem to shape civilization.
The deep-seated, blind, and intricate forces that shape culture, also mold the so-called creative leaders of society as essentially as they mold the mass of humanity.
Progress, so far as it can objectively be considered to be such, is something that makes itself.
We do not make it.
Our customary conviction to the contrary is probably the result of an unconscious desire not to realize our individual impotence as regards the culture we live in.
Social influence of a sort we do have as individuals.
But it is a personal influence on the fortune and careers of other individual members of society, and is concerned largely with aims of personal security, relative dominance, or affection among ourselves.
This obviously is a different thing from the exertion of influence on the form or content of civilization as such.
The opinion often held that unwritten languages necessarily alter faster than written ones, or that those of savages are less stable than the tongues of civilized men, is mainly a naïve reflection of our sense of superiority.
It contravenes the principles just referred to and is not supported by evidence.
Occasional stories that a primitive tribe after a generation or two was found speaking an almost made-over language are unconscious fabrications due to preconception and supported by hasty acquaintance, faulty records, misunderstanding, or perhaps change of inhabitants.
Nahuatl, the language of the Aztecs, has probably changed less in four hundred years than Spanish; Quechua, that of the Incas, no more.
English has apparently altered more than any of the three in the same period.
Dozens of native tongues, some of them from wholly rude peoples, were written down in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries by Spanish and other priests, and in most instances the grammars and dictionaries prove to be usable to-day.
Cultural alteration would appear to work toward speech change chiefly in certain ways.
New things need new names; new acts mean new thoughts and new ideas require new words.
These may be imported; or they may be made out of elements already in the language; or old words may undergo a shift of meaning.
In any event, the change is mainly on the side of vocabulary.
The sounds of a language are generally much less affected; its plan of structure least of all.
The introduction of a new religion or development of a new form of government among a people need not be accompanied by changes in the grammar of their speech, and usually are not, as abundant historical examples prove.
While the causes of grammatical innovation are far from clear, contact with alien tongues is certainly a factor in some degree.
An isolated off-shoot of a linguistic group is generally more specialized, and therefore presumably more altered, than the main body of dialects of the family.
The reason is that the latter, maintaining abundant reciprocal [135] contact, tend to steady one another, or if they swerve, to do so in the same direction.
The speakers of the branch that is geographically detached, however, come to know quite different grammars so far as they learn languages other than their native one, and such knowledge seems to act as an unconscious stimulus toward the growth of new forms and uses.
It is not that grammatical concepts are often imitated outright or grammatical elements borrowed.
Acquaintance with a language of different type seems rather to act as a ferment which sets new processes going.
It is in the nature of the case that direct specific evidence of changes of this character is hard to secure.
But comparison of related languages or dialects with reference to their location frequently shows that the dialects which are geographically situated among strange languages are the most differentiated.
But it is also likely that languages differ among each other in their susceptibility to change, and that the same language differs in successive periods of its history.
It is rather to be anticipated that a language may be in a phase now of rapid and then of retarded metabolism, so to speak; that at one stage its tendency may be toward breaking down and absorption, at another toward a more rigid setting of its forms.
Similarly, there is reason to believe that languages of certain types of structure are inherently more plastic than others.
At any rate, actual differences in rate of change are known.
There are also notable differences in the readiness to borrow words ready-made.
English is distinctly more hospitable in this regard than German, which tends rather to express a new concept by a new formation of old elements.
In this matter the type of language is probably of some influence, yet on the whole cultural factors perhaps predominate.
The direction and degree of cultural absorption seem to determine the absorption of words to a considerable measure.
Here writing is certainly potent.
The Latin and French element in English, the Sanskrit and Arabic element in the Malaysian languages, were brought in to a large extent by writing, and would evidently have remained much smaller if the historic contacts had been wholly oral.
This is perhaps the most important way in which writing exerts influence on the development of spoken language; an influence which in other respects is usually overestimated.
Fossils of the body and of the mind.—66.
Stone and metals.—67.
The Old and the New Stone Ages.—68.
Other materials: bone and horn.—74.
Harpoons and weapons.—76.
The evidence is far from complete, but there is enough to prove a development much as might be expected under the hypothesis of evolution.
To some extent fossils also afford an insight into the development of the human mind.
The capacity of a skull gives the size of the brain.
The interior surface of the skull corresponds to the outer surface of the brain.
In this way some slight knowledge has been gained of the development in ancient types of man of the convolutions and centers of the brain surface with which mental activity is associated.
Even limb bones yield indirect indications.
A straight thigh means an erect posture of the body, with the arms no longer used for locomotion.
Released from this service, they are freed for other purposes, such as grasping, handling, and various forms of what we call work.
But a hand adapted for work would be useless without an intelligence to direct its operations.
The suggestions are sketchy and incomplete, but they are worth something.
A second line of evidence is fuller.
When a human or pre-human hand has made any article, one can judge from that article what its purpose is likely to have been, how it was used, how much intelligence that use involved, what degree of skill was necessary to [138] manufacture the article.
All such artifacts—tools, weapons, or anything constructed—are a reflection of the degree of “culture” or civilization, elementary or advanced, possessed by the beings who made them.
On the whole the evidence to be got from artifacts as to the degree of advancement of their makers or users is greater than the information derivable from the structure of skeletons.
A large brain does not always imply high intelligence.
Even a much convoluted brain surface may accompany a mediocre mind.
In other words, the correlation between body and mind has not been worked out with accuracy.
On the other hand an advanced type of tool necessarily implies more skill in its use, and therefore a decided development of the use of intelligence.
Similarly, if one finds nothing but simple tools occurring among any past or present people, we may be sure that their civilization and the training of their minds have remained backward.
It is true that one cannot always infer from a particular manufactured object the mentality of the particular person who owned and used it.
An imbecile may come into possession of a good knife and even possess some ability in using it.
But he can acquire the knife only if there are other individuals in his community or time who know how to smelt iron and forge steel.
In this way a solitary implement, if its discovery is thoroughly authenticated, may suffice to establish a relatively high or low degree of civilization for a prehistoric period or a vanished race.
An implement manufactured by human hands of the past is of course different from an actual fossil of a former human being, and it is always necessary to distinguish between the two.
Nevertheless, in a metaphorical sense, the implements of the past may well be spoken of as the fossils of civilization.
There is even a further parallel.
Just as the geologist knows that one fossil is older or younger than another from its position in the earth’s crust or the stratum in which it was laid down, so the student of the beginnings of human civilization knows that the deposit at the bottom of a cave must be more ancient than the refuse at the top.
He calls in the geologist to tell him the age of a glacial deposit or of a river terrace, and thus he may learn that, of two types of implements found at different places or levels, one is so many thousands of years or geological periods older than the other.
In the long run, too, the older implements prove to be the simpler.
This evolution of human mental operations as it is reflected in the artifacts preserved from the lowest and earliest strata of civilization is the subject of the present chapter.
There is another way in which the evidence on the two lines of evolution is similar: its incompleteness.
Humanity has always been so much less populous than the remainder of the animal kingdom, especially in its earlier stages, that the number of individuals whose bones have been preserved as fossils is infinitely smaller.
For still earlier races or species of man the actual data are even scantier.
The remains which illustrate the development of the human mind are not so scarce.
A [140] single man might easily manufacture hundreds or even thousands of implements in the course of a lifetime.
When these are of stone they are practically imperishable; whereas it is only the exceptional skeleton, protected by favorable circumstances, of which the bones will endure for thousands of years.
For every ancient true fossil trace of man that has been found, we have therefore thousands of the works of his hands.
Objects of stone, even those of horn and of metal, last; clothing, fabrics, skins, basketry, and wooden articles ordinarily decay so rapidly as to have no chance of being preserved for tens of thousands of years.
Tools of the most ancient times have often been found in abundance; objects manufactured with tools from softer and less enduring materials are scarce even from moderately old periods.
Now and then a piece of an earthenware pot may show the imprint of a textile.
Textiles and foodstuffs are occasionally preserved by charring in fire or by penetration of metallic salts.
Charcoal or ashes found in pockets or beds indicate that fire was maintained in one spot for considerable periods, and must therefore have been controlled and used, possibly even produced, by human agency.
But for every point established in this way there are dozens about which knowledge remains blank.
Understanding of the social and religious life of the earliest men is naturally filled with the greatest gaps, and the farther back one goes in time, the greater is the enveloping darkness.
One can guess on these matters.
But it is clearly wisest not to try to stretch too far the conclusions which can be drawn.
Imagination has its value in science as in art and [141] other aspects of life, yet when it becomes disproportionate to the facts, it is a danger instead of an aid.
Still, now and then something has been preserved from which one may draw inferences with a reasonable prospect of certainty even concerning the non-material side of life.
If human bones are discovered charred and split open, there is good reason for believing these bones to be the remains of a cannibal feast.
When prehistoric skeletons are found in the position in which death might have taken place, the presumption is that the people of that time abandoned their dead as animals would.
If on the other hand a skeleton lies intact with its arms carefully folded, there is little room for doubt that the men of the time had progressed to the point where the survivors put away their dead; in other words, that human burial had been instituted, and that accordingly at least some rude form of society was in existence.
When, perhaps from a still later period, a skeleton is found with red paint adhering to the bones, although these lie in their natural places, the only conclusion to be drawn is that the dead body was coated with pigment before being interred and that as the soft tissues wasted away the red ocher came to adhere to the bones.
In this case the painting was evidently part of a rite performed over the dead.
In the latter of these, in which we are still living, metals were used; in the earlier, metals were unknown and tools made of stone.
Metals were first used in Asia and Egypt about 4,000 B.C.
The most conservative authorities, however, would allow forty or fifty thousand years for the Stone Age; while others make it cover a quarter million.
The assumption, which is here followed, of the intermediate figure of a hundred thousand years gives the Stone Age a duration twenty times as long as the Age of Metals.
When one remembers that hand in hand with metals came the art of writing and an infinite variety of inventions, it is [142] clear that larger additions have been made to human civilization in the comparatively brief period of metals than in the tremendously longer time that preceded it.
Progress in the Stone Age was not only slow, but the farther back one peers into this age, the more lagging does the evolution of human culture seem to have been.
One can definitely recognize a tendency toward the acceleration of evolution: the farther advancement has got the faster it moves.
The Age of Metals is subdivided into the Iron Age, which begins some three thousand years ago, say about 1,500-1,000 B.C.
In the Bronze Age one must distinguish first a period in which native copper was employed in some parts of the world; after which comes an era in which it had been learned that copper melted with a proportion of about one-tenth tin, thus producing bronze, was a superior material.
Within the past five thousand years or so, accordingly, there are recognized successively the ages of copper, of bronze, and of iron.
Broadly speaking, these five thousand years are also the historic period.
Not that there exist historic records going back so far as this for every people.
But the earliest preserved documents that the historian uses, the written monuments of Egypt and Babylonia, are about five thousand years old.
The Age of Metals thus corresponds approximately with the period of History; the Stone Age, with Prehistory.
This distinction is now known to be inaccurate.
It is true that the Old Stone Age did not yet employ frictional processes in shaping stone and confined itself to the older methods of fracturing by blows or pressure.
But the converse is not true, that the Neolithic worked stone only by grinding, nor even that grinding was its characteristic process.
Stone grinding was invented only toward the middle of the New Stone Age—in what is perhaps best designated the “Full Neolithic.” The Early Neolithic, which lasted half the total Neolithic duration, continued to work stone by fracture.
What marked the beginning of the Neolithic was certain inventions having nothing to do with stone: notably pottery and the bow.
With these available, human life took on a new color, and it was not until some thousands of years later that shaping of stone by grinding came into use.
In other words, the prehistorians’ idea as to what constitutes the Neolithic have changed, and they no longer put stone processes in the first place in characterizing the period.
They would do well, therefore, to change its name also to one having reference to its more specific traits.
Such a change of designation will perhaps become established in time.
Another point in connection with the two processes of working stone has reference to the mental activities involved by them.
A civilized person entirely [144] inexperienced in the working of stone would be likely to produce a fairly satisfactory implement by the rubbing technique.
If however he attempted to manufacture a chipped stone tool, even of simple type, he would probably fail repeatedly before learning to control the method well enough to turn out an implement without first ruining a dozen.
In short, the manual dexterity required to produce the best forms of chipped stone tools is greater than that needed for ground ones.
Inasmuch as the chipping process is, however, the earlier, we are confronted here with a paradox.
Yet the paradox is only on the surface.
It is true that so far as skill alone is concerned a good chipped tool is more difficult to make than a ground one.
But it can be made in a shorter time.
A rough stone tool can be manufactured in a few minutes.
A good artifact may be preceded by a number of unsuccessful attempts or “rejects,” and yet be produced in an hour or less.
The processes of pecking, grinding, and polishing, on the other hand, are laborious.
They are slow even when pursued with steel tools, and when the shaping material is no better than another stone or sand, as was of course always the case in prehistoric times, the duration of the labor must have been discouraging.
Weeks or at least days would be required to manufacture a single implement.
If the work was done at odd times, one may imagine that many a stone ax was months in being produced.
Patience and forethought of a rather high order are thus involved in the making of implements of the Neolithic type.
Dexterity is replaced by higher qualities of what might be called the moral order.
By comparison, the earliest men lacked these traits.
They would not sit down to-day to commence something that would not be available for use until a month later.
To think ahead, to sacrifice present convenience to future advantage, must have been foreign to their way of life.
The uses to which their implements could be put were also correspondingly restricted.
A first-class ax, a real chisel, or a mortar in which grinding can be done, can scarcely be made by chipping alone.
It was not until men had learned to [145] restrain their childish impulse to work only for the immediate purpose, and had acquired an increased self-control and discipline, that the grinding of stone came into use.
One principle must be clearly adhered to in the dating or proper arrangement of the periods of prehistoric time: the principle that it is always the highest types of implements which determine the age of a deposit.
Lower forms often persist from the earlier periods into the later, alongside the newly invented higher types.
The men of the Full Neolithic time did not wholly give up making chipped implements because they also ground stone.
In fact, stone masonry has had its principal development since metals have been in use.
This caution seems elementary enough.
But it has sometimes been overlooked by scholars in the pursuit of a theory that made them try to stamp some prehistoric or savage race as particularly primitive.
It is true enough that many American Indian tribes chipped arrow-points and knives more frequently than they would grind out axes.
Yet without exception they also knew the process of grinding stone and applied it to some purpose.
For this reason the endeavors that have been made by certain authors, who compare particular modern savage peoples to the races of prehistoric [146] Europe on the basis of a similarity of their chipped implements, are misleading.
They therefore belong clearly to a later stage of civilization.
The stage of development of the art of chipping in stone may be the same; the other arts and customs of modern Australian black-fellows and of Eskimos, and their bodily types, differ from those of the prehistoric Europeans.
These pieces occurred in extremely ancient deposits.
Still other students remain in doubt; and their attitude is perhaps still the safest to share.
This would make them tools only in the sense in which the limb of a tree is a tool when a man in distress seizes it to defend himself.
This would be much in line with our picking up a cobblestone in default of an ax or hammer, and continuing to maul away with it until the rough handling broke off several pieces and happened accidentally to produce an edge.
Even so some doubts remain.
These two species being more similar to modern man than to the apes or other animals, we must imagine them to have been gifted with at least some [148] human intelligence.
It would therefore have been entirely possible for them to supplement the tools with which nature endowed them—their hands and teeth—with flints which they picked up and manipulated in one useful way or another without particularly troubling to shape the stones.
Yet these periods are divisions of the Tertiary, or Age of Mammals—the age before man had been evolved!
In short, the argument cuts too far.
The general relation of this Old Stone Age in geological time may be defined as follows.
The Quaternary, whose duration may be estimated to have been about a million years, is subdivided into the Pleistocene and the Recent.
Of the two, the Recent is very much shorter than the Pleistocene.
Broadly speaking, from ninety-eight to ninety-nine per cent of the total duration of the Quaternary was occupied by the Pleistocene.
The Old Stone Age therefore falls in the Pleistocene.
The proportion of the Pleistocene which is covered by the Old Stone Age is variously estimated.
The geologist, because he deals with such enormous durations, has to operate on a broad-gauge scale, and usually disdains to commit himself to close estimates of years.
To measure the lapse of time within the Pleistocene, he has found it most useful to avail himself of the evidences left by the great glaciers which repeatedly covered parts of several continents during the Pleistocene, and he has therefore given this period its popular name of “glacial epoch.” These glaciations must be imagined as having occurred on a much larger scale than one might at first infer from the shrunken remnants of the glaciers that persist in the Alps and other mountains.
The Pleistocene glaciers were vast sheets, hundreds of feet in thickness, sliding uniformly over valleys, hills, and mountains except for an occasional high peak.
Modern Greenland, which except at the edges is [150] buried under a solid ice cap, evidently presents a pretty fair picture of what the northern parts of Europe and North America repeatedly looked like during the Pleistocene.
Four such glaciations, or periods of maximum extent of the continental ice, have been distinguished, and more or less correlated, in Europe and North America.
Between these four successive advances of the ice sheets there fell more temperate eras, some of them rather arid, and others moist and almost tropical even in the latitude of Europe.
These mild intervals are known as the interglacial periods.
That Europe was free from ice during these interglacial periods is shown not only by facts of a purely geological nature but by the occurrence in these periods of fossils of a semi-tropical fauna which included elephants, rhinoceroses, lions, and the like.
Coming now to a consideration of the relation of man to these ice eras, we find that the first, second, and probably the third glaciations passed without leaving sure evidence of manufactured stone implements.
The animals whose fossils are found in the same deposits with human skeletons and artifacts have been of the greatest assistance in the determination of the periods of such remains.
The fossils are partly of extinct species until toward the very end of the Pleistocene, when exclusively living types of animals begin wholly to supersede the [151] earlier ones.
If artifacts are found in association with fossil remains of an extinct animal such as the mammoth or the woolly rhinoceros, they are obviously older than artifacts that are accompanied only by the bones of the reindeer, the dog, or other living species.
For this reason, although the history of mammalian life in the past is a science in itself, it also has close relations with human prehistory.
Some of the most characteristic animals of the later Pleistocene, and the successive stages of human cultural development with which they were associated, are listed on the following page.
A “station” then is simply a spot at which prehistoric remains of human occupation are found.
One kind is in the open, mostly in the gravels laid down by streams.
These are therefore known as “River Drift” or simply “Drift” stations.
The other kind is found in caves or under sheltering rocks.
Brown bear, Ursus arctos.
Horses, probably several varieties.
Mastodon, tapir, anthropoids, and all primates but man and the macaque monkey already extinct in Western Europe.
He chose the stations as typical and included others as belonging to the same eras.
Two other periods had to be admitted.
This makes six periods within the [154] Old Stone Age; and these have been adopted by all students of the prehistory of man in Europe.
These six divisions of the Old Stone Age are so essential to an understanding of the prehistory of man, that the serious student finds it necessary to know their names and sequence automatically.
With this doubt about the fossil itself, it seems most reasonable not to press too strongly its identification as the type of man that lived in Europe at the commencement of the Old Stone Age.
The brain was about as large as that of modern man, but the retreating aspect of the forehead was accentuated by heavy brow ridges.
The first precursors of Homo sapiens, or modern man, have come on the scene.
5 and 17.
Earliest Prehistory of Europe.
This table is an elaboration of the upper portion of Figure 5.
Equal lapses of time are indicated by equal vertical distances.
The general acceleration of development is evident.
Stations of such richness are not particularly rare, and the stations are numerous.
Clear stratigraphic relations have also been observed again and again.
But a closer examination reveals [158] differences in their shapes and fundamental differences in the method of their manufacture.
The technique employed in the fashioning of artifacts is more significant than their appearance, and it is by directing attention to the process that one can classify these “fossils of civilization” with accuracy.
It is often somewhat pointed, although rarely very sharp.
It would have made an effective rude weapon.
When firmly grasped and well directed, it could easily crush a skull.
It might serve to split wood, hack limbs from trees, butcher large game, and perhaps roughly dress hides.
Most of the detached flakes were large, as shown by the surfaces from which they came off; perhaps most of the chips averaged a square inch.
Anything like fine work or evenness of outline was therefore out of question.
One can imagine that many tools were spoiled, or broken in two, by the knocks to which they were subjected in their manufacture.
The flakes struck off fell to the ground and were discarded.
Not more than a few dozen strokes of the hammer stone would be required to produce it.
But some of these identifications of particular types are uncertain, and at best, the differences between the types are slight.
Rude scrapers, knives, borers, can be distinguished.
Tools become smaller, less regular in outline, and are worked on one side only.
In these earlier periods flakes were struck off until the kernel of stone that remained was of the shape desired for the tool.
Secondly, when the flake dulled by use, its edge was renewed by fine chipping.
The pieces detached in this secondary chipping are so small that it would have been difficult to knock them off and maintain any regularity of edge, for to detach a chip by a blow means violent contact.
If the blow is a bit feeble, the chip that comes off is too small.
If the artifact is struck too hard, too large a chip flies off and the implement is ruined.
Fine [161] chips are better worked off by pressure than by impact.
A point is laid upon the surface near the edge.
When this point is pressed down at the proper angle and with proper firmness, a scale flies off.
With some practice the scales can be detached almost equal in size.
The point may be of softer material than the stone.
It is in the nature of flint, and of all stones that approach glass in their structure, that they break easily under pressure in definite planes or surfaces.
The process of detaching the scales or secondary flakes by pressure is known as “retouching.” Retouching allows finer control than strokes delivered with a stone.
First, the flake is used.
Secondly, two processes instead of one are followed; the knocking off of the flake followed by its retouching.
The process of retouching, without being fundamentally altered, [162] was evidently much better controlled than before.
They made points with a single shoulder at the butt, as if for mounting, and had crude forms which represented the types of earlier periods.
This partial conservatism is in accord with the general observation already stated, that lower types tend to persist even after higher ones have been invented; and that because a period is determined by its best products it by no means follows that simpler ones are lacking.
One reason for this decline was that another technique was coming to prevail.
It was a process which, on account of its simplicity, once it was mastered, was tending to make the art of retouching unnecessary.
This new method was the trick of detaching, from a suitable block of flint, long straight-edged flakes, by a single blow, somewhat on the principle by which a cake of ice can be split evenly by a well guided stroke of the pick.
To detach such a flake, flint of rather even grain is necessary, and the blow that does [163] the work must be delivered on a precise spot, at a precise angle, and within rather narrow limits of force.
This means that the hammer or striking tool cannot well come in direct contact with the flint.
A single stroke slices off the desired flake.
The sharp edges left on the block where the flake has flown off can be used to start adjacent flakes, and thus all the way round the block, the workman progressing farther and farther in, until nearly the whole of his core has been split off into strips.
Flakes struck from a core and reassembled.
It is only a few years ago that flints were being struck off by English workmen for use on flintlock muskets exported to Africa.
The modern Englishman worked with a steel hammer instead of a bone rod and cobblestone, but his technique was the same.
It is not adapted for making heavy instruments, but it yields an admirable knife.
The process is also expeditious.
There is every reason to believe that as time goes on we shall learn more and more about them, and thus be able to reconstruct a reasonably complete and vivid picture of their behavior.
These materials came more and more into favor as time went on.
Hammers, chisels or wedges, and perforators were added to the list of bone tools.
Whistles and perhaps flutes were blown.
Reindeer antler was employed for carved and perforated lengths of horn, “rods of command” or magic, they are usually called; as well as for harpoons and throwers, to be discussed below.
This may well have been a sort of preparation for the grinding and polishing of stone which is the distinctive technique of the New Stone Age.
Bone cannot well be chipped or retouched.
It must be cut, ground, or rubbed into shape.
Several inventions which they had made [166] compel us to attribute to them enough intelligence to lead them to cover themselves with skins when they felt cold.
But they may have been too improvident, or habituated to discomfort, to trouble even to dress hides.
At any rate there is no positive indication that they regularly clothed themselves.
Ornament may have been earlier than clothing.
About their necks and waists they hung rows of perforated shells and teeth.
More of these have been found on the skeletons of males than of females.
The shafts have of course long since decayed, but many of the reindeer antler heads have remained intact.
The harpoon differs from the simple spear or javelin in having its head detachable from the shaft.
The two are fitted together by a socket.
A line is attached to the head and tied to the shaft or held in the hand of the hunter.
The animal is thus kept from escaping.
The harpoon is really a rather complicated instrument: it consists of at least three pieces—head, shaft, and line.
The hand only steers the shaft at the beginning of its flight: the propulsion comes from the thrower.
The instrument may therefore be described as a device for artificially lengthening the human arm and thus imparting greater velocity and length of flight to the weapon.
There is without doubt considerable ingenuity involved in this apparatus, both in its invention and in its successful use.
One instrument that we are wont to associate with the beginnings of civilization, because of its almost universal employment by savages of to-day, is the bow and arrow.
There is no convincing evidence to show that this was so, and a good deal of negative evidence to establish that they were unacquainted with the weapon.
The prevailing opinion is that the bow was not invented until the Neolithic.
This would make the weapon only about ten thousand years old—a hoary antiquity, indeed, but recent as compared with the knife, the spear, and even the harpoon.
The reason for this lateness in the invention of the bow and arrow is probably to be sought in the delicacy of the instrument.
It is not essentially more complex than the harpoon, certainly not more complex than the harpoon impelled by the spear thrower.
But it involves much finer adjustments.
A poorly made harpoon is of course inferior to a well-made one, but may be measurably effective.
It may retrieve game half the time.
But a bow which falls below a [168] certain standard will not shoot at all, or will shoot so feebly as to have a zero efficiency.
In fact, one of the things that students of the beginnings of culture have long been puzzled about is how the bow and arrow could have been invented.
Most other inventions can be traced through a series of steps, each of which, although incomplete, achieved a certain utility of its own.
But, other than toys or musical instruments, no implement has yet been found, or even satisfactorily imagined, which was not yet a bow, which would still serve a purpose, and which, by addition or improvement, could give rise to the bow.
Even “half men” of the “missing link” type, it may be believed, would in case of need pick up a stick or wrench a limb from a tree to serve them as a club.
But we do not know when human beings first began to fashion wood into definite implements by working it with their stone tools.
Wood is too perishable a substance to have stood any chance of being preserved from so long distant a past.
The harpoon and dart heads, for instance, must have had wooden shafts.
A true ax is not known from the Old Stone Age and seems to have been invented in the Neolithic.
The distinctive factor of the instrument, upon which its utility largely depends, is the straightness and smoothness of the edge; and such an edge is best attained by the grinding process.
They split it, rubbed it, and burned it into shape, rather than trying to chop it.
It is also one of the most ancient.
Its occurrence is easily traced, at any rate in deposits that have not been disturbed by nature, through the presence of charred bones, lumps of charcoal, and layers of ash.
Charcoal crumbles easily, but its fragments are practically imperishable.
Its presence in considerable quantities in any station, particularly if the coal is accumulated in pockets, is therefore sure proof that the people who occupied the site burned fires for warmth, or cooking, or both purposes.
They could easily have acquired it in the first place from trees struck by lightning or from other occasional natural agencies.
Then, recognizing its value, they may well have nursed it along, lighting one hearth from another.
But in the nature of things it would be difficult to find evidence bearing on this point from more than ten thousand years ago.
It can be assumed that man is likely to have lived first for a long period in a condition in which he knew and used and preserved fire, yet was not able to produce it.
It is clear, moreover, that in this period the general development of the mechanical arts was sufficiently advanced to allow of the construction of some sort of rude edifices.
On account of the perishable nature of the materials involved, it happens that there is no proof either for or against such a supposition.
In case of a fire, the carbonized stumps might prove to have been preserved in place; or the butts of the posts might have gradually rotted away and the space once occupied by them have become filled with an earthy material of different color and consistency from the surrounding soil.
In this lucky event, even the size and shape of the house might be reconstructed from the relative positions of the post holes.
From evidence of just this sort some interesting ideas have actually been obtained as to the houses and village plan of Neolithic European peoples.
But the method would be equally applicable if favorable conditions offered; and it is in some such way that we may hope in the future to learn a little about the earliest habitations that mankind constructed.
In any event the example serves to illustrate the indirect and delicate means of which the student of prehistory must consistently avail himself in his reconstructions of the past; and gives reason to believe that all that has been learned about early man in the last fifty years is very little in comparison with what the ensuing generation and century will bring to light.
Analogy with modern uncivilized tribes would make us think that this is quite likely.
But the stone tools have remained lying in the earth, while the religious customs went out of use thousands of years ago and the beliefs were forgotten.
When existing nations do this, it is invariably in connection with a belief in the continued existence of the soul after death.
We may reasonably conclude therefore that even in this long distant period human beings had arrived at a crude recognition of the difference between flesh and spirit; in short, religion had come into being.
They also sometimes painted the bodies, and buried flint implements and food in the graves.
That is, funerary practices were becoming established.
We may assume that hand in hand with this development of observances there went a growth of ritual and belief.
The perfection to which they carried this art is simply astounding in view of the comparative meagerness of [172] their civilization otherwise.
It is also remarkable how full-fledged this achievement sprang into existence.
This art is not a child-like, struggling attempt to represent objects in the rough, nor is it a mere decorative playing with geometric figures.
These first human artists set boldly to work to depict; and while their technique was simple, it was carried to a remarkably high degree of perfection.
A few bold strokes gave the outlines of an animal, but they gave it with such fidelity that the species can often be recognized at a glance.
The lines are crude and wavering.
Any head, body, and tail with four legs stands for almost any animal.
It is a reasonable representation of an abstraction that they accomplish, not the delineation of what is characteristic in the visible form.
Both observer and painter, among most living savages, are supposed to know beforehand that the drawing represents a fox and not a bear.
At most, some symbols are added, such as a bushy tail for a fox or a fin for a whale.
It is only in rare cases that any but advanced nations break away from these primitive tendencies and learn to draw things as they really appear.
The ancient Egyptians [173] developed such a faculty, and among savages the Bushmen are remarkably gifted, but, on the whole, successful realistic art is an accomplishment of high civilization.
In sculpture their first efforts were directed upon figurines.
These mostly represent the human female.
The head, hands, and feet are either absent or much abbreviated.
It is likely that these statuettes served some religious cult.
At any rate, the carvings in three dimensions often represent the human figure, whereas two-dimensional drawings, etchings, and paintings mostly represent animals and are much more successful than the human outlines.
Success in seizing the salient outline was the earliest characteristic of the paintings and [174] drawings.
There are occasional pictures of animals from before or behind, or of a reindeer with its head turned backward.
Horse carved in mammoth ivory.
From Lourdes, France.
There are also some devices which look like the beginnings of attempts at composition.
They were trying, with some measure of success, to represent the animals as they moved in life and perhaps to combine several of them into one coherent picture or to suggest a setting.
By this time they had also acquired considerable ability in handling colors.
They engraved or painted outlines and sometimes accentuated these by filling them in with pigment.
Engraving of a charging mammoth.
On a fragment of ivory tusk found at La Madeleine, France.
While the artist’s strokes were crude, he was able to depict the animal’s action with remarkable vigor.
Note the roll of the eye, the flapping ears, the raised tail expressive of anger.
Progress is immensely slow at the outset, but gradually speeds up.
This diagram does not pretend to be complete; it does try to include some of the most important and representative inventions, arts, and accomplishments of the Old Stone Age.
The impressionistic manner enabled the artist to suggest rather effectively a large herd while drawing out only four animals.
These figures are not to be taken too literally.
The tabulation could easily have been compiled on a more elaborate basis.
But even then the relative proportion of culture features in each period would remain approximately as here given.
And as regards the general fact of accumulation of civilization, and its range and nature, the diagram may be accepted as substantially representative of what happened.
Note the naturalistic movement suggested by the legs and position of the head.
In short, many fundamental elements of civilization were established.
It is true that the sum total of knowledge and accomplishments was still pitifully small.
The most advanced of the Old Stone Age men perhaps knew and could do about one thing for every hundred that we know and can do.
A whole array of fundamental inventions—the bow and arrow, pottery, domestication of animals and plants—had not yet been attempted, and they do not appear on the scene until the Neolithic.
Most of the framework was there, even though but a small fraction of its content had yet been entered.
At first sight it may seem that this element of race might be quite influential.
Such racial mental traits, again, might conceivably be expressed in the conduct and culture of each people.
Races born to a greater activity of the mechanical faculties would achieve more or higher inventions, those innately gifted in the direction of music would develop more subtly melodious songs, and so on.
Yet in every particular case it is difficult or impossible to establish by incontrovertible evidence that heredity is the specific cause of this accomplishment, of this point of view, or of this mode of life; that it is the determining factor to such and such degree of such and such customs.
This is not a denial of the probability that inborn racial differences exist.
It is an affirmation of the difficulty, discussed in Chapters I, IV, and V, of knowing what is inborn; and more specifically, of the difficulty of tracing particular customary activities back to particular racial qualities.
Broad heads are also found among both the settled and nomadic tribes.
So with the pulse rate, which has been already mentioned (§ 70) as unusually slow among the Southwestern Indians.
It is the same for the nomadic Apache who lived by fighting, and for the Hopi and Zuñi who are famous for their timidity and gentleness.
Similar cases might be cited almost endlessly.
It is evident that they are of a kind with the lack of correspondence between race and speech, or race and nationality, among the European peoples.
It is of course plain that a primitive tribe under the equator would never invent the ice box, and that the Eskimo will not keep their food and water in buckets of bamboo, although it is possible that if the Eskimo had had bamboo carried to them by ocean currents, they would have been both glad and able to use it.
The materials and opportunities provided by nature may be made use of by each people, while other materials not being provided, other arts or customs can therefore not be developed.
Not performing an act because one lacks the opportunity by no means proves that the opportunity will necessarily lead to the [182] performance.
Whole series of peoples possess bamboo and clay, and yet some of them draw water in bamboo joints and others in pots.
Obviously, natural environment does impose certain limiting conditions on human life; but equally obviously, it does not cause inventions or institutions.
The native Australians have wood and cord and flint but do not make bows and arrows.
Their civilization had not advanced to the point where they were able to devise an efficient bow, and the requisite idea failed to be carried to them from elsewhere as it was to other peoples who also did not invent the weapon.
The Polynesians, on the other hand, seem once to have had the weapon, as evidenced by their retaining it as a toy, but to have disused it, perhaps because they specialized on fighting with spears and clubs.
Modern civilized people fight at long range, but have let bows go out of use, except for sport, because their knowledge of metallurgy and chemistry centuries ago progressed to the point where they could produce firearms.
Of those mentioned, the Australians are the only ones with whom a factor of natural environment might be alleged to enter: namely, their isolation, which cut them off from communications and the opportunity to learn from other races.
Yet such isolation is as much a matter of inability to traverse space as it is a matter of physical distance.
A developed art of navigation would have abolished the Australian isolation.
It is the latter which is the most immediate or specific cause.
In general, then, it may be concluded that the directly determining factors of cultural phenomena are not nature which gives or withholds materials, but the general state of knowledge and technology and advancement of the group; in short, historical or cultural influences.
Fish are scarce.
The result is that most of the tribes get little opportunity to fish.
Most of these Southwestern Indians will not eat fish; in fact, think them poisonous.
This circumstance might lead to the following inference: nature does not furnish fish in abundance; therefore the Indians got out of the habit of eating them, and finally came to believe them poisonous.
At first blush this may seem a sufficient explanation.
Disuse, aversion, and belief lie wholly within the field of human conduct.
To derive a psychological phenomenon, such as a belief, from another psychological phenomenon such as a particular disuse, because this disuse is founded on a geographical factor, would of course be a logical fallacy.
It can also be shown not to hold, since we prize caviar and oysters and venison in proportion to their rarity.
Scarcity in this case thus leads to the contrary psychological attitude, and either fails to establish beliefs or establishes favorable ones.
Or a people may remove to a new habitat, different from that in which their customs of eating were formed.
If environment alone were the dominating cause of their customs, these customs should then immediately alter.
As a fact, a group sometimes adheres to its old customs.
The immediate cause of such conservatism is habit or inertia or inclination toward superstition or fear of taboo, all of which are mental reactions expressed in folkways or social customs.
It is often said that the Jew’s prohibition against eating pork and oysters and lobsters originated in hygienic considerations; that these were climatically unsafe foods for him in Palestine.
This explanation is more simple than true.
Eating neither food, he happened to acquire a distrust of them; having the distrust, he rationalized it by saying that it was foreign and wicked and irreligious to act counter to his habits—just like the Pueblo Indian; and in the end had the Lord issue the prohibition for him.
Yet this outcome is a long way from the starting point of natural environment.
The environment may indeed be said to have furnished the first occasion, but the determining causes of the taboos in the Mosaic law are of an entirely different kind—distrust, custom, rationalization, psychological or cultural factors.
If doubt remains, it is dispelled by the orthodox Jew of to-day, whose environment thrusts some of his forbidden foods at him as economically and hygienically satisfactory, whereas he still shudders at the thought of tasting them.
If this sort of cultural crystallizing of custom and subsequent rationalizing or ritual sanctioning takes place among civilized and intelligent people, the like must occur among uncivilized tribes.
The first theory was that farming took its rise in the tropics, where agriculture came naturally, almost without effort, under a bounteous sky.
Only after people had acquired the habit of farming and had moved into other less favorably endowed countries, did they take their agriculture seriously in order to survive.
But a second, equally plausible, and quite contradictory theory has been advanced, which looks toward the duress rather than the easy favors of nature.
Between such flat opposites, the choice is merely one of unscientific guessing.
In this [185] particular case of the Southwest it is certain that both guesses are wrong.
Agriculture did not come to the natives of this area because nature was favorable or because it was unfavorable.
It came because through increase of knowledge and change of attitude, some people in the region of Southern Mexico or Guatemala or beyond first turned agriculturists, and from them the art was gradually carried, through nation after nation, to the Southwestern tribes, and finally even to the Indians of the North Atlantic coast.
The reasons for acceptance of this explanation are several.
First is the distribution of native agriculture, whose practice was about equally spread in the two American continents with its middle in or near Central America.
If a geographical diffusion of the art from a center took place, its radiation or extension would probably be about equal to the north and south.
Then, the middle portions of the new world held the greatest concentration of native population, such as would have tended to produce a pressure in the direction of the establishment of agriculture and would also normally be a consequence of the continued custom of farming, as opposed to unsettled life.
Again, the Southwestern tribes planted only maize, beans, and squashes; the Mexicans grew in addition tomatoes, chili peppers, cacao, and sweet potatoes.
It looks as if they had carried their agriculture farther through having been at it longer.
Then, pottery has evidently spread out from the same center, and the two arts seem to go hand in hand.
In short, the Southwestern Indians did not farm because nature induced them to make the invention.
They did not make the invention at all.
These contacts, which then are the specific cause of Southwestern agriculture, constitute a human social factor; a cultural or civilizational factor.
Climatic or physical environment did not enter into the matter at all, except to render agriculture somewhat [186] difficult in the arid Southwest, though not difficult enough to prevent it.
Had the Southwest been thoroughly desert, agriculture could not have got a foot-hold there.
But this would be only a limiting condition; the active or positive causes that brought about the Southwestern agriculture are its invention farther South, the spread of the invention to the North, and its acceptance there.
Of course this conclusion sheds no light on the causes of the first invention in the middle American region.
The ultimate origin of the phenomenon has not been penetrated.
But the prevalence of agriculture in the aboriginal Southwest for several thousand years past has been pretty certainly accounted for, and by an explanation in terms of culture or civilization, or the activity of societies of human beings.
If the example just discussed is representative, it is clear that cultural factors ordinarily interpret more phenomena of civilization, and interpret them more fully, than factors either of racial heredity or physical environment.
The forms and behavior of animals and plants are explainable in terms of heredity and environment because animals and plants have no culture.
It is true that the forms and behavior are determined also by other animals and plants, their characteristics, habits, and abundance, but these factors are in a larger sense part of the environment.
But since anthropology deals with beings whose distinctive trait in social relations is the possession of the thing that we call culture, the factors which biology employs are insufficient.
It is not that heredity and natural environment fail to apply to man, but that they apply only indirectly and remotely to his civilization.
This fundamental fact has often been overlooked, especially in modern times, because the biological sciences having achieved successful increases of knowledge and understanding, the temptation was great to borrow their method outright and apply it without serious modification to the human material of anthropology.
This [187] procedure simplified the situation, but yielded inadequate and illusory results.
For a very long time the idea that man possessed and animals lacked a soul influenced people’s thought to such a degree that they scarcely thought of human beings in terms of biological causality, of heredity and environment.
The just and wise course lies between.
After they have been thus resolved, the cultural causes may reduce to ultimate factors of heredity and natural environment.
They farm, make pottery, accumulate wealth in turquoise, are governed by priests, worship under a remarkably complex set of rituals, which involve altars, masks, symbols of all sorts, and a rude sort of philosophy.
The simplification increases among the more remote Mohave, whose cults are based [188] on dreams instead of priestly tradition.
But agriculture, homes of stone, turquoise, priests, and the majority of Pueblo institutions are unknown.
These are suggestive bits; fragments that have been whittled away or toned down.
Pueblo culture as a whole has vanished at this distance.
What is the significance of this gradual fading away of one type of civilization and its replacement by others?
Evidently that certain influences have radiated out from the higher Pueblo center, and that the effect of these has diminished in proportion to the number of tribes they have passed through.
The Apache being more remote, were less affected; and so on to the farthest limits of the influences.
It is also clear that a time element is involved.
A people receiving an art from another obviously acquires this later than the inventors.
Unless therefore there should be special reasons suggestive of a degenerative loss of the art among the marginal tribes— and no such reasons are known—the conclusion is forced that Southwestern pottery was first made by the ancestors of the Pueblos or their predecessors in the central part of the area, presumably as plain ware, and that thence knowledge of the art was gradually carried outward.
In time this added art also spread to the neighbors, but meanwhile these had passed knowledge of the first stage on to the tribes still farther out than themselves; and meanwhile also the Pueblos had perhaps gone on to a third stage, that of combining colors in their decoration.
In this way, if nothing interrupted the even regularity of the process, the focal people, with their lead in creating or inventing or improving, might pass through half a dozen successive stages of the art, or of many arts, while the outermost peoples were just beginning to receive the rudiments.
The intermediate tribes would show attainment of a less or greater number of stages in proportion to their distance from the center.
In this event the main facts concerning the pottery art of the Southwest could be represented by a diagram of a step pyramid, each level or step picturing a new increment to the basic art.
The Pueblos would be at the peak of the pyramid, five or six steps high, the near-by tribes a step or two lower; and so on to the outermost, who remain at, or have only recently attained to, the first or lowest level; while beyond these would be the non-pottery-making tribes wholly outside the Pueblo sphere of influence.
Of course on the actual map the distribution of the various forms or stages of pottery made does not work out with the perfect regularity of our schematic diagram.
But on the whole pottery distribution in the Southwest does follow the schematic arrangement with sufficient closeness to warrant the assumption that the history of its development has [190] been, at least in outline, as just reconstructed.
The facts conform still more closely to the step pyramid arrangement when consideration is given not to pottery alone but to the whole culture—agriculture, other arts, social forms, ritual, religious organization, and the like.
In that case Pueblo culture is seen to comprise easily the greatest number of traits or component parts, and these to grow fewer and fewer towards the edges of the Southwest.
Where documents are available, the development, the growth of the pyramid itself, as it were, can often be seen as it happened.
This is true of the Southwest, whose ancient pottery, stone edifices and implements, and evidences of agriculture remain as records of the past, telling a story only a little less complete and direct than that of the Roman historians.
In all this story, what has become of natural environment and heredity?
They have [192] dropped from sight.
We have been able to build up a reasonable and probably reliable reconstruction of the course of development of civilization in an area without reference to these two sets of factors.
The reconstruction is in terms of culture.
Evidently environment and heredity are in the main superfluous.
They need not be brought in; are likely to be confusing, to diminish the internal consistency of the findings attained, if they are brought in.
This is true in general, not only of the instance chosen.
By using environment or heredity, one can often seem to explain certain selected features of a culture, but the appearance is illusory, because one need only be impartial to realize that one can never explain in this way the whole of any culture.
When, however, the explanation can be made in terms of culture—always of course on the basis of a sufficient knowledge and digestion of facts—it applies increasingly to the whole of a civilization, and each portion explained helps to explain better all other portions.
The cultural interpretation of culture is therefore progressive, and ever more productive, whereas the environmental and the biological-hereditary interpretation fail in proportion as they are pushed farther; in fact can be kept going only by ignoring larger and larger masses of fact to which they do not apply.
Historians, who may be described as anthropologists whose work is made easy for them by the possession of written and dated records, have tacitly recognized this situation.
They may now and then attribute some event or condition of civilization to an inherent quality of a race, or to an influence of climate or soil or sea.
But this is mostly in their introductory chapters.
When they really get to grips with their subject, they explain in terms of human thought and action, in other words, of culture.
It is true that they dwell more on personalities than anthropologists do.
But that is because the materials left them by former historians are full of personalities and anecdotes.
And on the other hand, anthropological data are usually unduly deficient in the personal element; they consist of descriptions of customs, tools used by long forgotten individuals, and the like.
If anthropologists were able to recover knowledge of the particular Pueblo woman who first painted a third color or a glaze on a bowl, or of the priest who first instituted a masked dance in order to make rain, we may be confident that they would discuss these [193] individuals.
And such knowledge would throw more light on the history of Southwestern pottery and religion and culture generally than any amount of emphasis on the number of inches of rainfall per year, or the pulse rate or similar hypothetical and remote causes.
The magic flight.— 93.
The double-headed eagle.—95.
When a couple had a child, the wife got up and went about her daily work as well as she might, while the husband went to bed to lie-in in state and receive the visits of the neighbors.
This was thought to be for the good of the baby.
The same custom is found among the Indians of Brazil.
They believe that a violation of the custom would bring sickness or ill luck upon the child.
The Basques of the Pyrenees and the Indians of Brazil are of different race, separate origins, and without any known historical contacts.
The substantial identity of the custom among them therefore long ago led to its being explained as the result of the cropping out of an instinctive impulse of the human mind.
The Basque peasants, of course, are a more advanced people than the cannibalistic Brazilian natives.
According to this method of explanation, the occurrence of almost any custom, art, or belief among widely separated and unrelated peoples is likely to be the result of the similar working of the human mind under similar conditions.
The cause of cultural identities and resemblances, especially among primitive or “nature” peoples, is not to be sought primarily in historical factors, such as common origin, migrations, the propaganda of religion, or the gradual diffusion of an idea, but is to be looked for in something inherent in humanity itself, in inborn psychological tendencies.
This explanation is that of “Independent Evolution.” It is also known as the doctrine of “Elementary Ideas.” Contrasting with this principle is that of borrowing—one people learning an institution or belief from another, or taking over a custom or invention.
That borrowing has been considerably instrumental in shaping the cultures of the more advanced nations, is an obvious fact.
People are Christians not through the spontaneous unfolding of the whole dogma and ritual of Christianity in each of them, nor even within their nation, but because of the historically documented spread of Christianity which is still going on.
When historical records are available, cultural borrowing of this sort is generally easy to establish.
Borrowing can sometimes be shown as very likely even where direct evidence is lacking.
If two peoples that possess an institution in common are known off-shoots one from the other, or if they have had numerous trade relations, it is hardly necessary to demonstrate the specific time and manner of transmission between them.
The custom of uttering proverbs, for instance, has a significant distribution.
It seems astonishing that barbarous West African tribes should possess a stock of proverbs as abundant and pithy as those current in Europe.
Not that the proverbs are identical.
The negro lacks too many articles, and too many of our manners, to allude as we do.
But he does share with us the habit of expressing himself on certain situations with brief current sayings of homely and instantly intelligible nature, that put a generality into specific and concrete form.
Thus: “One tree does not make a forest”; “Run from the sword and hide in the scabbard”; “If the stomach is weak, do not eat cockroaches”; “Distant firewood is good firewood.” The proverb tendency is a sufficiently general one to suggest its independent origin in Africa and Europe.
One’s first reaction to the parallel is likely to be something like this: The negro and we have formulated proverbs because we are both human beings; the coining of proverbs is instinctive in humanity.
So it might be maintained.
Degree of civilization evidently has nothing to do with the matter, because in the Old World primitive and advanced peoples alike use proverbs; whereas in the New World wild hunting tribes as well as the most progressive nations like the Mayas have no proverbs.
Then, somewhere in the Old World, they came into use.
Perhaps it was a genius that struck off the first sayings to be repeated by his associates and then by his more remote environment.
At any rate, the custom spread from people to people until it extended over almost all the eastern hemisphere.
Some cause, however, such as geographical isolation, prevented the extension of the movement to the western [197] hemisphere.
The American Indians therefore remained proverbless because the invention was never transmitted to them.
Here, accordingly, is a case of the very incompleteness of a distribution going far to illuminate the history of a culture trait.
The lack of parallelism between the hemispheres disproves the explanation by instinctive independent origin.
This negative conclusion in turn tends strongly to establish the probability that the custom was borrowed, perhaps from a single source, in the four eastern continents.
Evidently, many facts must be taken into consideration: above all, geographic distribution.
Because a habit is so well ingrained in our life as to seem absolutely natural and almost congenital, it does not follow that it really is so.
The vast majority of culture elements have been learned by each nation from other peoples, past and present.
At the same time there are unexpected limits to the principle of borrowing.
Transmission often operates over vast areas and for long periods but at other times ceases.
Two reflections arise.
The first is the discouraging but salutary one that the history of civilization and its parts is an intricate matter, not to be validly determined by off-hand guesses.
A second conclusion is that the geographic distribution of any culture element is always likely to be a fact of prime importance about it.
In the following pages a number of culture elements will be examined from the point of view of their distribution with the aim of determining how far each of the two principles of parallel invention and of borrowing may be inferred to have been operative in regard to them.
In place of “independent origin” the terms “parallelism” or [198] “convergence” will be generally used.
As an equivalent of “borrowing” the somewhat less metaphorical word “diffusion” will be applied.
Well known historic cases of diffusion, such as those of Christianity and Mohammedanism, of Roman law, of the printing press and steam engine and of the great modern mechanical inventions, will not be considered.
It is however well to keep these numerous cases in the background of one’s mind as a constant suggestion that the principle of diffusion is an extremely powerful one and still active.
In fact, the chief reason why early anthropologists did not make more use of this principle seems to have been their extreme familiarity with it.
It was going on all about them, so that in dealing with prehistoric times or with remote peoples, they tended to overlook it.
This was perhaps a natural error, since the communications of savages and their methods of transmission are so much more restricted than our own.
Yet of course even savages shift their habitations and acquire new neighbors.
Slow as diffusion might therefore be among them, it would nevertheless go on, and its lack of rapidity would be compensated by the immense durations of time in the prehistoric period.
It is certain that the simpler inventions of primitive man generally did not travel with the rapidity of the printing press and telegraph and camera.
But on the other hand, instead of a generation or a century, there would often be periods of a thousand or five thousand years for an invention or a custom to spread from one continent to another.
There is thus every a priori reason why diffusion could be expected to have had a very large part in the formation of primitive and barbarous as well as advanced culture.
This is the incident known as the Magic Flight or Obstacle Pursuit.
It recounts how the hero, when pursued, throws behind him successively a whetstone, a [199] comb, and a vessel of oil or other liquid.
The stone turns into a mountain or precipice; the comb into a forest or thicket; the liquid into a lake or river.
Each of these obstacles impedes the pursuer and contributes to the hero’s final escape.
This incident has been found in stories told by the inhabitants of every continent except South America.
Its distribution and probable spread are shown in Fig.
While no two of the tales or myths containing the episode of the Magic Flight are identical, there can be no serious doubt as to a common source of the incident because of the co-existence of the three separate items that make it up.
Belief in the virtue of magic is world-wide, and it is entirely conceivable that from this common soil of magical beliefs the same episode might repeatedly have sprouted quite independently.
The same reasoning would apply to the incident of the transformation of the stone and of the comb, as long as they occurred separately.
The linking of the three items, however, enormously decreases the possibility of any two peoples having hit upon them separately.
It would be stretching coincidence pretty far to believe that each people independently invented the triple complex.
It is also significant that the number of impeding obstacles is almost always three.
Among the American Indians, however, three is scarcely ever thus used, either four or five replacing it according to the custom pattern of the particular tribe.
This instance introduces a consideration that is of growing importance in culture history determinations.
If a trait is composed of several elements which stand in no necessary relation to each other, and these several elements recur among distinct or remote peoples in the same combination, whereas on the basis of mere accident it could [200] be expected that the several elements would at times combine and at other times crop out separately, one can be reasonably sure of the real identity and common origin of the complex trait.
When a trait is simple, it is more difficult to be positive that the apparent resemblance amounts to identity.
Such doubt applies for instance to isolated magical practices.
A custom found among separate nations, such as sprinkling water to produce rain, may be the result of an importation of the idea from one people to another.
Or again it may represent nothing more than a specific application of the assumed principle that an act similar to a desired effect will produce that effect.
This magical belief is so broad, and so ramifying in its exemplifications, as to become almost impossible to use as a criterion.
The essential basis of magic may conceivably have been developed at a single culture center in the far distant past and have been disseminated thence over the whole world.
Or again, for all that it is possible to prove, magic beliefs may really be rooted instinctively in the human mind and grow thence over and over again with inevitability.
There seems no present way of determining which interpretation is correct.
Flood myths of some sort, for instance, are told by probably the majority of human nations.
In the early days of the science, this wide distribution of flood myths was held to prove the actuality of a flood, or to be evidence of the descent of all mankind from a single nation which had once really experienced it.
Such explanations are too obviously naïve to require refutation to-day.
Yet it is difficult to interpret the wide prevalence of flood myths, either as spontaneous growth from out the human mind, or as diffusion from a single devising of the idea.
Much of the difficulty is caused by the fact that one cannot be sure that the various flood myths are identical.
Some peoples have the flood come after the earth is formed and inhabited, and have it almost destroy the human race.
Other nations begin their cosmology with a flood.
For them, water was in existence before there was an earth, [201] and the problem for the gods or creative animals was to make the world.
This, according to some American Indian versions, they finally accomplished by having one of their number dive to the bottom and bring up a few grains of sand which were then expanded to constitute terra firma.
The first type of story is evidently a true “flood” myth; the second might better be described as a concept of “primeval water.” The difficulty is enhanced by the fact that the two types are sometimes found amalgamated in a single mythology.
So, according to some American tribes, the flood came after the earth, but the waters remained until after the diving.
It is clear that flood stories are more shifting than the Magic Flight episode.
They may conceivably all be variations of a single theme which has gradually come to differentiate greatly.
But again, several distinct concepts—primeval water, flood, the diving animals, the ark—may have been evolved in different parts of the world, each developing in its own way, and traveling so far, in some cases, as to meet and blend with others.
There is a vast amount of folk-lore recorded, and much of it has lent itself admirably to the working out of its historical origins, so far as limited regions are concerned.
When it comes to intercontinental and world-wide distribution, however, difficulties of the sort just set forth in regard to flood myths become stronger and stronger.
While the most interesting mythical ideas are those which are world-wide, it is in these that uncertainty between origin by diffusion or parallelism is greatest.
The Magic Flight therefore constitutes a grateful exception.
It opens the door to a hope that more assiduous analysis and comparison may lead to the accurate determination of the source and history of other common and fundamental myths.
Like many other elements of civilization, this goes back to an Egyptian beginning.
One of the great gods of Egypt was the sun.
The hawk and vulture were also divine animals.
A combination was made showing the disk of the sun with a long narrow wing on each side.
Or the bird itself was depicted with outstretched wings but its body consisting of the sun disk.
A second head was added, perhaps to complete the symmetry of the figure.
Just as a wing and a foot went out from each side of the body or disk, so now there was a head facing each way.
This double-headed bird symbol was carved on cliffs in Asia Minor.
In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries after Christ, the Turkish princes, feeling the symbol to be a fit [203] emblem of sovereignty, began stamping it on their coins.
The double-headed eagle was a welcome addition to the lions and griffins with which artists were emblazoning the coats of arms of the feudal nobility.
The meaning of sovereignty remaining attached to the figure, the device before long became indicative of the imperial idea.
Four hundred years ago Charles V was king of Spain and Austria and Holy Roman emperor of Germany.
It was in his reign that Cortez and Pizarro conquered Mexico and Peru.
At any rate, they introduced it into their textiles and embroideries.
Many other ancient and modern countries have made their contribution.
The ancient Sumerians and Babylonians, on the lower course of the Tigris and Euphrates, moved toward definite cultural progress about as early as the Egyptians, and [204] have perhaps contributed as many elements to the civilization of to-day.
One of these is the zodiac.
This is the concept of dividing the path of the sun, moon, and planets around the heavens into twelve equal parts, each named after a constellation.
Constellations, indeed, had begun to be named at a very early time, as is clear from the practice being common to all mankind.
From them the Persians, and then the Greeks, learned the zodiac; and with its introduction to the Roman Empire it became part of the fund of knowledge common to the whole of western civilization.
It does not appear to have been accepted by the Egyptians until Roman imperial times.
Knowledge of the zodiac also spread eastward to India.
It seems to have been carried as far as China by Buddhist missionaries, but failed to be seriously adopted in that country until its reintroduction by Jesuit missionaries in the seventeenth century.
This seems to be of independent origin from the western or Babylonian zodiac.
It appears to have been devised to designate the hours, then applied to other periods of time, and finally to the heavens.
Its path through the sky is the reverse of the western zodiac; and its signs are specifically different: rat, ox, tiger, hare, dragon, serpent, horse, sheep, monkey, hen, dog, and pig.
At most, therefore, it would seem that there might have penetrated to China from the west the idea of dividing time or space into twelve units and assigning to each of these the name of an animal.
The working out and utilization of the idea were native Chinese.
Already in ancient times the pictures of the twelve constellations of the western zodiac began to be abbreviated and reduced to symbols.
These gradually become more and more [205] conventional, although evidences of their origin are still visible.
The sign of the ram, for instance, as we employ it in almanacs, shows the downward curling horns of this animal; that for the ox, his rising horns; for the archer, his arrow, and so on.
These cursive symbols, once they became fixed, underwent some travels of their own which carried them to unexpected places.
The Negroes of the west coast of Africa make gold finger rings ornamented with the twelve zodiacal symbols in their proper sequence.
They seem ignorant of the meaning, in fact do not possess sufficient astronomical knowledge to be able to understand the use of the signs.
There has been some assertion that the zodiac was known to the more advanced Middle American Indians between Arizona and Peru, but the claim has also been denied.
It is not known that this series served the true zodiacal function of noting the positions of the heavenly bodies.
Further, the Maya series consists of thirteen instead of twelve symbols, and the figures present only distant resemblances to the Old World zodiac.
There is only one that is the same as in the Old World zodiac: the scorpion.
The relationship of the Maya and Old World series is therefore unproved, and probably fictitious.
The case however possesses theoretical interest in that it illustrates the criteria of the determination of culture relationships.
The Mexican zodiac would unquestionably be interpreted as a derivative from the Asiatic one, even though its symbols departed somewhat from those of the latter, provided that the similar symbols came in the same order.
The Asiatic ram might well be replaced by a Mexican deer, the lion by a wildcat, and the virgin by a maize goddess.
And if the deer, the wildcat, and the maize goddess came in first, fifth, and sixth place, it would be almost compulsory to look upon them as superficially altered equivalents of the Old World ram, lion, and virgin.
It is conceivable enough that similar individual symbols might independently come into use in remote parts of the world.
But it is practically [206] impossible that a series of symbols should be put into the same arbitrary sequence independently.
As a mere matter of mathematical probability there would be no more than an infinitesimal chance of such a complex coincidence.
Identity of sequence failing, there might still remain an instance of partial convergence.
This, however, would be a case of only incomplete parallelism.
The general concept would in that event have been developed independently, its specific working out remaining distinctive.
On accurate analysis of culture phenomena, this sort of result proves to be fairly frequent.
When independent developments have occurred, there is a basic or psychological similarity, but concrete details are markedly different.
On the other hand if a differentiation from a common source has taken place, so that true historical connection exists, some specific identity of detail almost always remains as evidence.
This of course is not an assertion that such proof has been brought.
In fact there are far more traits of civilization whose history remains to be elucidated than have yet been solved.
But the attainments already achieved, and an understanding of the principles by which they have been made, encourage hope for an indefinite increase of [207] knowledge regarding the origin and growth of the whole of human culture.
These include the division of the circle into three hundred and sixty degrees, of the day into twenty-four (originally twelve) hours, of the hour into sixty minutes, of the foot into twelve inches, and the pound—as it survives in our troy weight —into twelve ounces.
It is apparent that the system involved in these measures is based on the number twelve and its multiple sixty.
On these weights were based the ancient money values.
A talent of silver and one of gold possessed different values, but the weight was the same.
The duodecimal method of reckoning was carried west, became deeply ingrained during the Roman Empire, and has carried down through the Middle Ages to modern times.
It would be going too far to say that every division of units of measure into twelve parts can be traced directly to Babylonia.
Now and then new standards were arbitrarily fixed and new names given them.
But even when this occurred, the old habit of reckoning by twelves for which the Babylonians were responsible, was likely to reassert itself in competition with the decimal system.
Certain of these metric units became fixed more than two thousand years ago and have descended to us by an unbroken tradition.
When a few centuries ago, beginning with the introduction of the Copernican point of view, astronomy launched forward into a new period of progress, the old system of reckoning was so deeply rooted that it was continued without protest.
Had the first truly scientific beginnings of astronomy taken place as late as those of chemistry, it is extremely doubtful whether we should now be reckoning 360 degrees in the circumference of the circle.
The decimal system would almost certainly have been applied.
The last few examples may give the impression that cultural diffusion takes place largely in regard to names and numbers.
They may arouse the suspicion that the intrinsic elements of inventions and accomplishments are less readily spread.
This is not the case.
The English names of the seven days of the week (§ 125) are a case in point.
If stress seems to have been laid here on names and numbers, it is not because they are more inclined to diffusion, or most important, but because their diffusion is more easily traced.
They often provide an infallible index of historical connection when a deficiency of historical records would make it difficult, perhaps impossible, to prove that the common possession of the thing itself went back to a single source.
If historical records are silent, as they are only too often, on the origin of a device among a people, the occurrence of the same device at an earlier time among another people may strongly suggest that it was transmitted from these.
But the indication is far from constituting a proof because of the theoretical possibility that the later nation might have made the invention independently.
It is chiefly when the device is complex and the relation of its parts identical that the probability of diffusion approaches surety.
If however not only the thing but its name also are shared by distinct nations, doubt is removed.
It is obvious that peoples speaking [209] unrelated languages will not coincide one time in a thousand in using the same name for the same idea independently of each other.
The play of accident is thus precluded in such cases and a connection by transmission is established.
In fact the name is the better touchstone.
An invention may be borrowed and be given a home-made name.
But a foreign name would scarcely be adopted without the object being also accepted.
This is the pseudo-science of predicting the outcome of events by examination of the liver of animals sacrificed to the gods.
Their rules are known from the discovery of ancient clay models of the liver with its several lobes, each part being inscribed with its significance according as it might bear such and such appearance.
In some way which is not yet wholly understood, this system was carried, like the true arch, from the Babylonians to the Etruscans.
As there are definite ancient traditions which brought the Etruscans into Italy from Asia, the gap is however lessened.
Both systems were learned from them by the Romans, according to Roman tradition itself.
But meanwhile they had been carried in the opposite direction from their Babylonian source of origin, and became established in eastern Asia and finally, in somewhat modified form, among remote uncivilized peoples.
The pagan priests of Borneo and the Philippines even to-day are foretelling the future by observing the flight of birds and examining the gall bladder—an organ intimately associated with the liver—of sacrificial animals.
They live, however, at no [210] great distance from the Asiatic mainland, and are known to have been subjected to heavy cultural influences from China, Arabia, and especially India.
Four centuries ago, to cite only a few specific instances, the Philippine chieftains went under the title of rajah, the Hindu word for king.
In the southern Philippine islands there are “sultans” to-day.
In all parts of the Philippines as well as Borneo, even among the rude tribes of the interior mountains, Chinese jars imported centuries ago are treasured as precious heirlooms.
With these streams of higher culture flowing into the Malaysian islands, the only reasonable conclusion is that the arts of liver and bird divination were also imported.
In fact, it seems probable that the broader custom of sacrificing animals to the gods and spirits, a custom to which the pagan Malaysians still adhere, is a part of the same wave of influence from the Orient which has so deeply stamped the Homeric poems and the Old Testament.
Evidently the diffusion principle reaches far and long.
It appears therefore that the custom, after a period of somewhat wavering formation in eastern Asia, crystallized into an association with the domesticated sheep, forming a true culture “complex,” and was then diffused almost as far as this animal.
Tobacco The speed with which inventions sometimes diffuse over large areas is in marked contrast to the slowness with which they travel on other occasions.
The art or habit of smoking originated in tropical America where the tobacco plant is indigenous.
Originally, it would seem, a tobacco leaf was either rolled on itself to form a rude cigar, or was stuffed, cigarette fashion, into a reed or piece of cane.
Columbus found the West Indians puffing at cigars.
In the Southwestern United States, the natives smoked from hollow reeds.
Farther into the United States, both to the east and west, the reed had become a manufactured tube of wood or stone or pottery.
This tubular pipe, something like a magnified cigarette holder, has the bowl enlarged at one end to receive the tobacco.
It has to be held more or less vertically.
This form has survived to the present day among the California Indians.
As the tubular pipe spread into the central and eastern United States, it was elaborated.
The bowl was made to rise from the top of the pipe, instead of merely forming its end.
This proved a convenience, for the pipe had now no longer to be pointed skyward to be smoked.
Here then was a pipe with a definite bowl; but its derivation from the straight tubular pipe is shown by the fact that the bowl was most frequently set not at the end of the stem, as we [212] “automatically” think a pipe should be, but near its middle.
The bowl evidently represented a secondary addition which there seemed no more reason to place at the end than in the middle of the pipe; and the latter happened to become the fashion.
All this evolution took place at least a thousand years ago, probably much longer.
Elaborate stone pipes have been discovered in the earthworks left by the Mound Builders of the Ohio Valley, a people whose very existence had been forgotten when the whites first came.
Californian stone pipes occur well down toward the bottom of shell mounds estimated to have required three or four thousand years to accumulate.
Here and there this slow diffusion suffered checks.
In the Andean region of South America tobacco came into competition with coca, a plant whose leaf was chewed.
The effect of the contained alkaloid is to prevent fatigue and hunger.
Of the two, coca triumphed over tobacco, possibly because its action is more drug-like.
In North America, on the other hand, tribes that had not adopted maize and bean agriculture, sometimes tilled tobacco patches.
With them, tobacco cultivation had outstripped the spread of so important an institution as food agriculture.
In the extreme parts of North America, climatic factors checked the growth of tobacco, either wild or cultivated.
Where the supply was scarce, it was either diluted with pulverized tree bark, as by many tribes of the central United States, or it was eaten, as by a number of groups on the Pacific coast.
To these latter, tobacco seemed too precious to set fire to and lightly puff away.
They mixed it with lime from burnt shells and swallowed it.
Taken in this form, a small quantity produces a powerful effect.
In the farthest north of the continent, even this device had not obtained a foothold.
The development of intertribal trade was too slender and intermittent for anything but valuables, let alone an article of daily consumption, to be transported over long distances.
The result was that the Eskimo, when first discovered, knew nothing of tobacco or pipes.
The use of tobacco was quickly carried to the Old World by the Spaniards, and before long all Europe was smoking.
By the Spaniards and Portuguese, and later also by the Arabs, the habit of smoking was carried to various points on the shores of Africa, Asia, and the East Indies.
Thence it spread inland.
Native African tribes, and others in New Guinea, who had never seen a white man, have been found not only growing and smoking tobacco, but firmly believing that their ancestors from time immemorial had done so.
In northeastern Siberia, where the Russians introduced tobacco, a special form of pipe came into use.
It has a narrow bowl flaring at the top.
This stem may be straight or flattened and curved.
This form of pipe, along with tobacco as a trade article, crossed Behring Strait and was taken up by the Alaska Eskimo.
That this pipe is not of Eskimo origin is shown by its close resemblance to the Chukchi pipe of Siberia.
In short, smoking reached the Eskimo only after having made the round of the globe.
Originating in Middle America, the custom spread very anciently to its farthest native limits without being able to penetrate to the Eskimo.
A second invasion of America by a non-American form of pipe occurred in the eastern United States.
The old pipe of this region, as already stated, had its bowl set well back from the end of the stem.
The whole object thus had nearly the shape of an inverted capital T, whereas the European pipe might be compared to an L laid on its back.
After the English settlers had become established on the Atlantic coast, a tomahawk pipe was introduced by them for trade purposes.
This was a metal hatchet with the butt of the blade hollowed out into a bowl which connected with a bore running through the handle.
One [214] end of the blade served to chop, the other to smoke.
The hatchet handle was also the pipe stem.
The combination implement could be used as a weapon in war and as a symbol of peace in council.
The heads of these iron tomahawk pipes were made in England for the Indian trade.
They became so popular that those natives who were out of reach of established traders, or who were too poor to buy the metal hatchet-pipes, began to imitate them in the stone which their forefathers had used.
One of the two coexisting forms represented a form indigenous to the region since a thousand years or more, the other an innovation developed in Europe as the result of the discovery of America and then reintroduced among the aborigines.
Diffusion sometimes follows unexpectedly winding routes.
The reason is that migrations of peoples are a special and not the normal means of culture spread.
They form the crass instances of the process, easily conceived by a simple mind.
That a custom travels as a people travels with it, is something that a child can understand.
The danger is in stopping thought there and invoking a national migration for every important culture diffusion, whereas it is plain that most culture changes have occurred through subtler and more gradual operations.
The Mongols overran vast areas of Asia and Europe without seriously modifying the civilization of those tracts.
The accretions that most influenced them, such as writing and Buddhism, came to them by the quieter and more pervasive process of peaceful penetration, in which but few individuals were active.
We are all aware that printing and the steam engine, the doctrine of evolution and the habit of riming verses, have spread through western civilization without conquests or migrations, and that each [215] year’s fashions flow out from Paris in the same way.
That is far more picturesque, of course, more appealing to the emotions, than to conceive of a slow, gradual transfusion stretching over a thousand years.
In proportion as the known facts are few, imagination soars unchecked.
Secondary parallelism in the Indo-European languages.—104.
Textile patterns and processes.—105.
Primary parallelism: the beginnings of writing.—106.
Scale and pitch of Pan’s pipes.—108.
Parallels and psychology.—112.
It has often been assumed as operative, more rarely proved; and even in the latter cases has perhaps never been found to lead to complete identity.
In fact, the first observation to be made is that resemblance must not be too close if independent development is to be the explanation.
A complex device used in two or more parts of the world suggests a connection between them in very proportion to its complexity.
A combination of two or even three elements might conceivably have been repeated independently.
A combination of five or ten parts serving an identical purpose in an identical manner must necessarily appeal as impossible of having been hit upon more than once.
One thinks almost under compulsion, in such a case, of historical connection, of a transference of the idea or machine from one people to the other.
If the resemblance includes any inessential or arbitrary parts, such as an ornament, a proportion that so far as utility is concerned might be considerably varied but is not, a randomly chosen number, or a name, the possibility of independent development is wholly ruled out.
Such extrinsic features would not recur together once in a million times.
The significance of names in this situation has already been commented on.
We all [217] apply similar checks in practical life.
If in a court of law several witnesses testify to the same facts in the same language, without one of them adding or diminishing an item, if they follow the identical order of events, if even details such as the precise minute of an occurrence are stated without variation, judge and jury will infallibly suspect that the several testimonies go back to a single source of inspiration.
Eyewitnesses will differ.
They have seen from different angles; have followed events with attention that varied according to their participation and their previous habits and training; have reacted with individually colored emotion.
So with nations.
Their customs, interests, faculties are never wholly alike.
Their independent inventions and innovations, always springing out of a distinctive soil, therefore necessarily take on a distinctive aspect even when they embody the same idea.
In the degree that the form as well as the substance of culture traits coincide, does the probability of independent evolution diminish in favor of some sort of connection.
In other words, no fact relating to human civilization may be judged wholly without reference to its context or background.
If there are known connections, either in space or in time, between two nations, the likelihood of their having separately evolved a common trait is much less than as between two peoples in different continents or separated by thousands of years.
Yet the fact that Babylonia and Etruria shared two such specific culture traits as these, greatly increases the probability for each one having been borrowed from the Asiatic by the European people.
When the consideration is added that the ancients had traditions of the Etruscans having come to Italy out of Asia Minor, the likelihood of diffusion is strengthened to the point of practical certainty.
Connection in space is a particularly cogent argument in favor of diffusion, because of [218] its powerful presumption of accompanying communication.
When several hundred Indian tribes without a break in their ranks between Quebec and Argentina cultivate maize, it would be absurd to dream of each of them having originated the domestication of the plant for itself.
To be sure, it is logically conceivable that maize agriculture was independently developed by two or three of the most advanced tribes of the hundreds and then became diffused until the two or three areas of dispersion met and coalesced into one greater area.
Yet the principle that economy of explanation is the best would militate even against this interpretation as compared with diffusion from a single center, unless there were definite indications in favor of the multiple origin explanation.
Such indications might be radically distinct types of the plant or of agricultural implements in several parts of the maize area.
So, when the tribes on the Alaskan and Siberian sides of Behring Sea relate similar Raven legends, the geographical proximity is so close that it would be pedantic to let the fact that two continents are involved stand in the way of an explanation by diffusion.
Even where the distribution of a trait penetrates much farther into both America and Asia, as is true of the composite bow (§ 210), the continuity of area leaves little doubt as to diffusion from a single center, especially since it is reinforced by other traits showing the same intercontinental distribution: the Magic Flight story, for instance.
The fire-drill, flint chipping, the bow and arrow, the doctrine of animism or belief in souls and spirits, [219] sympathetic magic, are in this class.
The very universality of these elements tends to obliterate tangible evidence as to their histories.
At present, anthropological opinion is more cautious about such assumptions.
It is perhaps spontaneous enough for people in the habit of using tools to try to fashion them from stone if other materials be lacking, and easy for a nation accustomed to projectile weapons to invent the bow without ever having learned of it.
But this is far from proving what a people without these habits might do.
Intelligent as an ape is, and gifted with manual dexterity, it rarely enters his mind to throw a stone as a missile and never to split it into a knife or weapon.
It is temptingly but fatally easy to project our habits of mind into primitive man—much easier to imagine ourselves in his position than to imagine him, without reference to ourselves, as he was.
Animal psychologists have learned not to anthropomorphize, that is, endow the lower animals with specifically human mind processes.
It is conceivable that each of these culture products traces back to a single source in human history.
It is not necessary to go so far; in fact, wiser not to, because none of these matters is yet susceptible of real proof.
But it does seem profitable to recognize the possibility of the truth of such views, and that the drift of accumulating knowledge and experienced [220] interpretation is in their direction.
A simple consideration which has too often been neglected is that diffusion and imitation undisputedly do take place in culture on a vast scale.
Even one particular device may be partly borrowed and partly modified or further developed by original effort.
Still more intimate must be the combination of native and diffused elements in the whole culture of any people.
To wage an abstract battle as between two opposite principles is sterile, when their manifestations are admittedly frequent for one and at least certain for the other.
It is clearly more profitable to examine the associations and relations of diffusion and convergence, the conditions under which they supplement each other.
Besides parallels springing up wholly independently, there are two ways in which their relations to diffusion may be conceived.
Or, on the other hand, independent starts in similar direction may become merged in, or assimilated by, a subsequent diffusion.
Their tendency was synthetic (§ 51, 57).
Grammatical ideas such as voice, tense, number, case, were expressed by elements affixed to the word stem and incapable of a separate existence.
The two latter languages are analytical.
They break an idea into [221] parts which they express by separate words that change form but little.
They retain only fragments of conjugations and declensions.
Sanskrit had eight noun cases, Latin six; English has only two, the subjective-objective and the possessive, and French only one, or rather no case-form at all.
It is visible in the growth of English from Anglo-Saxon; of French, Spanish, and Italian from Latin; of modern from ancient Persian; of Hindi and Bengali from Sanskrit.
True, some of these have been in contact, like the Germanic and Latin languages, and might therefore be imagined to have set one another an example, although there is little evidence that languages seriously influence each other’s forms.
But many of the Indo-European idioms have not been in contact at all for thousands of years.
For the greater part of this period, accordingly, the related but no longer communicating languages that have resulted in modern English and Bengali, to take only one instance, have independently driven toward the same goal of more and more analytical structure.
But the movement of its daughters has certainly been an astoundingly parallel one.
This looks like parallelism and is parallelism.
The technique of the weave is such that if materials of two colors are used, the characteristic patterns evolve themselves almost of necessity.
It is too simple and too ancient a technique for modern knowledge to choose between the alternatives with positiveness.
The coiling technique for making baskets looks from its distribution in Africa and about the Mediterranean, in northeast Asia and northwest America, in the southern extremity of South America, in Malaysia and Australia, as if it had originated independently several times, and there is partial confirmation in the fact that different varieties of coiling are typical of most of the areas.
If however further knowledge should connect the now separate areas of coiling, the art would then have to be regarded as probably due to diffusion from a single invention.
A blending of diffusion and parallelism is apparent also in other textile processes.
But the treadle shed, the next step in the Eastern hemisphere, was never invented in the Western, so that at this point the parallelism ends.
Again, diffusion and convergence both enter into the history of what is known as resist [223] dyeing, that is, the covering of portions of textile patterns before immersion into the dye.
Batik, when wax is used as the protecting medium, is one form of resist dyeing.
Another method is “to tie little bunches of cloth with a cord either soaked in clay or wax or spun from fiber which has no affinity for the colors and then dip the tied web into the pot.” In the Old World, tie dyeing is of Asiatic, probably of Indian origin, and was in use by the seventh century, perhaps earlier.
The Peruvians, however, had long before hit upon the same art, as attested by textile remains in pre-Columbian graves.
Here then, we have a wide and long enduring diffusion of the general resist dyeing process, and a locally limited instance of independent parallelism for one phase of it.
An illustration is furnished by the history of writing, as sketched in the introductory paragraphs of the chapter on the Alphabet (§ 130-133).
The content of the systems, the signs themselves and their sound values, are wholly different.
The similarity applies only to the principle of reading pictures or symbols for their pictureless homonyms.
The concrete application of this method has nothing in common in the several parallel cases.
Finally, complete phonetic [224] writing was invented but once, all alphabets, however diverse, being historical descendants of the primitive Semitic alphabet, which served as the sole source of a tremendous diffusion (§ 134-149).
It is worth noting, however, that the first or pictographic stage of writing is by no means a thing that flows instinctively from all men.
They do not draw rude outlines to depict objects.
Asked to do so, they profess inability, though set an example, or make a pathetically crude attempt.
Their failure or refusal does not argue inherent lack of faculty, since the children of the same races, when put to school, draw figures with interest and often with success.
The attitude of the adults is rather that of a person who had never heard even a snatch of music of any kind or seen an instrument, being taken to a concert and then asked to compose a simple little song.
He would look upon this task as transcendently beyond his powers.
There are no songless nations, but there are pictureless ones.
If, on the other hand, it is the result of a single diffusing development, this must have an antiquity of more than fifteen thousand years, as attested by the Old Stone Age paintings, and the failure of certain peoples to be affected is also in need of explanation.
The Hindu inclination in this direction is discussed below (§ 146).
That the phonetic symbols of rebus systems should be largely syllabic is small wonder, for they are pictures of things named with whole words.
But the Hindu script was derived from a Semitic letter alphabet, and its essentially syllabic nature thus represents a reversion.
The Japanese in adding 47 purely phonetic characters to the Chinese ideograms in order to express grammatical elements, proper names, and the like in their [225] speech, denoted a syllable by each character.
A third as many consonant and vowel signs would have answered the same purpose.
When Sequoya the Cherokee devised an alphabet for his people in order to equate them with the whites, he incorporated the forms of a number of the English letters, but the values of all his signs were syllabic.
He had had enough mission schooling to be stimulated by the idea of writing, but “instinctively” fell back on syllable signs even though this necessitated two hundred different characters.
There is an evident psychological reason for the uniformity of these endeavors: we image words, in fact produce them, in syllables, not in sounds.
This case of parallelism rests, therefore, on a psychological fact of apperception.
Cumbersome and strange as this system appears, an exact parallel to it in principle was devised by the Hellenistic philosophers when they coupled the twenty-four hours of the day with the seven planets in a 168-hour cycle which gave the order and names to the days of the [226] week (§ 124).
[16] All three of these devices are based on the same mathematical principle and serve the same end of time reckoning.
But their content and result is different.
The Greeks combined 24 with 7, the Chinese 12 with 10, the Mayas 13 with 20 and 260 with 365; and the periods treated ranged from hours to years.
These cases of primary parallelism allow the inference that there are certain inherent tendencies of the human mind in certain directions, such as operation in rebus reading, syllabic writing, reckoning by least common multiples.
Here, then, is a seeming approach for a definite psychological interpretation of the history of civilization.
Yet the results of such a method of attack must not be overestimated.
The generic manner of culture in these several instances is indeed uniform enough to permit the conclusion that it springs from a uniform impulse or bent of the mind.
But all the particular, concrete content of these cultural manifestations is as diverse as their historical origins are separate; which means that psychology may explain what is psychological in the cases, but that a larger cultural constituent remains over before which the generically valid principles of psychology are ineffective as explanations.
As in the case of the influence of physical environment it might be said that psychological factors provide the limiting conditions of cultural phenomena.
The odd pipes differ, each from the next, by the interval of a fourth.
The even pipes give notes half-way in pitch between the adjacent odd ones, and thus form another “circle of fourths.” But the similarity does not end here.
The absolute pitch of the examined instruments from Melanesia and Brazil is the same.
Thus, the vibration rates in successive pipes are 557 and 560.5; 651 and 651; 759 and 749; 880 and 879!
This is so close a coincidence as to [227] seem at first sight beyond the bounds of accidental convergence.
The data have in fact been offered, and in some quarters accepted, as evidence of a historical connection between the western Pacific and South America.
Yet the connection would have had to be ancient, since no memory of it remains nor is it supported by resemblances in race, speech, nor anything obvious in culture.
The instruments are perishable.
Primitive people, working by rule of thumb, would be unable to produce an instrument of given absolute pitch except by matching it against another, and perhaps not then.
Moreover, it is not known that absolute pitch is of the least concern to them.
It is therefore incredible that this correspondence rests on any ancient diffusion: there must be an error in the record somewhere, or the one accident in a million has happened in the particular instruments examined.
The identity of scale or intervals however remains, and may be a true case of parallelism.
Only, as usual, it boils down to a rather simple matter.
This produces over-tones; of which the second, the “third partial tone,” is the fifth above the octave of the fundamental, so that successive notes in either the odd or even series of pipes, would, on the octave being disallowed, differ by fourths.
The basis of the resemblance, then, is a physical law of sound.
The cultural similarity shrinks to the facts of pipes in series, the use of overblown tones, and the intercalating odd-even series.
Even these resemblances are striking, and more specific than many cited cases of parallelism.
Bronze is copper alloyed with five to twenty per cent of tin.
The metals form a compound with properties different from those of the two constituents.
Tin is a soft metal, yet bronze is harder than copper, and therefore superior for tools.
Also, it melts at a lower temperature [228] and expands in solidifying from the molten condition, and thus is better material for castings.
In the eastern hemisphere bronze was discovered early and used widely.
For nearly two thousand years it was the metal par excellence of the more advanced nations.
A Bronze Age, beginning about 4,000 B.C., more or less simultaneously with the first phonetic writing, is recognized as one of the great divisions of cultural time (§ 66, 225).
In the western hemisphere bronze was apparently invented later than in the eastern and spread less extensively.
It was discovered in or near the Bolivian highland, which is rich in tin (§ 196).
From there its use diffused to the Peruvian highland, then to the coast, then north to about Ecuador, and finally, perhaps by maritime contacts, to Mexico, where local deposits of tin were probably made use of after their value was realized.
Theoretically, it might be queried whether knowledge of bronze had possibly been carried to the Andes from the eastern hemisphere by some now forgotten migration or culture transmission.
It is ten thousand miles by land from the metal-working nations of Asia to the middle Andes.
A people or culture wave that had traveled so far could not but have left traces of its course by the way.
The utilitarian superiority of bronze over stone tools is so great that no people that had once learned the art would be likely to give it up.
Even if here and there a group of tribes had retrograded, it cannot be imagined that all the nations between China and Peru could have slipped back so decisively.
The theory of a Chinese junk swept out of its course and washed on a South American shore might be invoked.
But the original South American bronze culture occupies an inland mountain area.
Further, while Asiatic ships have repeatedly been wrecked on the Pacific coast of North America and probably at times also on that of South America, there is everything to indicate that the civilizational effects of such accidents were practically [229] nil.
The highest cultures of Mexico and South America were evolved in interior mountain valleys or plateaus.
Not one of the great accomplishments of the American race— architecture, sculpture, mathematics, metallurgy—shows any specific localization on the shore of the Pacific.
Further, it is hard to understand how the arrival of a handful of helpless strangers could initiate an enduring culture growth.
It is easy enough for us, looking backward through the vista of history, to fancy the lonely Indians standing on the shore to welcome the strangers from the west, and then going with docility to school to learn their superior accomplishments.
Actually, however, people normally do not feel or act in this way.
Nations are instinctively imbued with a feeling of superiority.
They look down upon the foreigner.
Even where they admit his skill in this matter or that, they envy rather than admire him.
In no case did the natives make any attempt to absorb the higher culture of the strangers.
Generally these were enslaved or killed, their property rifled; sometimes the wreck was set on fire.
The greed for immediate gain of the treasures in sight proved stronger than any dim impulses toward self-improvement by learning.
This renders possible the unambiguous designation of numbers of any size with a small stock of figures.
Such a system is impossible without a sign for nothingness: 123 and 1,023 would be indistinguishable.
Our zero, along with the other nine digits, appears to be an invention of the Hindus approximately twelve or fifteen hundred years ago.
We call the notation “Arabic” because it was transmitted from India to Europe by the Arabs.
Maya symbols for zero: a, monumental; b, c, cursive.
Without a zero sign and position values, two methods are open for the representation of higher numerical values.
More and more signs can be added for the high values.
This was done by the Greeks and Romans.
MV means 1,005, and only that.
A simple system of multiplying numbers expressed like this one is impossible.
The unwieldiness is due to the fact that the Romans, not having hit upon the device of representing nothingness, employed the separate signs I, X, C, M for the quantities which we represent by the single symbol 1 with from no to three zeroes added.
The other method is that followed by the Chinese.
Besides signs corresponding to our digits from 1 to 9, they developed symbols corresponding to “ten times,” “hundred times,” and so on.
This was much as if we should use the asterisk, *, to denote tens, the [231] dagger, †, for hundreds, the paragraph, ¶, for thousands.
We could then represent 1,888 by 1 ¶ 8 † 8 * 8, and 1,005 by 1 ¶ 5, without any risk of being misunderstood.
But the writing of the numbers would in most cases require more figures, and mathematical operations would be more awkward.
Some forms of their zero are shown in Figure 28.
This Maya development constitutes an indubitable parallel with the Hindu one.
So far as the involved logical principle is concerned, the two inventions are identical.
But again the concrete expressions of the principle are dissimilar.
The Maya zero does not in the least have the form of our or the Hindus’ zero.
They worked with twenty fundamental digits instead of ten.
Their “100” therefore stood for 400, their “1,000” for 8,000.
[17] Accordingly, when they wrote, in their corresponding digits, 1,234, the value was not 1,234 but 8,864.
Obviously there can be no question of a common origin for such a system and ours.
They share an idea or a method, nothing more.
As a matter of fact, these two notational systems, like all others, were preceded by numeral word counts.
Our decimal word count is based on operations with the fingers, that of the Maya on operations with the fingers and toes.
Twenty became their first higher unit because twenty finished a person.
It is interesting that of the two inventions of zero, the Maya one was the earlier.
It may be older; it certainly required time to develop.
The Hindus may have possessed the prototypes of our numerals as early as the second century after Christ, but as yet without the zero, which was added during the sixth or according to some authorities not until the ninth century.
This priority of the Maya must weaken the arguments sometimes advanced that the ancient Americans derived their religion, zodiac, art, or writing from Asia.
If the zero was their own product, why not the remainder of their progress also?
That is, all persons born in a unit must take spouses born in some other unit, fellow members of one’s unit being regarded as kinsmen.
Often the association finds expression in magic or myth.
Since under this system one is born into his social unit, cannot change it, and can belong to one only, it follows that descent is unilateral.
[18] Institutions of this type have a wide and irregular distribution.
They are frequent in Australia, New Guinea, and Melanesia; found in parts of the East Indies and southeastern Asia; quite rare or stunted in the remainder of Asia and Polynesia; fairly common in Africa, though they occur in scattered areas; characteristic again of a large part of North America, but confined to a few districts of South America.
At a rough guess, it might be said that about as many savage peoples, the world over, possess totemic-exogamous clans [233] or moieties as lack them.
The patchiness on the map of exogamic institutions argues against their being all the result of a wave of culture transmission emanating from a single source.
Had such a diffusion occurred, it should have left its marks among the numerous intervening tribes that are sibless.
Further, both in the eastern and western hemispheres, the most primitive and backward tribes are, with fair regularity, sibless and non-totemic.
The question then becomes, how often, and where?
The evidence for America has been reviewed in another connection (§ 185).
If so, this would be an instance of convergence on the same continent—a rather rare phenomenon.
For Australia, New Guinea, and Melanesia, the geographical proximity is so close as to suggest a single origin for the whole area.
This fact has been interpreted as the result of an earlier patrilineal and a later matrilineal phase of diffusion.
It is interesting that this conclusion parallels the tentative one independently arrived at for America, although in both hemispheres further analysis and distributional study must precede a positive verdict.
A similar tendency toward geographical association is found in other phases of social structure: the clan and moiety, and again totemism and exogamy.
Under the plural system, a person, being of clan A, may marry at will into clans B, C, D, E, F. Three of his four grandparents would normally be of other clans than his own, but of which they were members, would vary in each individual case.
In a patrilineal society, one member of clan A would have his maternal uncles of clan B; the next, of clan C; a third, perhaps of clan F; according to the choices which their fathers had made of wives.
Two of his grandparents, say his father’s father and his mother’s mother, are inevitably of his own moiety, the two others of the opposite one.
Every possible kinsman —his maternal uncle, his cross cousin, his father-in-law, his wife’s brother-in-law, his daughter’s son—has his moiety affiliation foreordained.
Where descent is paternal, for instance, everybody knows that his future mother-in-law must be of his own moiety.
Evidently the effect of this dual system on the relations between kinsfolk, on social usages, on the individual’s attitude of mind toward other individuals, should normally tend to be profoundly different from the influence of a multiple clan system.
On theoretical grounds it might seem likely that the dual and multiple schemes had nothing [236] to do with each other, that they sprang from distinct psychological impulses.
Yet such a belief would be ungrounded, as the facts of distribution promptly make clear.
So in the Eastern, the Plains, and the Northwest areas of North America, clan tribes and moiety tribes live side by side; whereas as soon as these regions are left behind, there are vast districts—much of Mexico, Texas, the Great Basin and Plateau, northern Canada and the Arctic coast—whose inhabitants get along without either clans or moieties.
29), the two types of organization exist side by side, while most of Polynesia, Asia, and Europe are void of both.
Only Africa shows some development of multiple clan institutions but no moieties.
Either they contain both clan tribes and moiety tribes, or they contain neither.
A similar relation exists between exogamic units, be they moieties or clans, and totemism.
The first constitutes a scheme of society, a method of organization; the second, a system of symbolism.
There is no positive reason why they should be associated.
They are not always associated.
Exogamy and totemism, then, are theoretically separate factors.
Yet since they are distinct, it is remarkable that in probably seven or eight tenths of all cases they coincide, and that in each of the continents or areas containing them they are found associated.
If exogamy and totemism had grown out of separate roots, one could expect at least one considerable area somewhere in which one of them appeared without the other.
But there is no such area.
Wherever social exogamy appears among a larger group of nations, social totemism also crops out; and vice versa.
In other words, their correlation is positive and strong.
A number are touched upon elsewhere in this volume under the name of culture trait associations or complexes (§ 97, 149).
But usually such a complex or nexus consists of culture elements that have no necessary connection: Christianity and trousers, for instance.
But there is something arbitrary about this cohesion, generally.
There is no inherent reason why a hundred American tribes that grow maize should also grow beans and squashes and nothing else; but they do limit themselves to the three.
Its elements, however separate or even opposite logically, do have a [238] certain psychological affinity to one another.
Also, the arbitrary maize-beans-squash complex and other complexes are generally not duplicated.
But the intricate and psychologically founded totemism-exogamy-descent complex looks as if it might have been triplicated or quadruplicated.
This parallelism, if the facts prove to substantiate it, is parallelism raised to a higher power than any yet considered.
Heretofore the discussion has been of the parallelism of single culture traits.
Here it is a case of parallelism of a complex of culture traits.
Such complex convergence might suggest something peculiar to or inherent in the human mind, leading it, once it is stimulated to commence the development of one of the factors of the complex, to follow with the production of the other factors.
[20] Similar instances would be the tendency of agriculture to be followed by town life, if it could be demonstrated, though this seems doubtful; of settled living to be accompanied by migration legends; of religions with personal founders to become propagandizing and international but in time to die out among the nations in which they were originated.
In regard to all such cases it may be said first of all that an exhaustive analysis is necessary to ascertain whether the seeming association or correlation is borne out by the facts.
Second, the possibility of diffusion must be eliminated.
If Melanesian and African totem-exogamy are both products of one culture growth, they cannot be counted as two examples of the same association.
If they should ultimately both prove to be linked with the American system by a wave of migration or culture contact, as has, indeed been maintained in two separate hypotheses recently advanced, parallelism is of course disproved altogether.
In short, we should then be beginning to grasp specific psychological determinants for the phenomena or events of civilization.
Not only are a hundred instances of diffusion historically traceable for every one of parallelism, but the latter is regularly limited in scope.
Something tends to make us see phenomena more parallel than they actually are.
They merely spring from the same impulse, they inhere in the properties of objects or nature, they bear resemblance at one point only—and differ at all other points.
Yet they tend to impress us, in some mysterious way, as almost identical.
A whale may look fishlike, he is a mammal.
The Hindu and the Maya zero are logically the same; actually they have in common nothing but their abstract value: their shapes, their place in their systems, are different.
The most frequent process of culture history therefore is one of tradition or diffusion in time and space, corresponding roughly to hereditary transmission in the field of organic life.
Inventions may be thought of as similar to organic mutations, those “spontaneous” variations that from time to time arise and establish themselves.
The particular causes of both inventions and mutations remain as good as unknown.
Now and then a mutant or an invention heads in the same direction as another previously arisen one.
But, since they spring from different antecedents, such [240] convergences never attain identity.
They remain on the level of analogous resemblance.
Substantial identity, a part for part correspondence, is invariably a sign of common origin, in cultural as well as organic history.
House building and architecture.—114.
The problem of spanning.—115.
The column and beam.—116.
The true arch.—118.
Babylonian and Etruscan beginnings.—119.
The Roman arch and dome.—120.
The Arabs: India: modern architecture.—122.
The week: holy numbers.—123.
Babylonian discovery of the planets.—124.
Greek and Egyptian contributions: the astrological combination.—125.
The names of the days and the Sabbath.—126.
The week in Christianity, Islam, and eastern Asia.—127.
Summary of the diffusion.—128.
Month-thirds and market weeks.—129.
Leap days as parallels.
In exemplification of the principles discussed in the last two chapters, the next two are given over to a more detailed consideration of several typical ramifying growths whose history happens to be known with satisfactory fullness.
These are the arch, the week, and the alphabet.
Obviously, too, geography and climate are bound to have at least a delimiting influence.
The Eskimo of the Arctic cannot build houses of wood; the inhabitants of a coral reef in the Pacific could not, however much they might wish, develop a style in brick.
In structures not used as dwellings, their purpose necessarily affects their form.
A temple is likely to be made on a different plan from a court of law.
Temples themselves may vary according to the motives and rituals of the religions which they serve.
Bewilderment begins to abate as soon as one ceases trying to contemplate all buildings reared by human hands.
Obviously a dwelling erected by a small family group for the utilitarian purpose of shelter is likely to be more subject to immediate adaptations to [242] climate than a large communal structure serving some purpose such as the service of a deity.
If consideration be restricted still further, to religious or public buildings set up with the idea of permanence, another class of causes making for variability begins to be eliminated.
A structure intended as an enduring monument is reared with consideration to the impression that it will create in the minds of future generations.
Such permanent buildings being in stone or brick, techniques which flourish in wood or other temporary materials are eliminated.
Finally, a monumental structure is possible only at the hands of a community of some size.
The aggregation of numbers of men in one spot is always accompanied by specialization in advancement of the arts.
A four hundred foot pyramid does not differ in principle from the waist-high one that a child might pile up.
The problems which it involves are essentially the economic and political ones of providing and controlling the needed multitudes of workers.
Architecture as such is in abeyance and the engineering problems involved are mainly those of transporting and raising large blocks of stone.
Much the same holds of walls.
The Incas, for instance, reared masonry of astounding [243] massiveness and exactness without ever seriously attempting to solve architectural problems.
Once, however, a structure is planned to cover a wide space, it becomes architecturally ambitious.
The roof of a large dwelling can be made easily of poles and thatch by such collaborators as a family might muster.
But to span a clear space of some size in stone requires more than numbers of workers.
The accomplishment also yields definite sense of achievement which is strong in proportion as the extent of the ceiling is great.
A vault whose walls are thicker than its interior is wide, produces as chief impression an effect of massiveness.
The story of these voluntary and imaginative endeavors is the history of monumental art.
Two principal methods have been followed in the solution of the problem of covering large free spaces.
The first is the method of the column and the lintel; the second that of the arch or vault.
The column and lintel do not differ fundamentally from the idea of the wall with superimposed roof beams.
The elements of both are vertical support and horizontal beam.
In the arch, however, this simple scheme is departed from, and the covering elements take on a curved or sloping form.
The beam is subject to bending stress.
Timber makes a good material because of its strength against breakage by bending.
Stone is unreliable or outrightly weak against a bending stress, besides adding to the stress by its own weight.
There are therefore inherent limitations on the space that can be covered by a horizontal stone beam.
Even so superb an architecture as that of the Greeks never rose above it.
On account of its essential simplicity, columnar architecture grew up among several historically unconnected nations.
In the case of most of them, there can be distinguished an early stage of building in wood, when the column was the trunk of a tree, and a later stage in which the post was replaced by a monolith, or by superimposed drums of stone.
This change appears to have taken place somewhat independently in Egypt and in Greece, and wholly so in Mexico.
It has been thought that Greek architecture was derived from Egypt, but there was probably little more than a transmission of stimulus, since Greek temples were wooden pillared several thousand years after the Egyptians were rearing huge stone columns.
Furthermore, if the Greeks had borrowed their column outright from Egypt, they would probably have copied it slavishly at the outset.
Yet their early capitals are without the lotus flower head in which the Egyptian column terminated.
Here, then, and still more in Mexico, there was parallel development.
The failure of the Greeks to pass beyond column and lintel architecture may seem strange for a people that showed so unusual an artistic faculty and so bold and enterprising a spirit as they manifested in most departments of civilization.
The Greek state remained a city.
All attempts to establish larger political aggregates, whether on the basis of confederation or conquest, failed miserably and speedily.
Paved roads, aqueducts, sewers, and works of a like character were scarcely attempted on any scale of magnitude.
[245] With the rather small numbers of individuals which at best the Greeks assembled in one spot, such works were not necessary, and undertaken in mere ambition, they would have encountered public antagonism.
This fact illustrates the almost organic interconnection existing between the several sides of the culture of any people; it illustrates also the importance of knowing the whole of a civilization before trying to provide an explanation for any one of its manifestations.
It is a device for carrying construction over an empty space without horizontal beams.
Both are arches in form, but the blocks that form the curvature of one are not self-supporting; in the other they are.
The stone at the end of the second course of masonry extends part of its length beyond the end stone of the first course.
At the opposite side, the second course hangs similarly out above the first.
In the third course, the end blocks again project beyond those of the second.
The arrangement thus is that of two series of brackets, or two staircases turned upside down.
What keeps the projecting stones from toppling into the clear space?
Nothing, obviously, but such weight as is put on their inner or embedded ends.
Suppose a stone projects a third of its length beyond the one below, so that its center of gravity is still above the lower stone.
It will then lie as placed.
Suppose still another stone again projects a third of its length beyond the second.
Its center of gravity now falling outside the lowest block, it will topple both itself and the second one.
Only if other blocks are inserted behind will their counterweight hold up the projecting [246] blocks.
Obviously, there will be more such counterweights needed the higher the side of the arch rises.
In general, the area of wall needed as counterweight is at least as great as the area of overhanging.
If the arch is to clear ten feet horizontally—hanging over five feet from each side—there must be five feet or more of masonry built up on each side of the clear space.
The same principle holds for the vault, which is a three-dimensional extension of the virtually two-dimensional arch.
The weight above strives to snap them in two.
These developments seem historically connected.
This parallel development differs from that of the true arch, which seems everywhere to be derived from a single original source.
The blocks that form the under surface or soffit of its span are self-sustaining.
The fundamental principle of the true arch is the integration of its elements.
Such an arch is nothing until completed; but from that moment its constituents fuse their strength.
Each block has a shape which is predetermined by the design of the whole, and each is useless, in fact, not even self-supporting, until all the others have been fitted with it.
Each is a gently sloping piece of wedge instead of a rectangular block.
When bricks replace dressed stone, the mortar takes the place of this shaping, being thinner toward the inner face of the vault and thicker toward the interior of the construction.
A true arch in process of erection would instantly collapse if not held up.
It can be built only over a scaffold or “centering.” Once however the keystone has wedged its parts together, it not only stands by itself but will support an enormous weight.
The greater the pressure from above, the more tightly are the blocks forced together.
The blocks are subjected only to crushing pressure, which stone and brick are specially adapted to withstand.
The weakness of the arch is that it turns vertical into horizontal thrust.
This is what the Hindus mean when they say that “the arch never sleeps.” 118.
Thence the principle of the arch was carried to adjacent Assyria.
Both these Mesopotamian peoples employed the arch chiefly on a small scale in roofing doors and in tunnels.
It remained humble and utilitarian in their hands; its [248] architectural possibilities were scarcely conceived.
They continued to rear their monumental structures mainly with an eye to quantity: high and thick walls, ramps, towers ascending vertically or by steps, prevailed.
The true arch and vault are next found in Italy, among a prosperous city-dwelling people, the Etruscans, some seven or more centuries before Christ.
All through the civilization of this nation runs a trait of successful but never really distinctive accomplishment.
The Etruscans were receptive to new ideas and applied them with energy, usually only to degenerate them in the end.
It is therefore probable that the principle of arch construction was transmitted to them from its earlier Babylonian source.
The Etruscans also failed to carry the use of the arch far into monumental architecture.
They employed it in tombs, gates, and drains rather than as a conspicuous feature of public buildings.
The great sewer of Rome, for instance, the Cloaca Maxima, is an arched vault of brick.
Gradually, however, as the Romans grew in numbers and wealth and acquired a taste for public undertakings, they transferred the construction to stone and introduced it into their buildings.
By the time their polity changed from the republican to the imperial form, the arch was the most characteristic feature of their architecture.
The exterior of their circus, the Coliseum, is a series of stories of arches.
Much of the mass of the structure also rests upon arches, thus making possible the building of the huge edifice with a minimum of material.
On the practical side, this is one [249] of the chief values of the arch.
The skill which evolved it eliminates a large percentage of brute labor.
Earlier peoples would have felt it necessary to fill the space between the interior tiers of seats and the outer wall of the Coliseum.
Once the fever of architecture had infected them, the Romans went beyond the simple arch and vault.
They invented the dome.
Their relations are those of a hoop, a barrel, and a hollow ball.
Imagine a vault revolved on a central vertical pivot, and it will describe the surface of a dome.
Two intersecting arches can be served by a single keystone.
Theoretically, more and more arches can be introduced to intersect at the same point, until they form a continuous spheroid surface.
Neither construction nor the evolution of the dome did actually take place by this method of compounding arches, which however serves to illustrate the logical relation of the two structures.
The Roman engineers put domes on their Pantheon, the tomb of Hadrian, and other buildings.
In the centuries in which the Mediterranean countries were Romanized, the dome and the arch, the vault and the row of arches set on pillars, became familiar to all the inhabitants of the civilized western world.
After Roman power crumbled, the architectural traditions survived.
Even when there was decadence of execution and little monumental construction, the principles once gained were never lost.
The arch became pointed at the top.
Vertical building lines were elongated at the expense of [250] horizontal ones, which in the lower and less brilliant sun of the north are less effective in catching light and shade and giving plastic effect than on the Mediterranean.
The dominant effect became one of aspiration toward height.
This is the so-called Gothic architecture, developed from the twelfth century on, most notably in northern France, with much originality also in England, and undergoing provincial modification in the various north European countries.
In fact, the style was finally carried back into Italy, to compete there with the Romanesque order, as in the famous cathedral of Milan.
As an artistic design a Gothic cathedral is as different from an imperial Roman building as the latter from a Greek temple.
Yet it represents nothing but a surface modification of Roman methods.
Its essential engineering problems had been solved more than a thousand years earlier.
The effect of a hemispherical arch associated with low round columns, and of a high pointed one soaring from tall clusters of buttresses, is as diverse as can be obtained in architecture.
But so far as plan or invention are concerned, there is no decisive distinction between the two orders.
The great church of St. Sophia at Constantinople is a sixth century example of a splendid dome set on four great arches and intersecting with smaller domes at its corners.
From the Byzantine Greeks—or Romans as they long continued to call themselves—and perhaps from the neighboring Sassanian Persians, the principle of arch and dome came to the Arabs when these underwent their sudden expansion after the death of Mohammed.
In nearly all the countries overrun by the Arabs, Mesopotamia, Syria, Egypt, North Africa, Sicily, and Spain, they encountered innumerable old public buildings or ruins.
It was not long before they were emulating these.
During the centuries superficial fashion does not stand still in architecture any more than in dress.
The trousers of 1850 would seem out of place if worn in 1920, and [251] yet the two garments are identical in basic plan.
The Arab sometimes twisted his columns and bulged his arch to horseshoe shape.
He added no essential element.
Among the countries in which the Arabs built is Spain.
They in turn carried the style to Mexico; from there it was transported to New Mexico and California, where converted Indians made and laid the adobe bricks of their mission churches according to the plans of the padres.
Since the American occupation, the buildings and ruins of the Spanish period have stood out as landmarks, fired the imagination of visitors, and set the model for a type of architecture.
Railroad stations and the like are now done in “Mission” style, which in essentials is nothing but Spanish Moorish architecture, as this again is only the Arab modification of the Roman original.
In the sixteenth century Mohammedan conquerors of Mongol origin, known therefore as the Moguls, carved out a great empire in northern India.
Prosperity resulted for several generations, and its memory was embellished by the erection of notable buildings.
Perhaps the most famous of these is the tomb near Agra known as the Taj Mahal.
Yet the central feature of the Taj Mahal is a great dome done on the identical plan as that of St. Sophia or the Pantheon and derived from them.
What then one is wont to regard as the triumph of Indian architecture is not Indian at all; no more than Gothic architecture had any connection with the Goths.
The one is Mohammedan, the other French.
Both represent little else than the working out in new countries and in later centuries of an invention which the Romans had borrowed from the Etruscans and they from the Babylonians.
Our public buildings, those intended to serve as monuments and therefore summoning the utmost abilities of the architect, still make use of the arch, vault, and dome, or fall back frankly on modifications of the Greek temple with its rows of columns.
So far as the outside appearance of modern buildings goes, all our fine architecture is essentially a burrowing in the past to recombine in slightly new proportions, and for new uses, elements taken from the most diverse countries and ages, but forming part of only two lines of development.
It may be, when we have built much longer in steel and concrete, and perhaps still newer materials, that the inherent properties of these may gradually force on a future generation of architects and engineers possibilities which indeed are now lying before us, but to which the resistance of the human mind to novelty blinds us.
Its origins go back to a number cult.
Three and seven at once rise to mind, with thirteen as unfortunate.
But the particular numbers considered mystic are very diverse.
The latter, in fact, [253] would have seemed to almost all of them imperfect and insignificant.
Nearly all the Americans who were conscious of any preferential custom exalted four; and the remaining tribes, those of the North Pacific Coast, were addicted to five.
The Africans were without any feeling for seven, except where they had come under Islamic or other foreign influences.
The Australians and Pacific islanders also have not concerned themselves with seven, and the same seems to be true of those remoter peoples of northern Asia which remained until recently beyond the range of the irradiation of higher civilization.
This reduces the area in which seven is thought to have sacred power to a single continuous tract comprising Europe, the culturally advanced portions of Asia and the East Indies, and such parts of Africa as have come under Eur-Asiatic influence.
This circumscribed distribution suggests diffusion from a single originating center.
Where this may have been, there is no direct evidence to show, but there are indications that it lay in Babylonia.
Here mathematics, astrology, and divination flourished at an early time.
Since the art of foretelling the issue of events from examination of a victim’s liver spread from Babylonia to Italy on one side and to Borneo on the other, it is the more likely that the equally ancient attribution of mystic virtue to seven may have undergone the same diffusion.
In fact, the two practices may have traveled as part of a “complex.” The Greeks and Hebrews are virtually out of question as originators because they were already thinking in terms of seven at a time when they were only receiving culture elements from Babylonia without giving anything in return.
The Egyptians turned their interest to the sun and the year, and devised the earliest accurate [254] solar calendar.
The Babylonians lagged behind in this respect, adhering to a cumbersome lunar-solar calendar.
But they acquired more information as to other heavenly phenomena: the phases of the moon, eclipses, the courses of the planets.
They devised the zodiac and learned to half predict eclipses.
It is true that their interest in these realms was not scientific in the modern sense, but sacerdotal and magical.
An eclipse was a misfortune, an expected eclipse that did not “come off,” a cause for rejoicing.
Yet this superstitious interest did lead the Babylonians to genuine astronomical discoveries.
Among these was the observation that five luminaries besides the sun and moon move regularly across the heavens, visible to the naked eye and independent of the host of fixed stars: the planets that we call Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.
This impressive fact must have significance, they felt, and from anthropocentric reasons they found the significance in the influence of these bodies on the fortunes of men.
The planets were identified with gods by the Babylonians, at any rate named after gods.
It is even probable that the ancient priest-astronomer-magicians were driven to distinguish the full set of observable planets by their desire to attain the full number seven.
It is not an obvious thing by any means that the all-illuminating sun should be set on a par with moving stars that at times are no more conspicuous than some fixed ones.
No people unaffected by the Babylonian precedent has ever hit upon the strange device of reckoning sun and moon as stars.
It is said that great astronomers of a few centuries ago sometimes never in their lives saw this innermost of the planets with naked eye, at least in northern latitudes.
It seems possible therefore that its Babylonian discovery may have been hastened by an eagerness to attain the perfect seven for the number of the traveling bodies.
They for the first time determined the distance or order of the seven luminaries from the earth, and determined it as correctly as was possible as long as it was assumed that our earth formed the center of the universe.
Ptolemy—the astronomer, not the king—placed Saturn as the most outward, next Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon.
This scientific advance, the west Asiatic astrologers again took hold of and brought into connection with the hours of the day.
For this purpose they employed not the old Babylonian division of the day and night into twelve hours—which had long since passed over to the Greeks—but the Egyptian reckoning of twenty-four.
This was possible because the Greek discoveries were made in the Egyptian city of Alexandria.
Each of the twenty-four hours in turn was assigned by the astrologers to a planet in the Ptolemaic order, beginning with Saturn.
As there were only the seven, the cycle began over again on the eighth hour, and in the same way the fifteenth and twenty-second were “dominated” by Saturn.
This gave the twenty-third to Jupiter, the twenty-fourth to Mars, and the twenty-fifth—the first of the next day, to the Sun.
This second day was thought to be specially under the influence of the planet of its initial hour, the Sun, as the first was under the influence of its initial hour, that of Saturn.
With the continuance of the count, the Moon would become dominant of the first hour of the third day, and so on through the repeated series, the remaining planets emerging in the sequence Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus; whereupon, the cycle having been exhausted, it would begin all over again with Saturn’s day—Saturday, as we still call it—and its successors Sun’s day and Moon’s day.
This was the week as we know it, evolved perhaps somewhat more than a century before Christ, soon carried back into Alexandria, and there imparted to Greeks, Romans, and other nationalities.
By the time Jesus was preaching, knowledge of the planetary [256] week had reached Rome.
Less than a century later, its days were being written in Pompeii.
In another hundred years it was spoken of by contemporaries as internationally familiar.
The names of the days were those of the gods which the Babylonians had assigned to the planets a thousand or more years earlier, or, in the Western world, “translations” of the Babylonian god names.
The reckoning of the week was growing in frequency, and some sort of familiar and pronounceable names for its days had to be found for the new peoples to whom it spread.
So a minimum of resemblance between two deities answered for an identification.
Moreover, the ancients, because they believed in the reality of their gods but not in the infinity of their number, were in the habit of assuming that the deities of foreign nations must be at bottom the same as their own.
For the days of the week, then, which the public came more and more to deal with, these translations were made.
Jesus observed the Sabbath, not Sunday, which he was either ignorant of or would have denounced as polytheistic.
The influence of the Babylonian-Hebrew Sabbath on the development of the week was chiefly this: it provided the early Christians with a ready-made habit of religiously observing one day in seven.
Sunday, instead of Sabbath-Saturday, became the religious day of the week in Christianity because of the early tradition that it was on this day that Jesus rose from the dead.
An unconscious motive of perhaps greater influence was the desire to differentiate the new religion from its Sabbath-observing mother religion, both in the minds of converts from Judaism and in the opinion of the pagans.
The Romans for about a century [258] confused Jews and Christians, no doubt to the irritation of both.
At any rate, in 321 A.D. Constantine ordained “the venerable day of the Sun” as a legal holiday from governmental, civic, and industrial activity.
Before long, church and state were in accord to discountenance work on Sunday; and thus Christianity had adopted the heathen planetary week in all respects but the names of its days.
Protestantism finally withdrew even this barrier and accepted the planet-god names that had so long been popularly and civilly established.
The Mohammedan week is that of Judaism and Eastern Christianity, and was taken over bodily from one or the other of these religions.
Sunday is the “first” day, and so in order to Thursday.
Friday is “the meeting,” when one prays at the mosque, but labors before and after, if one wishes.
The Arabs have spread this form of the week far into Africa.
But the planetary week of Babylonian-Greek-Egyptian-Syrian origin spread east as well as west and north and south.
By the fifth century, it had been introduced into India.
For a time after the tenth century, it was more used in dating than among European nations.
From India, the week spread north into Tibet, east to the Indo-Chinese countries, and southeast to the Malay Peninsula, Sumatra, and Java.
An ancient west Asiatic mystic valuation or magical cult of the number seven led on the one hand to an observance of taboo days, on the other to an association with the earliest astronomical knowledge, polytheistic worship, and divination.
A European people learned the combination and built on it for further scientific progress, only to have this gain utilized for new playing by the astrologers.
The planetary week, the creation of these mathematical diviners, was reintroduced into Europe and became connected with the calendar and civil life.
Mohammedanism took over this concept along with the period, but without the polytheistic and astrological elements.
Eastern Asia, on the other hand, was chiefly interested in the latter.
With us, the significance is becoming increasingly economic.
Names have changed again and again, but their very variations evidence their equivalence.
In about three thousand years from its first beginnings and half as many from its definitive establishment, the institution of the week by 1492 had spread over all the earth except the peripheral tracts of Asia and Africa and the peripheral continents of Oceania and America.
No historic connections are known between the custom in these regions; its official and religious associations are everywhere slender, and intervening nations either employ other periods or none at all.
It looks, therefore, as if these might be cases of true parallelism, although in that event an American occurrence might also be expected and its absence seems in need of explanation.
If an institution as precise and artificial as our planetary week had been independently originated more than once, the fact would be more significant.
Regular market days among agricultural peoples have frequently led to a reckoning of time superficially resembling the week.
Some tribes shorten the period to three days or lengthen it to five.
The fairly compact distribution of this African market week points to a single origin.
The early Romans observed a regular eighth day market and semi-holiday.
This might be connected with the African institution, but as yet cannot be historically linked with it.
In ancient America, markets were customary every fifth day in Mexico, third day in Colombia, tenth day in Peru.
These were also days of assembly and cessation from labor.
The American instances establish beyond cavil that some of these market weeks are truly independent evolutions.
Moreover, they nearly all occur among peoples of about the same degree of advancement, at any rate on the economic side of their cultures.
But it is [261] only the idea, the outline of the institution, that is similar; its concrete cultural execution, as expressed in the length of the period, differs in Asia and Africa, and in the three American regions.
That the Mexican and Southeast Asiatic weeks were both of five days, means nothing but the sort of coincidence to be expected when the choice of duration is limited to a small range, such as between three and ten days.
The Egyptians counted the 360 in twelve months of thirty days, the Mayas and Aztecs in eighteen groups of twenty days; both agreed in regarding the five leap days as supplementary and unlucky.
This last fact looks like a close correspondence, but analysis dissolves much of the likeness.
The solar year consists of 365 days and a fraction.
There is nothing cultural about that phenomenon except its recognition.
Careful observation continued for a long enough period inevitably yields the result.
But 365 is indivisible except by 5 and 73; 360 is much “rounder,” that is, divisible by many numbers, and these “simple” like 6, 10, 12, 18, 20, 30, and therefore easier to operate with.
This again is a mathematical, not a cultural fact.
The five supplementary days thus scarcely represent any distinctive achievement.
As to their being considered unlucky and evil, that is unquestionably a true cultural parallel.
At the same time, this parallel cannot be enacted into any generally valid law.
These twelve days were looked upon as prophetic and portentous, but not as specifically evil.
The Persian and Armenian calendars, seemingly derived from the Egyptian, had the same five supplementary days.
But in the former the first of its five is reckoned as lucky, only the third as unlucky; and in the latter, none of the five has any special value or observance.
In short, the human mind does tend to attach an unusual value to any day in the [262] calendar that is in any way outstanding.
This observation is a psychological one, and could be predicted from what is known of the principle of association in individual psychology.
When it comes to the social expression of this tendency, regularity ceases.
Sometimes the value of the special day is virtually identical among unconnected social groups, such as the Mayas and Egyptians; sometimes it is diverse, as between them and ourselves; and sometimes the value wholly disappears, as in Armenia.
Parallelism in any matter of civilization is never complete and perfect, just as culture elements rarely spread far or long without modification.
Kinds of writing: pictographic and mixed phonetic.—131.
Deficiencies of transitional systems.—132.
Presumptive origins of transitional systems.—134.
Phonetic writing: the primitive Semitic alphabet.—135.
The Greek alphabet: invention of the vowels.—136.
Slowness of the invention.—137.
The Roman alphabet.—138.
Letters as numeral signs.—139.
Reform in institutions.—140.
The sixth and seventh letters.—141.
The tail of the alphabet.—142.
Capitals and minuscules.—143.
Conservatism and rationalization.—144.
Hebrew and Arabic.—146.
The spread eastward: the writing of India.—147.
The East Indies: Philippine alphabets.—149.
Northern Asia: the conflict of systems in Korea.
The first is the use of pictures of things and symbols of ideas: the pictographic method.
In the second stage the representation of sounds begins, but is made through pictures or abbreviations of pictures: and pictures or ideographs as such continue to be used alongside the pictures whose value is phonetic.
This may be called the mixed or transitional or rebus stage.
Third is the phonetic phase.
In this, the symbols used, whatever their origin may have been, no longer denote objects or ideas but are merely signs for sounds—words, syllables, or the elemental letter-sounds.
The first of these stages, the pictographic, and the degree to which it flows, or rather fails to flow spontaneously out of the human mind, have already been discussed (§ 105).
The second or transitional stage makes use of the principle that pictures may either be interpreted directly as pictures or can be named.
A picture or suggestive sketch of the organ of sight may stand for the thing itself, the eye.
Or, the emphasis may be on the word eye, its sound; then the picture can be made with the purpose of representing that sound when it has a different meaning, as in the pronoun “I.” The method is familiar to us [264] in the form of the game which we call “rebus,” that is, a method of writing “with things” or pictures of objects.
The insect bee stands for the abstract verb “be,” two strokes or the figure 2 for the preposition “to,” a picture of a house with the sign of a tavern, that is an inn, for the prefix “in-,” and so on.
This charade-like method is cumbersome and indirect enough to provide the difficulty of interpretation that makes it fit for a game or puzzle.
The principle of reading the name instead of the idea of the thing pictured is therefore a most important invention.
There is no difficulty drawing a recognizable picture of a man, and two or three such pictures might give the idea of men.
But no picture system can express the difference between “a man” and “the man.” Nor can relational or abstract ideas like those of “here,” “that,” “by,” “of,” “you,” “why,” be expressed by pictures.
For one thing, many symbols were required.
They had to be pictured with some accuracy to be recognizable.
A picture of a bee must be made with some detail and care to be distinguishable with certainty from that of a fly or wasp or beetle.
The figure of the human eye is a more elaborate character than the letter I.
Then, too, the old pictures did not go out of use.
When the writing referred to bees and inns and eyes, pictures of these things were written and read as pictures.
The result was that a picture of an eye would in one passage stand for the organ and in [265] another for the personal pronoun.
Which its meaning was, had to be guessed from the context.
If the interpretation as pronoun fitted best—for instance, if the next characters meant “tell you”—that interpretation was chosen; but if the next word were recognized to be “brow,” or “wink,” the character would be interpreted as denoting the sense organ.
Owing to the paucity of sound signs at first, the object or idea signs had to be retained; after they were once well established, they continued to be kept alongside the sound signs even after these had grown numerous.
The tenacity of most mixed systems is remarkable.
The Egyptians early added word signs and then syllable and pure letter signs to their object signs.
After they had evolved a set of letter signs for the principal sounds of their language, they might perfectly well have discarded all the rest of their hundreds of characters.
But for three thousand years they clung to these, and wrote pictographic and phonetic characters jumbled together.
They would even duplicate to make sure: as if we should write e-y-e and then follow with a picture of an eye, for fear, as it were, that the spelling out was not sufficiently clear.
Yet of course they were only following the grooves of crystallized habit, as when we write “weight” or “piece” with unnecessary letters, or employ a combination of two simple letters each having its own value, like T and H, to represent a third simple sound, that of TH.
With us, as it was with the Egyptians, it would be more of a wrench and effort for the adult generation to change to new and simpler characters or methods than to continue in the old cumbersome habits.
So the advantage of the next generation is stifled and the established awkward system goes on indefinitely.
In all of these systems there was more or less tendency to abbreviate the pictures, to contract them to a few strokes, to reduce the original representations to conventional characters.
Cuneiform and presumably Chinese underwent this process early and profoundly.
Such conventional abbreviations made possible a certain speed of production, rendered writing of use in business and daily life, and thereby contributed to the spread of literacy.
In themselves, however, they introduced no new principle.
That is why one customarily speaks of “systems” of writing.
Without the system, there can be not even picture-writing, but only pictures, whose range of power of communication is far more limited.
An inn must be distinguished from a house by its shield, a house from a barn by its chimney, and so on.
The shield will perhaps have to be exaggerated to be visible at all, be heart-shaped or circular to distinguish it from windows; and so forth.
So with the phonetic values.
A syllable like English “per” might be represented by one scribe by means of a cat with a wavy line issuing from its mouth to denote its purr; by another by a pear; by a third, by something that habitually came as a pair, such as earrings.
This correspondence of representation and interpretation is precisely what constitutes a set of figures into a system of writing instead of a puzzle.
In fact, it seems that transitional systems of writing have originated among small groups with common business or purpose, whose members were in touch with one another, and perhaps sufficiently provided with leisure to experiment: colleges of priests, government archivists, possibly merchants with accounts.
It is also clear that any system must reflect the culture of the people among whom it originates.
The ancient Egyptians had no inns nor purses, but did have horned serpents and owls.
Still more determining is the influence of the language itself, as soon as writing attempts to be phonetic.
The words expressing pair and sieve are obviously something else in Egyptian than in English, so that if these signs were used, their sound value would be quite otherwise.
Yet once a system has crystallized, there is nothing to prevent a new nationality from taking it over bodily.
It is also well to distinguish between such cases of the whole or most of a system being taken over bodily, and other instances in which one people may have derived the generic idea of the method of writing from another and then worked out a system of its own.
Yet both the forms of the characters and their meaning and sound values differ so thoroughly in Egyptian and Cuneiform that no specific connection between them has been demonstrated, and it seems unlikely that one is a modified derivative form of the other.
So with the hieroglyphs of the Hittites and Cretans.
Consequently, although their forms are distinctive and, so far as can be judged without our being able to read these systems, their values also, it would be dogmatic to assert that the development of these two writings took place without any stimulation from Egyptian or Cuneiform.
Something of a similar argument would perhaps apply even to Chinese (§ 251), though on this point extreme caution is necessary.
If on the other hand one has in mind the content and specific manner of systems of the transitional type, Egyptian, Cuneiform, and Chinese, perhaps also Cretan and Hittite, are certainly distinct and constitute so many instances of parallelism.
Even greater is the number of independent starts if one considers pure pictographic systems, since tolerable beginnings of this type were made by the Indians of the United States, who never even attempted sound representations.
Perhaps the most significant fact about this method as distinguished from earlier forms of writing is that it was invented only once in history.
All the alphabetic systems which now prevail in nearly every part of the earth—Roman, Greek, Hebrew, Arabic, Indian, as well as many that have become extinct —can be traced back to a single source.
The story in this case is therefore one of diffusion and modification instead of parallelism.
What circumstance it was that caused this all-important invention to be made, is not known, unfortunately, though time may yet bring knowledge.
Some have looked to the Egyptian system, others to a Cuneiform or Cretan or Hittite source of inspiration.
Nor is it wholly clear who were the precise people responsible for the invention.
Moreover, they represented the sounds of Semitic with sufficient accuracy for anything in the language to be written and read without trouble.
These twenty-two letters look simple and insignificant alongside the numerous, beautiful, and interesting Egyptian hieroglyphs.
But on them is based every form of alphabet ever used by humanity.
Now Moab was a little and rude country, somewhat off the roads of commerce and civilization.
This spread must have been facilitated by the close kinship of the speech of these nations, enabling any of them to adopt the alphabet of another without material modification.
The fact of the transmission is corroborated by the form of the letters and by their order in the alphabet.
It is also proved very prettily by the names of the letters.
As we speak of the ABC, the Greeks spoke of the Alpha Beta—whence our word “alphabet.” Now “alpha” and “beta” mean nothing in Greek.
They are obviously foreign names.
Or possibly the letters originated in some other way, and then, names for them being felt to be desirable, and the shape of the first rudely suggesting the outline of an ox’s head and the second a house, these names were applied to the characters already in use.
The same sort of correspondence can be traced through most of the remaining letters.
A people who themselves invented an alphabet would obviously name the letters with words in their own language, and not with meaningless syllables taken from a foreign speech.
They improved it.
An outstanding peculiarity of Semitic writing was that it dispensed with vowels.
It represented the consonants fully and accurately, in fact had carefully devised letters for a number of breath and guttural sounds which European languages either do not contain or generally neglect to recognize.
But, as if to compensate, the Semitic languages possess the distinctive trait of a great variability of vowels.
When a verb is conjugated, when it is converted into a noun, and in other circumstances, the vowels change, only the consonants remaining the same, much as in English “sing” becomes “sang” in the past and “goose” changes to “geese” in the plural.
Only, in English such changes are comparatively few, whereas in Semitic they are the overwhelming rule and quite intricate.
The result of this fluidity of the vowels was that when the Semites invented their letters they renounced the attempt to write the vowels.
Apparently they felt the consonants, the only permanent portions of their words, as a sort of skeleton, sufficient for an unmistakable outline.
So, with their ordinary consonants, plus letters for J and V which at need could be made to stand for I and U, and the consistent employment of breaths and stops to indicate the presence or absence of vowels at the beginning and end of words, they managed to make their writing readily legible.
Even to-day the Bible is written and read in the Jewish synagogue by this vowelless system of three thousand years ago.
In the Greek language more confusion would have been caused by this system.
As a result, the Greeks took the novel step of adding vowel letters.
It is significant that what the Greeks did was not to make the new vowel signs out of whole cloth, as it were, out of nothing, but that they followed the method which is characteristic of invention in general.
They took over the existing system, twisted and stretched it as far as they could, and created outright only when they were forced to.
So they transformed the Semitic breaths and stops into vowels.
It was the first time that a system of writing had been brought on the complete basis of a letter for every sound.
All subsequent European alphabets are merely modifications of the Greek one.
In the Semitic languages this glottal stop is frequent, vigorous, and etymologically important, wherefore the Semites treated it like any other consonant.
The Greeks gave it a new value, that of the vowel A.
The value of several of the letters fluctuated in the different parts of Greece for two or three centuries.
In one city [273] a certain value or form of a letter would come into usage; in another, the same letter would be shaped differently, or stand for a consonant instead of a vowel.
In fact, however, these little finishing touches were several centuries in the making; the final result was a compromise between all sorts of experiments and beginnings.
One can picture an entire nationality literally groping for generation after generation, and only slowly settling on the ultimate system.
There must have been dozens of innovators who tried their hand at a modification of the value or form of a letter.
Nor can it be denied that what was new in the Greek alphabet was a true invention.
The step of introducing full vowel characters was as definitely original and almost as important as any new progress in the history of civilization.
Yet it is not even known who the first individual was that tried to apply this idea.
Tradition is silent on the point.
It is quite conceivable that the first writing of vowels may have been independently attempted by a number of individuals in different parts of Greece.
But it is clear that it was not taken from the Greek alphabet after this had reached its final or classic form.
If such had been the case, the Roman letters, such as we still use them, would undoubtedly be more similar to the Greek ones than they are, and certain discrepancies in the values of the letters, as well as in their order, would not have occurred.
Now the Romans at this period still pronounced the sound H, which later became feeble in the Latin tongue and finally died out.
On the other hand the distinction between short and long (or close and open) E, which the Greeks after many experiments came to recognize as important in their speech, was of no great moment in Latin.
The result was that whereas classic Greek turned both the Semitic H’s into E’s, Latin accepted only the first of these modifications, that one affecting the fifth letter of the alphabet, whereas the other H, occupying the eighth place in the alphabetic series, continued to be used by the Romans with approximately its original Semitic value.
This retention, however, was possible because Greek writing was still in a transitional, vacillating stage when it reached the Romans.
The Western Greek form of the alphabet that was carried to Italy was still using the eighth letter as an H; so that the Romans were merely following their teachers.
Had they based their letters on the “classic” Greek alphabet which was standardized a few hundred years later, the eighth as well as the fifth letter would have come to them with its vowel value crystallized.
In that case the Romans would either have dispensed altogether with writing H, or would have invented a totally new sign for it and probably tacked it on to the end of the alphabet, as both they and the Greeks did in the case of several other letters.
Yet before its meaning had become entirely lost, they had carried it to Italy.
There the Romans seized upon it to designate a variety of K which the Greek dialects did not possess, namely KW; which is of course the phonetic value which the symbol Q still has in English.
Although not used as a letter, it was a number symbol.
None of the ancients possessed pure numeral symbols of the type of our “Arabic” ones.
The Semites and the Greeks employed the letters of the alphabet for this purpose, each letter having a numeral value dependent on its place in the alphabet.
As this series became established, Q as a numeral denoted 90; the Greeks, long after they had ceased writing Q as a letter, used it with this arithmetical value.
Once it had acquired a place in the series, it would have been far too confusing to drop.
With Q omitted, R would have had to be shifted in its value from 100 to 90.
One man would have continued to use R with its old value, while his more new-fashioned neighbor or son would have written it to denote ten less.
Arithmetic would have been as thoroughly wrecked as if we should decide to drop out the figure 5 and write 6 whenever we meant 5, 7 to express 6, and so on.
Habit in such cases is insuperable.
No matter how awkward an established system becomes, it normally remains more practical to retain with its deficiencies than to replace by a better scheme.
The wrench and cost of reformation are greater, or are felt to be greater by each generation, than the advantages to be gained.
These are social and therefore in a sense arbitrary.
In mechanical or “practical” matters people adjust themselves to the pressure of new conditions more quickly.
If a nation has been in the habit of wearing clothing of wool, and this material becomes scarce and expensive, some attempt will indeed be made to increase the supply of wool, but if production fails to keep pace with the deficiency, cotton is substituted with little reluctance.
If, on the other hand, a calendar becomes antiquated, which could be changed by a simple act of will, by the mere exercise of community reason, a tremendous resistance is encountered.
Time and again nations have gone on with an antiquated or cumbersome calendar long after any mediocre mathematician or astronomer could have devised a better one.
As long as men are concerned with their bodily wants, those which they share with the lower animals, they appear sensible and adaptable.
In proportion however as the alleged products of their intellects are involved, when one might most expect foresight and reason and cool calculation to be influential, societies seem swayed by a conservatism and stubbornness the strength of which looms greater as we examine history more deeply.
Of course, each nation and generation regards itself as the one exception.
But irrationality is as easy to discern in modern institutions as in ancient alphabets, if one has a mind to see it.
Daylight saving is an example very near home.
The beginning of the natural day was being spent in sleep, most relaxation taken at night.
This was not from deliberate preference, but from a species of procrastination of which the majority were unintentionally guilty.
Every one was actually paying money for [277] illumination which enabled him to sit in a room while he might have been amusing himself gratis outdoors.
Really rational beings would have changed their habits—blown the factory whistle at seven instead of eight, opened the office at eight instead of nine, gone to the theater at seven and to bed at ten.
But the herd impulse was too strong.
The individual that departed from the custom of the mass would have been made to suffer.
The first theater opening at seven would have played to empty chairs.
The office closing at four would have lost the business of the last hour of the day without compensation from the empty hour prefixed at the beginning.
The only way out was for every one to agree to a self-imposed fiction.
So the nations that prided themselves most on their intelligence solemnly enacted that all clocks be set ahead.
Next morning, every one had cheated himself into an hour of additional daylight, and the illuminating plant out of an hour of revenue, without any one having had to depart from established custom; which last was evidently the course actually to be avoided at all hazards.
Of course, most individual men and women are neither idiotic nor insane.
The only conclusion is that as soon and as long as people live in relations and act in groups, something wholly irrational is imposed on them, something that is inherent in the very nature of society and civilization.
There appears to be little or nothing that the individual can do in regard to this force except to refrain from adding to its irrationality the delusion that it is rational.
But this conclusion is untenable: first, because the forms of the earliest Latin and Greek letters are on the whole more similar to each other than to the contemporaneous Semitic forms; and second because of the deviations from the Semitic prototype which the Latin and Greek systems share with [278] each other, as in the vowels.
One of the brilliant discoveries of classical philology was that the speech in which the Homeric poems were originally composed still possessed this sound, numerous irregularities of scansion being explainable only on the basis of its original presence.
The letter for it looked like two Greek G’s, one set on top of the other.
This, in turn, the Romans omitted, because their language lacked the sound.
The shift came about thus.
The earliest Italic writing followed the Semitic and Greek original and had C, pronounced G, as its third letter.
But in Etruscan the sounds K and G were hardly distinguished.
K therefore went out of use; and the early Romans followed the precedent of their cultured and influential Etruscan neighbors.
For a time, therefore, the single character C was employed for both G and K in Latin.
Finally, about the third century before Christ, a differentiation being found desirable, the C was written as C when it stood for the “hard” or voiceless sound K, but with a small stroke, as G, when it represented the soft or voiced sound; and, the seventh place in the alphabet, that of Z, being vacant, this modified character was inserted.
But the letter Z did not remain permanently eliminated from western writing.
As long as the Romans continued rude and self-sufficient, they had no need of a character for a sound which they did not speak.
When they became powerful, expanded, touched Greek civilization, and borrowed from this its literature, philosophy, and arts, they took over also many Greek names and words.
As Z occurred in these, they adopted the character.
[279] Yet to have put it in its original seventh place which was now occupied by G, would have disturbed the position of the following letters.
It was obviously more convenient to hang this once rejected and now reinstated character on at the end of the alphabet; and there it is now.
The original Semitic alphabet ended with T. U was differentiated by the Greeks from F to provide for one of their vowel sounds.
This addition was made at an early enough period to be communicated to the Romans.
Later, they added X.
An old Semitic S-sound, in fifteenth place in the alphabet and distinct from the S in twenty-first position which is the original of our S, was used for both SS and KS.
In classic Greek, one form, with KS value, maintained itself in its original place.
The SS letter later dropped out because it was not distinguished in pronunciation from S. The Y that follows X is intrinsically nothing but the U which the Romans already had —a sort of double of it.
The Greek U however was pronounced differently from the Latin one—like French U or German ü.
The literary Roman felt that he could not adequately represent it in Greek words by his own U.
He therefore took over the U as the Greeks wrote it—that is, a reduced V on top of a vertical stroke.
Our modern Roman alphabet is however still fuller.
The two values which V had in [280] Latin, that of the vowel U and the semi-vowel W, are so similar that no particular hardship was caused through their representation by the one character.
This change occurred both in Latin in its survival as a religious and literary tongue, and in the popularly spoken Romance languages, like French and Italian, that sprang out of Latin.
The two forms with rounded and pointed bottom were already actually in use as mere calligraphic variants, although not distinguished in sound, V being usually written at the beginning of words, U in the middle.
In the same way I and J were originally one letter.
Later, however, in English, French, and Spanish speech, the semi-vowel became a consonant just as V had become.
About the fifteenth century, I was given a round turn to the left, when at the beginning of words, as an ornamental initial.
The distinction in sound value came still later.
The forms I and J were kept together in the alphabet, as U and V had been, the juxtaposition serving as a memento of their recency of distinction—like the useless dot over small j.
Had the people of the Middle Ages still been using the letters of the alphabet for numerical figures as did the Greeks, they would undoubtedly have found it more convenient to keep the order of the old letters intact.
J and U would in that case almost certainly have been put at the end of the alphabet instead of adjacent to I and V. J presents a survival—a significant anachronism.
Although now recognized in the [281] alphabet, the letter is not always accorded its full place in the series; now and then it is treated like an adopted child whose position in the family is somewhat subsidiary.
When a continental European uses letters to designate rows of chairs in a theater, paragraph headings in a book, a series of shipping marks, or any other listing, he often omits J, passing directly from I to K as a Roman of two thousand years ago would have done.
If asked the reason, we perhaps rationalize the omission on the ground that I and J look so much alike that they run risk of being confused.
Yet it scarcely occurs to us that I and L, or I and T, can also be easily confused.
The origin of W is accounted for by its name, “Double-U,” and by its form, which is that of two V’s.
The old Latin pronunciation of V gradually changed from W to V, and many of the later European languages either contained no W-sound or indicated it by the device of writing U or some combination into which U entered.
Since the sound of the semi-vowel was felt to be fuller than that of the consonant, a new letter was coined for the former by coupling together two of the latter.
This innovation did not begin to creep into English until the eleventh century.
Being an outgrowth of U and V, W was inserted after them as J was after I.
It is a slight but interesting instance of convergence that its name is exactly parallel to the name “Double Gamma” which the Greek grammarians coined for F long before.
Yet it is a late addition in the history of the alphabet.
Greeks and Romans knew nothing of it.
They [282] wrote wholly in what we should call capital letters.
If they wanted a title or heading to stand out, they made the letters larger, but not different in form.
The same is done to-day in Hebrew and Arabic, and in fact in all alphabets except those of Europe.
These modifications increased in the Middle Ages, giving rise first to the “Uncial” and then to the “Minuscule” forms of the letters.
Both represent a cursive rather than a formal script.
The minuscules are essentially the modern “small” letters.
But when they first developed, people wrote wholly in them, reserving the older formal capitals for chapter initials.
Later, the capitals crept out of their temporary rarity and came to head paragraphs, sentences, proper names, and in fact all words that seemed important.
Of course little or nothing was gained by this procedure.
In many sentences the significant word must be a verb or adjective; and yet, according to the arbitrary old rule, it was the noun that was made to stand out.
To-day we still feel it necessary in English to retain capitals for proper names.
It is certain that a suggestion to commence these also with small letters would be met with the objection that a loss of clearness would be entailed.
As a matter of fact, the cases in which ambiguity between a common and proper noun might ensue would be exceedingly few; the occasional inconvenience so caused would be more than compensated for by increased simplicity of writing and printing.
Every child would learn its letters in little more than half the time that it requires now.
The printer would be able to operate with half as many characters, and typewriting machines could dispense with a shift key.
[283] French and Spanish designate proper adjectives without capitals and encounter no misunderstanding, and all English telegrams are sent in a code that makes no distinction.
When we read the newspaper in the morning and think that the mixture of capital and small letters is necessary for our easy comprehension of the page, we forget that this same news came over the wire without capitals.
It is true that this waste is distributed through our lives in small driblets, and therefore is something that can be borne without seeming inconvenience.
Civilization undoubtedly can continue to thrive even while it adheres to the antiquated and jumbling method of mixing two kinds of letters where one is sufficient.
Yet the practice illustrates the principle that the most civilized as the most savage nations assert and believe that they adhere to their institutions after an impartial consideration of all alternatives and in full exercise of wisdom, whereas analysis regularly reveals them as astonishingly resistive to alteration whether for better or worse.
But since the history of the alphabet shows that the capital letters are the earlier ones, that the small letters were for centuries used alone, and that systems of writing have operated and operate without the distinction, it is clear that utility cannot be the true motive.
The employment of capital letters as initials originated in a desire for ornamentation.
It is the use of capitals that has caused the false sense of their need, not necessity that has led to their use.
The sharp angles, double connecting strokes, goose-quill flourishes, and other increments of the Gothic letters undoubtedly possess a decorative effect, although an over-elaborate one.
They were evolved in a period when a copyist cheerfully lettered for a year in producing a volume, and the lord or bishop into whose hands it passed was as likely to turn the leaves in admiration of the black and red characters as to spend time in reading them.
The Italians, who had always been half-hearted about the Gothic forms, soon revolted.
Under the influence of the Renaissance and its renewed inspiration from classical antiquity, they reverted as far as possible to the ancient shapes of the characters.
From Italy these types spread to France and most other European countries, including England, which for the first fifty years had printed in Black-Letter.
Yet Germans sometimes complain of the “difficulty” of the Roman letters, and books intended for popular sale, and newspapers, go into Gothic.
There can be little doubt that in time the Roman letters will dispossess the Gothic ones in Germany and Scandinavia except for ornamental display heads.
But the established ways die hard; Gothic letters may linger on as the “old-style” calendar with its eleven-day belatedness held out in England until 1752 and in Russia until 1917.
The spread of alphabetic writing.
The numbers stand for centuries: with hollow circles, before Christ; with solid circles, after Christ.
In Asia the alphabet underwent more profound changes.
B and K, M and S, G and N, H and CH and T, D and V and Z and R are shaped as if with intent to look alike rather than different.
Arabic, on the other hand, runs wholly to curves: circles, segments of circles, and round flourishes; and several of its letters have become identical except for diacritical marks.
If we put side by side the corresponding primitive Semitic, the modern English, the Hebrew, and the Arabic letters, it is at once apparent that in most cases English observes most faithfully the 3,000-years old forms.
Greek and Roman writing, on the other hand, were at first used largely in monumental, dedicatory, legal, and religious connections, and preserved clarity of form at the expense of rapidity of production.
One feature of primitive Semitic, most Asiatic alphabets retained for a long time: the [286] lack of vowel signs.
In the end, however, representation of the vowels proved to be so advantageous that it was introduced.
They continued to recognize consonant signs as the only real letters, and then added smaller marks, or “points” as they are called, for the vowels.
There is this difference, however: whereas European points are reserved for minor modifications, Hebrew and Arabic have no other means of representing vowels than these points.
The vowels therefore remain definitely subsidiary to the consonants; to the extent of this deficiency Hebrew has adhered more closely to the primitive Semitic system than have we.
The reason for this difference lies probably in the fact that Hebrew and Arabic have retained virtually all the consonants of ancient Semitic.
The step perfecting the alphabet was therefore taken by them not so much because they possessed originality or specially fertile imagination, as because of the accident that their speech consisted of sounds considerably different from those of Semitic.
In that case they, and after them the Romans, and perhaps we too, would very likely have gone on writing only consonants as full letters and representing vowels by the Semitic method of subsidiary points.
In short, even so enterprising and innovating a people as the Greeks are generally reputed to have been, made their important contribution to the alphabet less because they wished to improve it than because an [287] accident of phonetics led them to find the means.
Such are the marvels of human invention when divested of their romantic halo and examined objectively.
Most of this extension in Asia is comprised in two great streams.
One of these followed the southern edge of the continent.
This was a movement that began some centuries before Christ, and often followed water routes.
The forms of the Sanskrit letters show that they and the subsequent Hindu alphabets are derivatives, though much altered ones, from the primitive Semitic writing.
Exactly how the alphabet was carried from the shore of the Mediterranean to India has not been fully determined.
As the Arabs were Semites, and as there was a certain amount of commerce up and down the Red Sea, it is not surprising that even these rather remote and backward people had taken up writing.
Between south Arabia and India there was also some intercourse, so that a further transmission by sea seems possible enough.
The Hindus speaking Indo-European were confronted with the [288] same difficulty as the Greeks when they took over the vowelless Semitic alphabet.
But they solved the difficulty in their own way.
Thus, each letter was really the sign for a syllable.
The most common vowel in Sanskrit being A, this was assumed as being inherent in the consonant.
This meant that when K was to be read merely as K, it had to be specially designated: something had to be done to take away the vowel A.
This negative sign is a “point” just as much as the positive vowel points of Hebrew; but was used to denote exactly the opposite.
There are of course other vowels than A in Sanskrit.
Thus while this is a diagonal stroke below the consonant, U is represented by a small curve below, E by a backward curve above, AI by two such, and so on.
If a syllable had two consonants before the vowel, these were condensed into one, the essential parts of each being combined into a more complex character.
This process reduced every syllable to a single though often compound letter.
If the syllable ended in a consonant, this carried over as the beginning of the next syllable.
Even the end consonant of a word was written as the first letter of the next.
Love of system cropped out otherwise.
The Hindus devised a new symbol— mainly by differentiation of old ones—for every sound that they had and Semitic lacked.
Then they rearranged their order on a phonetic and logical basis.
All sounds made against the back palate were brought into one group; those formed against the fore-palate, gums, and teeth came after; the lip sounds last.
Within each of the groups the letters followed one another in a fixed order according [289] to their method of production—voiceless stops always first, nasals always last.
The result of these innovations was that the Hindu alphabets diverged much more from the Semitic original than did ours.
This perhaps was really to be expected, since writing entered India by long leaps between peoples that were not in intimate relations.
Also, by the time the alphabet first reached them, the Hindus, in the isolation of their remote peninsula, had already worked out an advanced and unique type of civilization.
It may be said that in general, with the chief exception of China, Hindu writing followed where Hindu religion penetrated.
But it may be illuminating to touch briefly on one of the extensions.
In the early centuries after Christ, Hindus began to reach the East Indies, especially Sumatra and Java.
Here they established principalities or kingdoms and their religion.
Many arts were also imported by them, such as iron working, batik dyeing, sculpture, drama, and writing.
From perhaps the sixth to the fifteenth centuries, the Malaysian population of Java lived under a heavy layer of Hindu culture (§ 104, 126, 262), and literacy evidently became fairly widespread.
In the Philippines, the Spaniards of the sixteenth century found several related alphabets, one to each of the principal nationalities, which seem derived from Bengal some eight hundred years before.
The Malayan languages are unusually simple in their array of sounds.
But the salient characteristics of Sanskrit writing were retained.
A consonant was read as consonant plus [290] A.
Points were provided if the consonant was to be read with other vowels.
Of such points, the Philippine alphabets employed only two.
One, put above the consonant, served indiscriminately for I and E, the other, below, for U and O.
The position of the points connects them with the Sanskrit vowel signs.
At the time of the Spanish discovery, the native Philippine alphabets were already meeting Arabic writing, which had shortly before been introduced in the southern islands with Mohammedanism.
The Spaniards of course brought the Roman alphabet.
Under this double competition the use of native writing soon began to decay.
Here in the jungle, among half clothed savages living under rude thatches and without firearms or government, the remotest descendants of the ancient Sanskrit alphabet linger.
Three widely different descendants of the primitive Semitic alphabet have therefore met in this archipelago.
One, beginning its journey some twenty-five hundred years ago, traveled via Arabia and northern India, probably reaching the Philippines by 800 A.D.
The second evolved in the Semitic homeland, finally poured out of northern Arabia with Mohammedanism, was carried across India to the Malay Peninsula, and thence leaped across the sea to Borneo and the Philippines about 1,400 A.D.
In Korea, the spread of the alphabet was checked, not through any inherent flaws or weakness of age, but by the competition of a totally different system of writing: that of the Chinese.
Chinese writing is not alphabetic at all.
To some extent it does represent sounds.
But it represents syllables or words, not letters; and it represents them by the rebus method.
The basis of Chinese writing is ideographic.
It is therefore a modified form of picture writing, and theoretically pertains to an early stage, almost comparable in principle to Egyptian hieroglyphs.
In a conflict between such a primitive system and a truly alphabetic one, the latter should of course prevail on account of its much greater efficiency and simplicity.
Actually, however, the Korean alphabet did not triumph but barely managed to maintain an existence alongside Chinese.
The cause was a familiar one: the tremendous social conservatism of the human mind.
When the native alphabet obtained its hold in Korea, it was confronted by an overwhelming Chinese influence.
The court, the government, the institutions, official religion, all activities of people of fashion and importance, were modeled after Chinese examples.
The man who could not write and read Chinese characters was eliminated from polite society and advancement.
This was only natural.
The civilization of China is one of the most ancient and greatest in the world, and the Koreans were a smaller people and close neighbors.
Western civilization was thousands of miles away, and it was only [292] now and then that a driblet from it penetrated to the eastern edge of Asia.
On one side then stood the undoubted practical advantage of the alphabet from the West; on the other, the momentum of the whole mass of Chinese culture.
The outcome was that the nationally Korean and true alphabet became something that shopkeepers and low people made use of; a thing easy to learn and more or less contemptible.
But laws and documents and books of higher learning were written in Chinese characters, which innumerable Koreans for generation after generation spent years of their lives in mastering.
If the human mind were really rational, if it operated rationally only a tenth as much as it fondly believes, it would not do awkward and difficult things after a simpler and more effective means to the same end had been put within its reach, as was the case in this Korean situation.
Another principle beyond mere outright inertia is operative here.
This is the tendency of culture elements which have for some time been associated, often only by accident, to form an interlocked aggregation or “complex.” Once such a complex or cluster has acquired a certain coherence, it survives with a tenacity independent of the degree of inherent or logical connection between its elements.
The fact that ideographs were associated with Chinese religion, literature, and institutions, constituted them part of what may be called the Chinese complex.
The mass of this Chinese complex far overbalanced the slight and scattering Western influences.
The alphabet drifted into Korea as an isolated fragment, and was promptly borne down by the weight of the elaborate and closely knit culture aggregate of Chinese origin.
This brute fact, and not any superior reasonableness or intrinsic merit of one system or the other, determined the issue between them.
In the same way the “complex” that we know as Western civilization—Christianity and collars, science and picture films, factory labor and democracy, fine and base all tangled together—is to-day crushing the breath out of ancient and exotic cultures.
We like to call the process “Progress” because that is more comforting than to view it as the rolling of a fate beyond our control.
Regional variation of culture.—151.
Plains, Southwest, Northwest areas.—152.
California and its sub-areas.—153.
The shaping of a problem.—154.
Girls’ Adolescence Rite.—155.
The First Period.—156.
The Second Period: Mourning Anniversary and First-salmon rite.—157.
Era of regional differentiation.—158.
Third and Fourth Periods on the Lower Colorado: Dream Singing.—161.
Northwestern California: world-renewal and wealth display.—162.
Summary of religious development.—163.
Other phases of culture.—164.
Outline of the culture history of California.—165.
The question of dating.—166.
General serviceability of the method.
The distinctions between individual and individual, and even the greater distinctions between one group and another, become buried under the overwhelming mass-effect of their difference from ourselves.
Growing familiarity, however, renders individual, local, and tribal peculiarities plainer.
At the same time his business is to add something new to human understanding—facts at any rate, interpretation if possible.
Generalities are likely to be pretty widely known, and progress, new formulations, therefore depend ultimately on mastery of detail.
This means that if a scientist is to contribute anything to the world’s comprehension, is to add a new mental tool to its chest, he must devote himself to specific traits, to discriminations of fine detail.
It is only by finding new trees that he helps to make the woods larger.
If then we approach a race like the American Indians with the scientist’s or student’s [294] purpose of discovering something more than we already know, we quickly find that institutions, customs, and utensils, in other words the cultures, vary from tribe to tribe.
When one compares tribes living so far apart as to be no longer united in intercourse, nor even by communication with common intermediaries, there is scarcely a trait in which their cultures are wholly identical.
Within a limited district a fair degree of uniformity is found to prevail.
Yet when the boundaries of such an area are crossed, a new type of culture begins to be encountered, which again holds with local variations until a third district is entered.
They are all warlike, the great aim in life of every man in these tribes being attainment of military glory.
Nearly all of them performed a four days’ religious ceremony known as the Sun Dance, of which one of the outstanding acts was fasting and sometimes self-torture inflicted with skewers drawn through the skin and torn out.
This Southwestern culture, its internal relations, and the tribes participating in it, have already been discussed in another connection (§ 87).
If, however, on leaving the Plains one turns northwest to the shores of British [295] Columbia and southern Alaska, a third distinctive type of native civilization appears.
Aristocracy, commoners, and slaves made up distinct strata of society in this region.
Public rituals were occasions for the ostentation of wealth.
Houses were carpentered of wood.
Cooking was done in boxes.
The prevalent food was fish.
The significant thing is that these are not three tribes, but three groups each consisting of a number of politically independent tribes spread over a considerable territory and evincing a fairly fundamental similarity of customs and institutions.
We are confronting three kinds of culture, each super-tribal in range and attached to a certain area.
These areas have sometimes been called “ethnographic provinces”; they are generally known as “culture-areas.” Of such areas ten are generally recognized on the North American continent.
These are the Plains, Southwest, North Pacific Coast, Mackenzie-Yukon, Arctic, Plateau, California, Northeast, Southeast, and Mexico.
[23] Obviously we have here a classification comparable to that which the naturalist makes of animals.
The naturalist however cannot stop with a group as inclusive as the mammals, and goes on to subdivide them into orders, such as the rodents, carnivores, ungulates, and the like.
Each of these again he goes on splitting into families, genera, and finally species.
The species correspond to the smallest groups in human society, namely the tribes or nations.
Parallel to the family or order which the naturalist finds between a particular species and the great class of mammals, one may therefore expect to discover groups intermediate between particular tribes and the large culture-areas.
We may call such clusters or fractions sub-culture-areas, and must concern ourselves with them if we desire to deepen our understanding of aboriginal American civilization.
For the sake of simplicity, it will be well to select a limited portion of North America, instead of wrestling with the intricacies of the continent as a whole, in an endeavor to see how its culture-areas and sub-culture-areas reveal themselves in detail and help to throw light on native history.
California will serve as a type example.
This partial discrepancy holds for California.
Northernmost California, especially along the ocean, was inhabited by Indians that affiliated with the tribes of the North Pacific coast.
Here then we have a second cultural type, that of Northwestern California, which constitutes a subdivision of the North Pacific Coast culture-area.
The southern California Indians link with the Indians of the adjoining states of Arizona and New Mexico.
Sub-culture-areas of native California, as part of the major culture-areas of western North America.
A, culture of Northwestern California; B, Central California; C, Southern California; D, Lower Colorado River.
The table on the opposite page gives a brief characterization of these four sub-culture- [298] areas.
On the other hand, there has always existed a consensus of impression, among experienced as well as hasty observers, that a certain likeness runs through the culture of most the tribes of California, northern, central, and southern.
In this way there will be more likelihood of making a substantial beginning; any results obtained from the example can be subsequently checked from other aspects of the cultures to see if the findings are broadly representative.
Further, let us arrange the items of information that are available on this one aspect of culture, not haphazardly, nor mechanically as under an alphabetic classification, nor in the sequence in which authors have published their observations, but naturally, or according to some principle that is likely to work out into an interpretation.
Since part of the problem is the relation of the uniform features to the peculiar ones, a promising order will be to put at one end of the line or series of data the most universal features, and at the other the most particular or localized ones.
Let us select religion as that part of native culture to be examined, and limit this still farther by eliminating from consideration, for the time being, all forms of religion except public rituals, which among Indians are frequently accompanied or signalized by sacred dances.
We may forget, for the moment, private rites, individual sacrifices, superstitions and taboos, medicine men, myths, and the like, and direct attention to dances made by groups of people, or the obvious equivalents of such dances, and ritual acts definitely associated with the dances or the common weal.
One of these is the Victory Dance held over the head or scalp of a slain enemy; the other is an Adolescence Rite performed for girls at puberty.
The latter is the more profitable to consider.
It is the more widely spread, having been performed in every district of California, and by almost every tribe.
The Victory Dance was not made by the Indians of northern California, who substituted for it a war incitement dance of different character.
Further, a tribe having the tradition of the Victory Dance might often be at peace and go for a generation or two without the celebration.
But a ceremony which it was thought necessary to make for each girl at puberty was obviously due to be performed every few years even among a small group.
There are many local variations in the Californian Adolescence Rite, but certain of its features emerge with constancy.
These traits are based on the belief that the girl who is at [301] this moment passing from childhood to maturity must be undergoing a critical transition.
The occasion was considered critical not only for her but for the community, and, since the Indians’ outlook was limited, for the whole of their little world.
A girl who at this period did not show fortitude to hardship would be forever weak and complaining: therefore she fasted.
If she carried wood and water industriously, she would remain a good worker all her life, whereas if she defaulted, she would grow up a lazy woman.
So crucial, in fact, was this moment, that she was thought extremely potent upon her surroundings, as constituting a latent danger.
If she looked abroad upon the world, oak trees might become barren and next year’s crop of acorns fail, or the salmon refuse to ascend the river.
Among many tribes, therefore, the maturing girl was covered with a blanket, set under a large basket, or made to wear a visor of feathers over her eyes.
Others had her throw her hair forward and keep her head bowed.
She was given the benefit of having ancient religious songs sung over her, and dances revolved around her night after night.
Certain additional developments of the ceremony were locally restricted.
But a number of specific features occur from the north to the south end of the state.
Among these are the following rules.
The girl must not eat meat, fat, or salt.
She must not scratch her head with her fingers, but use a stick or bone implement made for the purpose.
She must not look at people; and she should be sung over.
It should be added that most of these traits of the Girls’ Rite recur among the tribes of a much larger area than California, including those of Nevada and the Great Basin and the Pacific coast for a long distance north.
This institution, then, is remarkably widespread and has preserved nearly the same fundamental features wherever it is found.
It seems fair to try the presumptive conclusion of antiquity.
A continent is likely to be older than an island.
A [302] family of animals has probably existed longer than a single species.
A world-wide custom normally is more ancient than one that is confined to a narrow locality.
If it spread from one people to another, this diffusion over the whole earth would usually require a long time.
It is true that one may not place too positive a reliance on evidence of this sort.
The history of civilization furnishes some contrary examples.
The use of tobacco has spread over the eastern hemisphere in four centuries.
Still, such cases are exceptional; and in the absence of specific contrary considerations, heavy weight must be given to wideness of occurrence in rating antiquity.
Yet the fact that the essential uniformity of the rite is overlaid by so much local diversity—as for instance the baking custom restricted to southern California—indicates the unlikelihood of such a rapid and late diffusion.
The ceremony is much in the status of Christianity, which, in the course of its long history, has also become broken into national varieties or sects, all of which however remain Christian.
The facts then warrant this tentative conclusion: that the Girls’ Rite is representative of the oldest stratum of religion that can be traced among the Indians of California—their “First Period.” The Victory Dance would presumably be of nearly but not quite the same antiquity.
The outstanding one in this class is the Mourning Anniversary.
This is a custom of bewailing each year, or at intervals of a few years, those members of the tribe who have died since the last performance, and the burning of large quantities of wealth—shell money, baskets, and the like—in their memory.
Each family offers for its own dead, but people of special consideration are honored by having images made of them and consumed with the property.
Until the anniversary has been performed, the relatives of the dead remain mourners.
After it, they are free to resume normal enjoyment of life; and the name of the deceased, which until then has been strictly taboo, may now be bestowed on a baby in the family.
Its distribution thus covers more than half of the state.
But it has not spread elsewhere except to a small area in southern Nevada and western Arizona.
In northern California the Mourning Anniversary is lacking.
It is not that the Indians here fail to mourn their dead.
They may bury or burn some property with the corpse.
They do not assiduously accumulate wealth for months or years in order to throw it into a communal fire at the end.
And they do not make images of their dead.
In fact, they would be shocked at the idea as indelicate, if not impious.
Is there anything in this northern part of California that takes the place of the anniversary?
Not as a psychological equivalent; but as regards distribution, there is.
This is the custom, established in northern California and parts of Oregon, for a leading shaman or medicine-man to conduct a ceremony at the beginning of each year’s salmon run.
Until [304] he had done this, no one fished for salmon or ate them.
If any got caught, they were carefully returned to the river.
When the medicine-man had gone through his secret rites, he caught and ate the first fish of the year.
After this, the season was open.
Moreover, the prayers or formulas recited by the shaman propitiated the salmon and caused them to run abundantly, so that every one had plenty.
There is clearly a communal motive in the rite, even though its performance was entrusted to an individual.
The one specific element common to the Mourning Anniversary and this First-salmon Rite is their connection with the natural year, the cycle of the seasons, a trait necessarily lacking in the Girls’ Rite with its intimately personal character.
They may therefore be provisionally assigned to a Second Period of the prehistory of California.
Since the Northwestern one affiliated with the extensive North Pacific culture, and those of Southern California and the Colorado River with the great culture of the Southwest, many of their customs must have originated in those parts of these two culture-areas which lie outside of California.
Even if the northern and southern Californians “lent” as well as “borrowed” inventions and institutions, they must on the whole have received or learned or imitated more in the interchange than they imparted.
This is clear from the fact that the Indians of British Columbia are more advanced in their manufacturing ability, richer in variety of tools and utensils, and more elaborate in their organization of society, than those of Northwestern California; and a similar relation of superiority and priority exists between the Pueblos of New Mexico and [305] Arizona and the Southern California tribes (§ 87).
Somewhere in the unraveling of the prehistory of California the first indications of these streams from the outside should be encountered.
They are not manifest in the two periods which have so far been established.
The distribution of the Girls’ Rite of the First Period and of the Mourning Anniversary and First-salmon Rite of the Second, does not coincide with the major culture-areas of the continent.
The Southwest, for instance, from which the modern southern Californians have received so much, does not possess any of these ceremonies.
The Southwest culture therefore evidently originated, or began to take on its recent aspect, or at least to influence Southern California, chiefly after the two periods had passed by in which these ceremonies became established in California.
The Girls’ Rite, to be sure, extends up the Pacific coast into Alaska.
Yet it is more widespread than the North Pacific Coast culture, since this has its southerly limit in Northwestern California, whereas the ceremony is universal as far as to the southern end of the state, besides occurring inland throughout the Great Basin and Plateau regions.
Being more widely spread than the Coast culture, the Girls’ Rite is presumptively more ancient.
The beginnings of the four modern types of California native culture must thus evidently be looked for at about the point now reached in our reconstruction.
At first there was a single very widespread ceremony; then two less widely diffused ones; the next logical step in development would have been the growth of a still larger number of ceremonies or ritual systems.
These, on account of their greater recency, and perhaps on account of conflicting with one another, would have spread only over comparatively [306] small areas.
Of course, the idea could scarcely be entertained that these four local systems sprang into existence full-fledged.
They are complicated sets of rituals, quite different from the simple Girls’ Rite and Mourning Anniversary.
They must have grown up gradually from more meager beginnings and have been a considerable time reaching their present elaboration.
The society holds great four-day dances in large earth-covered houses.
Time is beaten to the dance and song with rattles of split sticks, and stamped with the feet on a great log drum.
The dancers wear showy feather costumes which disguise them to the uninitiated women, children, and strangers, who take them to be spirits of old that have come to exhibit themselves for the good of the people.
There may be as many as twelve divinities represented in this way, each with his distinctive name and dress.
Thus, they assemble for a competition of “throwing” sickness into one another, or to charm the rattlesnakes so that they can be handled and that no one in the tribe may be bitten during the ensuing year.
In these gatherings there is the idea of an association of people endowed with particular powers and operating more or less jointly for the benefit of the community.
This conclusion is corroborated by the distribution.
There is a periphery of low organization and a core of high organization.
According to our previous rule (§ 87, 97), recency in acquisition but antiquity of stage pertain to the marginal as the more widely distributed; the geographically more compact nucleus representing an earlier beginning but a later stage of present development.
Native ritual growths in the Californian area, the range of each narrowing in proportion to its recency and specialization.
First period, stippling: Girls’ Rite.
Second period, shading: horizontal, MA, Mourning Anniversary; vertical, FS, First-Salmon Rite.
Actually there is such a later growth.
The history of native ritual in Central California thus is fairly plain.
Early in the Third Period, perhaps already during the Second, the specialists in religion, the medicine-men, had acquired the habit of giving public demonstrations.
This resulted in a bond of fellowship among themselves and a sense of exclusiveness toward the community as a whole.
Out of this sense there was elaborated during the Third Period, somewhere about the lower Sacramento Valley, the idea of an organized secret society with initiated members.
The performances became more and more elaborate, and the production of proof of supernatural power gradually crystallized into impersonations of deities.
It may therefore be concluded, first, that they grew up contemporaneously in the Third Period; and next, that [310] they sprang out of the same soil, a growing tendency of the medicine-men toward professional association.
The selection of the jimsonweed as the distinctive element in the south seems to have been due to influences from Mexico and the Southwest.
Because Mexican civilization was so much the more advanced, it seems likely that the use of jimsonweed originated in Mexico, was carried into the Southwest, and from there spread into Southern California —perhaps at the receptive moment when the medicine-men’s associations were drawing more closely together and feeling the need of some powerful emotional element to lend an impetus to their cults.
This group associates the greatest number of rituals and dances with the Jimsonweed Society, and is therefore likely to have had the leading share in the working out of the religion.
This ground painting served both as an altar for the rites and as a means of instructing the initiates (§ [311] 192, 193).
The reason for this seems to be the fact that religion developed among these tribes less through the invention or establishment of new elements, than by the lopping away of older ones, with the result of a rather narrow specialization on the few elements that were retained.
Tribes like the Yuma and Mohave scarcely danced for religious purposes.
They did adhere to the widespread and ancient idea that dreams are a source and evidence of supernatural power.
Instead of their medicine-men forming a society based on initiation, the Colorado River tribes came to feel that every one might be a medicine-man according to his dreams.
They put emphasis on these internal experiences.
The result has been that they believe that a legend can be true and sacred only if it has been dreamed, and that a man’s songs should be acquired in the same way.
Religion, therefore, is an intensely individualistic affair among them.
Since no two men can dream quite alike, no two Yumas or Mohaves tell their myths or sing their song cycles identically.
This cast to their religion is so strong that it looks to be fairly ancient.
The beginnings of this local type of religion may therefore be set in the Third Period.
Yet here the rooting of these two eras in the Second is clearer.
We have seen that all through northern California there exists the First-salmon Rite conducted by a prominent medicine-man of each locality; and we have referred the probable origin of this rite to the Second period.
The modern Indians of Northwestern California consider their great dances of ten or twelve days’ duration as being essentially the showy public accompaniment of an extremely sacred and secret act performed by a single priest who recites a magical formula.
His purpose in some instances is to open the salmon season, in others to inaugurate the acorn crop, in still others to make new fire for the community.
But whatever the particular object, it is always believed that he renews something important to the world.
He “makes the world,” as the Indians call it, for another year.
Evidently this specific rite that originated in the Second Period was developed in the Northwest during the Third and Fourth eras by being broadened in its objective and having attached to it certain characteristic dances.
These dances are the Deerskin and Jumping Dances.
They differ from those of the Central and Southern tribes in that every one may participate in them.
There is no idea of a society with membership, and hence no exclusion of the uninitiated.
In fact the dances are primarily occasions for displays of wealth, which are regarded as successful in proportion to the size of the audience.
The dances are the best opportunity of the rich [313] men to produce their heirlooms before the public and in that way signalize the honor of ownership—which is one of the things dearest in life to the Northwest Californian.
Another feature of these Northwestern dances which marks them off from the Central and Southern ones is the fact that they can only be held in certain spots.
The reason for this attachment to the spot seems to be his conviction that the most essential part of the dance is a secret, magical rite enacted only in the specified place because the formula recited as its nucleus mentions that spot.
In the Northwest we again seem to be able to recognize, as in the Central and Southern regions, an increasing contraction of area for each successively developed ritual.
Whereas the First-salmon Rite of the Second Period covers the whole northern third of California and parts of Oregon, the Wealth-display dances and World-renewing rites of the Third and Fourth Periods occur only in Northwestern California.
During these four eras, the most typical cults gradually changed from a personal to a communal aim, ceremonies grew more numerous as well as more elaborate, influences from the outside affected the tribes within California, and local differences increased until the original rather close uniformity had been replaced by four quite distinct systems of cults, separated in most cases by transitional areas in which the less specialized developments of the earlier stages have been preserved.
This history may be expressed in visual form, as on page 314.
[314] Periods of Religious Development in and about Native California.
[315] Periods of Culture Development in Native California.
Does this reconstructed history apply only to ritual cults, or can a parallel development be traced for other elements of religion, for industries, inventions, and economic relations, for social institutions, for knowledge and art?
The findings are that this history holds for all phases of native culture.
Material and social development progressed much as did religion.
Each succeeding stage brought in new implements and customs, these became on the whole more specialized as well as more numerous, and differed more and more locally in the four sub-culture-areas.
It would be a long story to adduce the evidence for each of these determinations and all others that could be made.
It will perhaps suffice to say that the principles by which they are arrived at are the same as those which have guided us in the inquiry into religion.
It may therefore be enough to indicate results in a scheme, as on page 315.
It will be seen that this is nothing but an amplification of the preceding table.
The framework there constructed to represent the history of native rituals has here been further filled with elements of material and social culture.
First Period: a simple, meager culture, nearly uniform throughout California, similar to [317] the cultures of adjacent regions, and only slightly influenced by these.
Second Period: definite influences from the North Pacific Coast and the Southwest, affecting respectively the northern third and the southern two thirds of California, and thus leading to a first differentiation of consequence.
Fourth Period: consummation of the four local types.
Influences from outside continue operative, but in the main the lines of local development entered upon in the previous era are followed out, reaching their highest specialization in limited tracts central to each area.
This summary not only outlines the course of culture history in native California: it also explains why there are both widely uniform and narrowly localized culture elements in the region.
They are alike largely insofar as they have retained certain old common traits.
They are different to the degree that they have severally added traits of later and localized development.
As regards accurate dating, there is only one possible answer: we do not know nearly enough.
But no historian believes that any profound change took place between 475 and 477 A.D. That is an impression beginners may get from the way [318] history is sometimes taught.
Also, if the results of anthropological studies are to be connected with the written records of history proper, at least tentative dates must be formulated, though of course in a case like this of the periods of native culture in California it is understood that all chronology is subject to a wide margin of error.
History provides a start toward a computation, although its aid is a short one.
California began to be settled about 1770.
The last tribes were not brought into contact with the white man until 1850.
As early, however, as 1540 Alarcón rowed and towed up the lower Colorado and wrote an account of the tribes he encountered there.
Two years later, Cabrillo visited the coast and island tribes of southern California, and wintered among them.
In 1579 Drake spent some weeks on shore among the central Californians and a member of his crew has left a brief but spirited description of them.
In all three instances these old accounts of native customs tally with remarkable fidelity with all that has been ascertained in regard to the recent tribes of the same regions.
That is, native culture has evidently changed very little since the sixteenth century.
We might then assign to this period about double the time which has elapsed since the explorers visited [319] California; say seven hundred years.
This seems a conservative figure, which would put the commencement of the Fourth Period somewhere about 1200 A.D. All the remainder must be reconstruction by projection.
In most parts of the world for which there are continuous records, it is found that civilization usually changes more rapidly as time goes on.
While this is not a rigorous law, it is a prevailing tendency.
However, let us apply this principle with reserve, and assume that the Third Period was no longer than the Fourth.
Another seven hundred years would carry back to 500 A.D. Now, however, it seems reasonable to begin to lengthen our periods somewhat.
For the Second, a thousand years does not appear excessive: approximately from 500 B.C.
It might be wisest to set no beginning at all, since our “First” period is only the first of those which are determinable with present knowledge.
Actually, it may have been preceded by a still more primitive era on which as yet no specific evidence is available.
It can however be suggested that by 2000 or 1500 B.C.
Nothing markedly stratigraphical has been discovered.
Pottery, which has usually proved the most serviceable of all classes of prehistoric remains for working out sequences of culture and chronologies, is unrepresented in the greater part of California, and is sparse and rather recent in those southern parts in which it does occur.
Certain peculiar types of artifacts are found in each of these regions, are found only there, and agree closely with objects used by the modern tribes of the same districts.
It may thus be inferred (1) that none of the four local cultures was ever spread much more widely than at present; (2) that each of them originated mainly on the spot; and (3) that because many of the prehistoric finds lie at some depth, the local cultures are of respectable antiquity—evidently at least a thousand years old, probably more.
This fairly confirms the estimate that the differentiation of the local cultures of the Third Period commenced not later than about 500 A.D. 167.
The deposits themselves contribute the evidence.
These mounds are refuse accumulations.
Other spots were evidently inhabited for many centuries, since the masses of shell now run more than thirty feet deep and hundreds of feet long.
The higher such a mound grew, [321] the better it drained off.
One side of it would afford shelter from the prevailing winds.
The more regularly it came to be lived on, the more often would the inhabitants bring their daily catch home, and, without knowing it, thus help to raise and improve the site still further.
Others lie on the very edge of the bay, and several of these, when shafts were sunk into them, proved to extend some distance below mean sea level.
The conclusion is that the sites have sunk at least seventeen or eighteen feet since they began to be inhabited.
The only alternative explanation, that the first settlers put their houses on piles over the water, is opposed by several facts.
The shells and ashes and soil of the Ellis Landing mound are stratified as they would be deposited on land, not as they would arrange in water.
There are no layers of mud, remains of inedible marine animals, or ripple marks.
There is no record of any recent Californian tribe living in pile dwellings; the shore from which the mound rises is unfavorably situated for such structures, being open and exposed to storms.
Suitable timber for piles grows only at some distance.
One is therefore perforce driven to the conclusion that this mound accumulated on a sinking shore, but that the growth of the deposit was more rapid than the rise of the sea, so that the site always remained habitable.
How long a time would be required for a coast to subside eighteen feet is a question for geologists, but their reply remains indefinite.
A single earthquake might cause a sudden subsidence of several feet, or again the change might progress at the rate of a foot or only an inch a century.
All that geologists are willing to state is that the probability is high of the subsidence having been a rather long time taking place.
These appear to be the remains of the pits over which the Indians were wont to build their dwellings.
A native household averages about 7 inmates.
One may thus [322] estimate a population of about 100 souls.
Numerous quadruped bones in the mound prove that these people hunted; net sinkers, that they fished; mortars and pestles, that they consumed acorns and other seeds.
Fifty mussels a day for man, woman, and child seem a fair estimate of what their shellfish food is likely to have aggregated.
This would mean that the shells of 5,000 mussels would accumulate on the site daily.
Laboratory experiments prove that 5,000 such shells, with the addition of the same percentage of ash and soil as occurs in the mound, all crushed down to the same consistency of compactness as the body of the mound exhibits, occupy a volume of a cubic foot.
This being the daily increment, the growth of the mound would be in the neighborhood of 365 feet per year.
Dividing this figure by 365, one obtains about 3,500 as the presumable number of years required to accumulate the mound.
This result may not be accepted too literally.
It is the result of a calculation with several factors, each of which is only tentative.
Had the population been 200 instead of 100, the deposit would, with the other terms of the computation remaining the same, have built up twice as fast, and the 3,500 years would have to be cut in half.
On the other hand, it has been assumed that occupation of the site was continuous through the year.
Allowance for this factor would double the 3,500 years.
All that is maintained for the computed age is that it represents a conscientious and conservative endeavor to draw a conclusion from all available sources of knowledge, and that it seems to hit as near the truth as a calculation of this sort can.
One verification has been attempted.
Samples of mound material, taken randomly from different parts, indicate that 14 per cent of its weight, or about 7,000 tons, are ashes.
If the mound is 3,500 years old, the ashes were deposited at the rate of two tons a year, or about eleven pounds daily.
Experiments with the woods growing in the neighborhood have shown that they yield less than one per cent of ash.
The eleven daily pounds must [323] therefore have come from 1,200 pounds of wood.
On the assumption, as before, that the population averaged fifteen families, the one-fifteenth share of each household would be eighty pounds daily.
This is a pretty good load of firewood for a woman to carry on her back, and with the Indians’ habit of nursing their fires economically, especially along a timberless shore, eighty pounds seems a liberal allowance to satisfy all their requirements for heating and cooking.
If they managed to get along on less than eighty pounds per hut, the mound age would be correspondingly greater.
This check calculation thus verifies the former estimate rather reasonably.
It does not seem rash to set down three to four thousand years as the indicated age of the mound.
Both methods carry the First traceable period back to about 1,500 or 2,000 B.C.
After all, exactness is of little importance in matters such as these, except as an indication of certitude.
That it was the California Indians who were selected, is partly an accident of the writer’s familiarity with them.
The choice seems fair because the problem here undertaken is rather more difficult than many.
The Californian cultures were simple.
They decayed [324] quickly on contact with civilization.
The bulk of historical records go back barely a century and a half.
Then, too, the whole Californian culture is only a fragment of American Indian culture, so that the essentially local Californian problems would have been further illuminated by being brought into relation with the facts available from North America as a whole—an aid which has been foregone in favor of compact presentation.
In short, the problem was made difficult by its limitations, and yet results have been obtained.
Obviously, the same method applied under more favorable circumstances to regions whose culture is richer and more diversified, where documented history projects farther back into the past, where excavation yields nobler monuments and provides them in stratigraphic arrangement, and especially when wider areas are brought into comparison, can result in determinations that are correspondingly more exact, full, and positive.
It is thus clear that cultural anthropology possesses a technique of operation which needs only vigorous, sane, and patient application to be successful.
This technique is newer and as yet less refined than those of the mechanical sciences.
It is also under the disadvantage of having to accept its materials as they are given in nature; it is impossible to carry cultural facts into the laboratory and conduct experiments on them.
Still, it is a method; and its results differ from those of the so-called exact sciences in degree of sharpness rather than in other quality.
It will be noted that throughout this analysis there has been no mention of laws; that at most, principles of method have been recognized—such as the assumption that widely spread culture elements are normally more ancient than locally distributed ones.
In this respect cultural anthropology is in a class with political and economic history, and with all the essentially historical sciences such as natural history and geology.
The historian rarely enunciates laws, or if he does, he usually means only tendencies.
Even the “laws” of astronomy, when they are not mere formulations of particular occurrences which our narrow outlook on time causes to seem universal, are [325] not really astronomical laws but mechanical and mathematical ones.
In other words, anthropology belongs in the group of the historical sciences: those branches of knowledge concerned with things as and how and when they happen, with events as they appear in experience; whereas the group of sciences that formulates laws devotes itself to the inherent and immutable properties of things, irrespective of their place or sequence or occurrence in nature.
Of course, there must be laws underlying culture phenomena.
There is no possibility of denying them unless one is ready to remove culture out of the realm of science and set it into the domain of the supernatural.
Where can one seek these laws that inhere in culture?
Obviously in that which underlies culture itself, namely, the human mind.
The laws of anthropological data, like those of history, are then laws of psychology.
As regards ultimate explanations for the facts which it discovers, classifies, analyzes, and recombines into orderly reconstructions and significant syntheses, cultural anthropology must look to psychology.
The one is concerned with “what” and “how”; the other with “why”; each depends on the other and supplements it.
Limitations on the diffusion principle.—171.
Diagrammatic representation of accumulation and diffusion of culture traits.—176.
Representation showing contemporaneity and narrative representation.—177.
Racial origin of the American Indians.—178.
The time of the peopling of America.—179.
The primitive culture of the immigrants.—181.
The route of entry into the western hemisphere.—182.
The spread over two continents.—183.
Emergence of middle American culture: maize.—184.
The sequence of social institutions.—186.
Rise of political institutions: confederacy and empire.—187.
Developments in weaving.—188.
Progress in spinning: cotton.—189.
Crisis rites and initiations.—192.
Secret societies and masks.—193.
Temples and sacrifice.—195.
Architecture, sculpture, towns.—196.
Calendars and astronomy.
The several provincial developments: Mexico.—200.
The Andean area.—201.
The Tropical Forest.—203.
North America: the Southwest.—205.
The Northern Woodland.—207.
The Northwest Coast.—209.
Northern marginal areas.—210.
Later Asiatic Influences.
In a subsequent chapter (VIII) it was made clear that civilization is to a great extent the result of accretion.
New elements are handed down in time or passed along in space by a process which psychologically is one of imitation and in its cultural manifestations is spoken of as tradition or diffusion.
The chapters on the arch and the week, and the alphabet (X, XI) serve as exemplifications that the principle holds with equal validity in the domains of mechanical, institutional, and intellectual activity.
As contrasted with it, instances of the principle of independent origin or parallel development prove to be decidedly rare, and tend to be illusory on searching analysis or to dissolve into only partial similarities.
In the analysis of the growth of religion in native California (Chapter XII), the attempt was made to apply an assumption derived from the diffusion principle—the assumption that normally the more widely spread element would be the more ancient—to the unraveling of the growth of a civilization which on account of its poverty has left no chronological records; in short, to reconstruct the tentative history of a field lacking ordinary historical data, by converting elements of space into elements of time.
The cultural connections of native America with the Old World are generally conceded to have been slight: its civilization represents the most important one that in the main developed independently of the Eur-Asiatic nexus.
The distribution principle may be the most useful of the weapons in the ethnologist’s armory.
But it requires supplement and qualification.
Schematic illustration of distributions of culture traits as indicative of their history.
A, distribution corresponding to one by accident, and suggesting that each occurrence is independent of the others.
B, distribution by contiguous occurrences, strongly suggesting a single invention and subsequent diffusion.
C, distribution interpretable as due either to independent, parallel origins; or to a single origin, diffusion over the whole area, and subsequent loss of the trait in most parts, with survival only in marginal tracts.
The loss in the central area might be due to the growth of a supplanting trait, whose later diffusion had not yet penetrated to the farthest ends.
D, distribution suggesting a single origin old enough for its diffusion to have become extensive, but checked in certain directions by adverse conditions in nature, communications, or cultural preoccupation.
The specific demonstration of such adverse factors would substantiate the interpretation.
Continuity is therefore not a necessary ingredient of geographical range.
An ancient trait may have been displaced in all but a few remote peripheral tracts.
The areas of these may aggregate but little.
Yet the distances between them are likely to remain greater than the longest range of a later trait which has replaced the earlier one over most of its original territory.
Yet these two outlying systems enclosed between them a larger tract than those over which the alphabets had diffused.
But the former constituted two great and continuous groups, one in each hemisphere, to which the non-agricultural peoples in the north of Asia, the south of Africa, the remote continent of Australia, the north of North America, and the south of South America were obviously peripheral.
Agriculture being of necessity later than the non-agricultural state, and there being thus no doubt that the marginal hunting peoples represent the remnant of a condition that was once world-wide, it appears that there must be a presumption of validity in favor of reckoning the extent of a scattered custom by its included rather than its actual area.
Of course, the situation is not always so simple.
There may exist the possibility of two or more marginal areas sharing a trait as the result of parallelism.
The last two interpretations in fact seem more conservative than the first.
In short, the periphery argument must not be stretched too thin.
Nor would it be fair to balance the whole group of true alphabets in the year 500 B.C.
Yet the distribution of all alphabets as against that of all ideographic and rebus systems would lead, at that date as two thousand years later, to the same interpretation that the facts of history actually give.
This is a criterion that has been abused in the earlier anthropology, but it is usable with caution, especially where a measure of experience confirms the grading that seems rational.
Yet there is this indirect evidence: there are peoples that make baskets only, others that make baskets and cloth, none that make cloth only.
Where two devices serve the same end and come into full contact, the issue is even simpler, because the better crowds out the worse.
There is no record of any people, once able to produce metal axes or knives, reverting to or inventing stone ones.
An adequate system of recording events has always maintained itself.
Literacy may have become less [331] frequent, now and then, under economic or military stress, and literature poorer, but no recording culture has ever gone back wholly to oral tradition.
Specific systems of records have indeed died out—witness Egyptian and Cuneiform: but only because they were rendered useless by more efficient systems of pure phonetic writing.
These, on the other hand, have never been known to yield to non-phonetic systems.
In such cases judgment should if possible be wholly suspended until evidence is available.
In fact, one important stimulus to belief in matrilineal priority has been the awareness that the most advanced cultures of the recent period have inclined to count descent from the father.
But it is obviously unfounded to deduce from this that ancient and primitive nations favored mother-reckoning.
It would be equally logical—or illogical—to infer that what is had always been since institutions arose, as to argue that because a thing is now it must formerly not have been.
This points to a further limiting consideration: that it is dangerous to argue from a fraction of culture history to the whole.
Particularly dangerous is it to infer from the last four centuries to all that went before.
In the present era distant communications have become infinitely more numerous and rapid.
Space has in one sense been almost abolished.
Diffusions that now encircle the planet in a hundred years would in previous [332] ages often have required a thousand to cross a continent by halting steps from people to people.
Similarly, the results of the diffusion principle may be vitiated by an arbitrary bounding of the spatial field of investigation.
A review of African distributions by themselves, for instance, would lead to many misleading conclusions, because it is obvious that African culture has evolved not integrally but as a part of the larger complex Europe-Asia-Africa.
What from the angle of Africa thus appears central, like iron, may really be peripheral; what appears marginal, like Islam, is often actually central.
By comparison America is so discrete from the Old World, both geographically and historically, that an analogous attempt is far more justifiable.
Yet even here, as will appear, some influences from the Old World have operated, whose a priori elimination would lead to false conclusions.
As regards what is high and low, whole cultures as well as culture elements must be considered.
Between two civilizations, it is fair to assume that the more advanced will normally radiate, the retarded one absorb.
In the case of a still unexplained trait common to the two areas and limited to them, the presumption of origin would thus lie in one or the other tract according to whether its appearance fell in the period of Asiatic or Greek culture domination.
So in America, loom weaving is shared by Mexicans and Pueblos.
If nothing else were known of them except that the former but not the latter had passed from oral tradition to visible records, there would be justification for belief in the probability of importation of the loom from Mexico into the adjacent Southwest.
Since this one item of Mexican superiority is reinforced by the facts that the Mexicans cultivated a dozen plants to the Pueblos’ three; that they were expert in several metallurgical processes and the Pueblos at best, and rarely, hammered native copper; that the Mexicans alone carried on elaborate astronomical observations, computed with large figures, and had established an intercommunal dominion, the probability of their priority in loom weaving becomes so strong as to serve as a fairly reliable working basis.
The [333] Greeks were without writing, metal working, successful astronomy, or empire while these already flourished in Egypt and Asia and were later carried to Greece.
Yet in this general period the Greeks developed metrical poetry and vowel signs for the alphabet.
A backward tribe might adopt a simple iron-working technique quite avidly, yet find the manufacture of sewing machines beyond its endeavors and wants.
Among a people owning little property and no money and therefore not in the habit of counting, and indifferent to their ages or the lapse of time as expressed in numbers of years and days, a calendar system like that of the Babylonians or Mayas would certainly not become established merely because of contact.
They might adopt and make use of the knowledge that there are some twelve moons in the round of the seasons, and that the solstices furnish convenient starting points for the count within each year.
So with a religion like Christianity or Buddhism carried by a lone missionary, or shipwrecked sailors, to a people as simple in their life as the Indians of California.
The religion would be too abstract, too remote, too dependent on unintelligible preconceptions, to be embraced.
A particular Christian or Buddhist trait, say a symbol like the swastika or cross, might conceivably be taken over and perpetuated as a decorative motive or as a magical charm.
True, if the missionary came in the company of troops and settlers, and introduced cattle, regular meals, comfortable clothing, intertribal peace, new occupations and diversions, the old simple culture would often crumble rapidly, and the higher religion be adopted as part of the larger change, as indeed happened in California when the Franciscans entered it.
But one would not argue from the convertibility of the Indians under such circumstances to their [334] equal readiness to accept Buddhism from sporadic East Asiatic castaways.
About 1889 a messianic religious movement known as the Ghost-dance fired half the Indian tribes of the United States for a few years.
In 1891 this had a wider diffusion than any ancient cult.
It represented something struck from the contact of two culture systems: it was not of pure native evolution.
A point had been reached where the old cultures felt themselves suffocated by the wave of Caucasian immigration and civilization.
And in a last despairing delirium they flung forth the delusion of an impending cataclysm that would wipe out the white man with his labor, penalties, and restrictions, bring back the extinct buffalo, and restore the old untrammeled life.
Such a cult could not of course have remained permanently active.
If analogous excitements occurred in the prehistoric period, they died away without a trace and may therefore be disregarded in a view of long perspective.
Or at most they served as ferments productive of other and more stable culture growths.
Even if all knowledge of American religion were blotted out except its condition in 1891, the careful investigator would stand in no serious danger of inferring a high antiquity from the broad extent of the Ghost-dance cult, because of the conspicuous elements which it purloined from that very Christianity and Occidental civilization whose encroachments gave it birth.
Snowshoes cannot be expected in equatorial lowlands.
The spread of the cultivation of a tropical plant like manioc is necessarily restricted no matter how great the [335] antiquity of its use.
Limitations of diffusion, or breaks in the continuity of distribution, thus do not count as negative evidence if climate or soil suffice to explain them.
This is in accord with what has been previously formulated (§ 83) as to environment being a limiting condition rather than a cause of cultural phenomena.
It may actually be nuclear.
The coasts show many more imported traits.
Communication in the archipelago is by sea, internally as well as in foreign relations; resistance to travel, conquest, intercourse, or innovation is by land.
The remote area as regards time may therefore be a mountain range fifty miles inland, while a coast a thousand miles away is near.
So a rough hill tract in a level territory, a desert encircled by fertile lands, sometimes remain backward because they oppose the same obstacles to diffusion as great distances.
It is thus evident that valuable as the distribution principle is, perhaps most important of all non-excavating methods of prehistoric investigation, it can never be used mechanically.
It must be applied with common sense, and with open-mindedness toward all other techniques of attack.
With these provisos in mind, let us approach the problem of American culture.
In general there are few historic data extant about them.
Second, they represent the civilizations of by far the greatest geographical extent and highest attainment that have developed independently, in the main at least, of the great web of culture growths which appear to have had their principal origin in the regions not far from the eastern Mediterranean.
They offer, accordingly, a separate problem, and one which, on account of the dearth of temporal data, has had to be approached through the [336] medium of space.
As soon, therefore, as knowledge of American cultures became orderly, its organization was inevitably effected in terms of geography.
The result has been the recognition of a series of culture-areas or culture-centers, several of which have already been referred to (§ 150-152).
These geographically defined types of culture are gradual and empirical findings.
They are not the product of a scheme or imagination, nor the result of theory.
They are not even the formulation of any one mind.
They do represent a consensus of opinion as to the classification of a mass of facts, slowly arrived at, contributed to by many workers, probably accepted in exact identity by no two of them but in essential outlines by all; in short, a non-philosophical, inductive, mainly unimpeachable organization of phenomena analogous to the “natural” classification of animals and plants on which systematic biology rests.
These culture areas, centers, or types have been established with greater exactitude for North than for South America.
34) are: 1.
Arctic or Eskimo: coastal 2.
Northwest or North Pacific Coast: also a coastal strip 3.
California or California-Great Basin 4.
Mackenzie-Yukon: the northern interior forest and tundra tract 6.
Plains: the level or rolling prairies of the interior 7.
Northeast or Northern Woodland: forested 8.
Southeast or Southern Woodland: also timbered 9.
Southwest: the southern plateau, sub-arid 10.
Mexico: from the tropic to Nicaragua.
The only serious divergence of opinion as to distinctness or approximate boundaries might arise in regard to numbers 4 and 5 of this list.
The culture of the Mackenzie region is so deficient and colorless that some students have hesitated to set it up as a separate unit.
The Plateau culture is also vague as to positive traits.
In fact, usage has here been departed from in reckoning the Great Basin, that part of the plateau which is without ocean drainage, with California instead of the Plateau.
Culture-areas of America.
The numbers refer to the names as listed on pp.
The Mexican area is less homogeneous than any of the preceding.
South American cultures seem to arrange themselves on fewer lines of cleavage than those of the northern continent.
Only five areas are as yet distinctly recognizable.
This paucity is perhaps due to a less intensive search for facts and less systematic attempt to classify them, so that future studies may increase the number of areas recognized.
Yet a simplicity of plan of culture relationships is evident.
The narrow strip between the Andes and the Pacific is a region of rather high culture throughout, the whole remainder of the continent one of much lower and comparatively uniform culture.
The areas determined are: 11.
Colombia or Chibcha: western Colombia with the nearer parts of Central America and northwestern Ecuador.
This is in the main a timbered region.
Andean or Peruvian: from southern Ecuador to northern Chile and northwestern Argentina.
Patagonia: characteristically an open, semi-arid country.
All three of these are open areas or only part timbered.
Antillean: the West Indies, including probably the Venezuela coast.
This culture was the earliest to perish in the New World.
It received the first shock of Caucasian discovery and settlement, and its carriers had no hinterland to which to retreat.
It is therefore imperfectly known.
Its closest affiliations are with the preceding area.
In fact, the Antillean may yet prove only a subdivision of the Tropical Forest culture.
In the discussions that follow, it has been omitted, but can in the main be understood as included in what is said of the Tropical Forest area.
Roughly, at least, these columns can follow one another in geographical order.
In each column, then, there might be entered all the culture traits found in its area.
If one culture were twice as rich or complex as another, the double number of entries would pile up twice as high and impress the eye.
Actually, such a procedure is hardly practicable.
The number of culture elements is too great.
Often too there would be doubt whether a feature should be reckoned as one or several.
Metal working comprises smelting, casting, forging, alloying, plating, soldering, and welding.
These are distinct techniques.
Yet they usually occur together or are all lacking.
Another adds three-strand, diagonal, and lattice twining and three-strand braiding, probably as developments of the original two-strand process.
As between two adjacent or related basket-making peoples, this difference may be very significant; measured against cloth weaving, it is trivial.
This means that a necessarily subjective selection of traits has been made in the compilation of the table.
But the reader who is not a specialist in the matter will generally be grateful for the elimination; and this elimination has at least been conducted without a conscious bias in any one direction.
With every possible datum inserted, the peaks in the table would probably overshadow the valleys much more conspicuously.
Accepting the diagram, then, as affording an approximately truthful picture, it is obvious that much the greatest advancement took place in Middle America—the region from Mexico to Peru; and that on the whole the majority of culture traits found in any of the more backward areas are shared with this middle region.
These are the traits below the heavy line that steps up and down across the diagram.
A minority of traits—those above the heavy line—are local to the several areas.
On the basic principle that a trait occurring over a continuous territory may be assumed to have originated but once and to have spread by diffusion, the bulk of the culture of most of the areas must have come into them from outside.
On the principle that a people with many established arts is more likely to make a new invention than is a retarded people, the great majority of the diffused elements may therefore be attributed to a Middle American source.
In this region, then, lay the focal point, the hive, of American civilization.
Diagram illustrating the occurrence of some representative elements of culture in the various areas of America.
In general, assumed early elements are below, late ones above, within each column; but for the figure as a whole, horizontal levels do not indicate contemporaneity as they do in figure 36.
Height of columns is representative of quantity or elaboration of culture content, which towers impressively in Middle America, to fall away towards the peripheries.
Hatching indicates elements that may once have existed in areas but are now lacking; stippling, elements perhaps introduced from Asia.
Entries above the heavy line are local developments.
In South America, the diffusion proceeded broadside from the length of the Andes.
In North America, it radiated fanwise from the south Mexican angle, the Southwest serving as the gateway or first relaying station that let through most but not all of what it received.
One area alone, the Northwest Coast, was reached but imperfectly by Middle American influences, yet attained a tolerable development through its own creative force, supplemented in some measure by the drift into it of sporadic culture element migrants from Asia.
Here only, then, there occurred a markedly independent growth of civilization, though definitely secondary to the great evolution of Middle America which in the main determined the culture of the twin continents.
In the lowest level, for instance, have been set those elements that are likely to have been common to all the first immigrants into America.
Local developments tending on the whole to be late, have been placed toward the heads of columns; and, roughly throughout, widely diffused and therefore apparently early elements are nearer the bottom.
In general, accordingly, the sequence upward of traits indicates their approximate sequence in time.
But this arrangement obviously holds chiefly for each column as a unit.
As between the columns, it breaks down, since the top of each column would represent the same period, the moment of discovery, and these tops are not on a level.
The display of the same data in such a manner that vertical position would adequately represent proportional lapse of time as the horizontal placing suggests geographical contiguity, would necessitate another arrangement.
In such a diagram the height of each column would be the same, but the richer cultures would have their constituent elements more closely crowded.
That is, each new invention or institution or importation followed more rapidly on its predecessor than in the peripheral areas.
The strata in the diagram would therefore generally not be level [342] but would slope upward from their origin in the middle.
This would be a more accurate schematic representation of what happened.
On the other hand, difficulties would arise in the graphic representation.
The domestication of the llama, for instance, is confined to a single area, the Andean.
The llama could therefore not be placed properly near the head of the column representing Andean culture, because the top of this column would signify recency.
It would have to be inserted lower down, thus breaking the continuity of strata extending through several areas.
Such a procedure, however, is much easier and more accurate for the subdivisions of one limited area than for an entire hemisphere, because the interrelations of the areas constituting this are naturally very complex and at many points imperfectly known.
Such a schematic representation of the course of culture in the whole of the Americas on the basis of as many traits as are included in Figure 35, is therefore not attempted here.
36) recently published by an author whose primary concern is with Middle America, who has presented his story in the form of a treatment by larger periods, and in his diagram extends these to the remainder of the two continents.
35 and 36) is more apparent than intrinsic.
Fewer elements of culture are included than in figure 35, but these are definitely placed according to their indicated sequence in time.
But the reader must remember that this is a reconstruction from indirect and often imperfect evidence, probably correct in the large and in many details, certain to be incorrect in some proportion of its findings, tentative throughout and subject to revision as the future brings fuller insight.
It aims to give the truth as it can be pieced together: it is never a directly documented story like those familiar to us from orthodox “history.” 177.
Its affiliations, as previously set forth (§ 23, 25) are generically Mongoloid.
This statement does not mean that the American Indians are descended from the Chinese or Japanese, any more than the fact that these are denominated Mongolians implies belief in their descent from the particular modern people known as the Mongols.
So the Mongolians are that group of “yellow” peoples of eastern Asia of whom the Mongols form part; and the Mongoloids are the larger group that takes in Mongolians, East Indians, and Americans.
The American Indians have probably remained closer to it than the Chinese.
It would be more correct to say that the Chinese have developed out of an ancient Indian-like stock, acquiring slant eyes rather late.
It is probably much older.
These were probably the real discoverers of the New World, which they found inhabited only by brutes.
The time of their invasion can be but roughly fixed, yet within its limits it seems fairly reliable.
Had the migration occurred much later, when the Neolithic was already well under way, the domesticated animals and plants of the Old World would have been introduced—cattle, pigs, sheep, wheat, barley, rice, millet, all of which the Americans lacked.
The same holds for inventions like the wheel.
But none such have been found in America, or where alleged, their circumstances have remained matters of controversy.
There has been much excavation, and numerous investigators are alive to the importance which evidence of this sort would bear.
Yet to date not a single human fossil of positively Pleistocene age or type has been discovered.
Numerous sensational finds have been announced.
Every once alleged Pleistocene skull or part appears to belong to some branch of the American Indian race as it exists to-day.
If the date of the entry is set at ten thousand years ago, the elapsed period accounts very well for the present diversification of the American race.
There are broad and narrow headed tribes, tall and short ones, some with hooked noses, others with slightly wavy hair.
But the fundamental type is everywhere the same.
The differences seem just such as environment and mode of life, the accidents of descent from small groups, and perhaps a slight effect of selection, would be certain to accomplish in time.
In general, the natives of America are remarkably homogeneous, considering the vast territory they occupy, its variations of temperature, humidity, altitude, and food supply, and the marked differences in the living customs of many tribes.
The one group that at all stand apart are the Eskimo; and these are distinct in language and culture also.
Moreover, they occupy the parts nearest to Asia, including both sides of Behring Strait.
Mixture is one of the greatest factors of racial change, and in the isolation of America this element was eliminated to a much larger extent than in most of the Old World.
The American Indian languages certainly appear to be diverse.
It has been customary to reckon about a hundred and fifty distinct speech families in North and South America (§ 50).
Buried and disguised resemblances are being noted, which point to original unity.
The number to be ultimately recognized bids fair to be small.
Old World conditions are at bottom more similar than at first glance seems.
English and the modern Hindu languages, such as Bengali, although certainly related, are quite different from each other.
The proof of their common Indo-European origin rests largely on the similarities between their ancestral forms, Anglo-Saxon and Sanskrit.
These in turn are tied together more closely by the connecting evidence of other ancient languages, such as Greek and Latin.
Take away these extinct tongues and the modern transitional ones, imagine English and Bengali to be the only representatives of Indo-European, and it is doubtful whether their common parentage could be wholly proved.
The relationship would certainly not be readily recognizable; the most painstaking analysis would reveal so many words wholly peculiar to each language, and so many exceptions to every suggestion of regular sound equivalences, that conservative philologists would perhaps refuse to commit themselves on the problem of a single origin.
This imaginary situation parallels the actual one in American linguistics.
Not a single ancient form of speech has been preserved.
Many living ones are inadequately known.
The fact that some enthusiast has compiled a grammar of Nahuatl or Quechua or Eskimo does not necessarily mean that he has dissected out its whole structure.
A book devoted to a language may be as superficial as it looks learned.
And the man who really knew Nahuatl has usually concerned himself very little with Quechua.
So far as he might become acquainted with it, it would appear so different that the pressing of comparisons would seem sterile.
It has been a case of unproved rather than disproved unity of origin.
If the Indo-European languages were not our own but those of a strange race and therefore known to us much less intensively; if the history of their ancient forms were obliterated instead of preserved for us for over three thousand years; and if they were [347] allowed a period of ten thousand years in which to have differentiated, philology would probably be assigning them to several distinct stocks.
This is not an assertion that Nahuatl and Quechua are related.
It is a claim that in the light of present knowledge they might have been one language ten thousand years ago.
A single people with a single speech could well have given rise in so long a period as that—three hundred generations—to languages that now seem so different.
And at that, there is no reason for believing that all the American languages are necessarily derivable from a single mother tongue.
There might have been half-a-dozen or a dozen idioms in use among as many populations which moved out of Asia into Alaska.
For of course it is improbable that the migration was an isolated, unitary event.
Each of these waves, which only the perspective of ages has merged into the appearance of a single movement, may have brought its own speech, from which in time there branched out languages that ultimately became so differentiated as to appear now like distinct families.
Not that it is known that this happened; but it seems inherently plausible that it might have happened, and there is no present evidence to the contrary.
In short, philology interposes no obstacle to the acceptance of the date which has been assumed as roughly defining the period of the peopling of America.
These elements were either brought along on the invasions or developed so soon afterwards as to become equally widely diffused.
For the bow and arrow, there is no proof in Europe until the opening of the Neolithic.
The dog, the earliest animal attached to man, is known from the same period, whereas cattle, swine, and sheep were kept only at the height of the Neolithic (§ 67, 222).
As the American Indians possess dogs, it is difficult to attribute the custom otherwise than to a heritage from the same culture stage in the Old World to which the harpoon and bow belong.
This connection is made more certain by the fact that the Indian dog is most closely related not to the specifically American coyote but to the circumpolar wolf and perhaps the jackal, and diverged into much the same types of breeds as the Old World dog.
There are American races of dogs—some of them ancient, as represented by skeletons from mounds, and mummies from Arizona and Peru —that are respectively droop eared, curly tailed, short legged, long furred, hairless, or undershot in the jaw, thus corresponding closely to the breeds evolved with similar traits in the eastern hemisphere, and virtually forcing the conclusion that the dog was brought into America by man and not domesticated from a wild species in this continent.
The ten thousand years set as the lapse since this event are admittedly more arbitrary.
No one pretends to date the remoter stages of European prehistory exactly.
Relative durations are all that it is legitimate to pin much faith on.
Dates are avowedly approximations.
This round number, not taken too literally, has the virtue of concreteness and seems somewhere near the truth.
It may yet prove to be a few thousand years short or over.
But it does allow enough time, and no obtrusive excess of time, for the diversification of the Indians in race, speech, and culture; and this seeming accord of the assumption with the [349] present facts may be taken as a rough corroboration.
The other culture elements assigned in Figure 35 to the first or immigrant stratum cannot be dated by any concrete remains, since some are institutions and others are arts whose materials are perishable—baskets and fire-drills, for instance.
They are, however, found among all or most of the lower American tribes, and recur more or less widely in the eastern hemisphere.
The first settlers may accordingly be pictured as a people living off nature; hunting, fishing, gathering roots and fruits and seeds, digging or picking shellfish.
Their best weapons were the bow and the harpoon with detachable head.
Simpler weapons were also used: clubs, stones, probably darts and spears, perhaps daggers of bone or stone.
Flint was chipped and flaked, other stones were beginning to be ground or rubbed into form.
Bone awls served for piercing; less certainly, eyed needles for sewing.
Cordage of bast was twisted, and in all likelihood baskets, bins, weirs, traps were woven or twined, perhaps also nets made.
Dogs were alternately played with and kicked about; they were half kept, half tolerated, probably eaten in time of need.
There was no organization of society but on a basis of blood and contiguity.
Related groups would act together until they fell apart.
Labor was sex allotted; the men of each community possibly maintained a house or place of meeting at which they gathered in their leisure, perhaps nightly, and which women feared to enter.
Beliefs in souls and spirits were already immemorially old.
The people had risen to the point of being no longer passive toward the immaterial; the most intense-minded among them aspired to communication with the spirits; they demonstrated to their fellows their control and utilization of supernatural beings, and were what we call shamans.
Custom in fact conceded the influence of the spiritual world on every human being, and felt it to be strongest at times of passage or crisis—birth, maturity, death.
Puberty in particular seemed important, as portentous of the whole of adult life.
The welfare of the individual and his proper relation to the community were therefore sought to be insured by spiritual safe-guarding.
Girls were secluded, treated or doctored, trained; boys subjected to whipping or other ordeals of fortitude; the passing of such initiation admitted them to the [350] men’s house.
He may have navigated; more likely, or more often, he crossed on the ice.
Long before, there had been a land bridge from Siberia to Alaska, by which horses, camels, cattle, elephants, deer and many other species extended their range from one continent to another.
But this was in geological antiquity, man’s entry in geological recency— immediacy, rather; and the divided configuration of the continents was probably already established.
Horses had become extinct in the New World when man arrived, the elephant tribe probably also.
Llamas, pumas, jaguars took the place of Old World camels, lions, tigers.
The fauna of the Americas, their vegetation, their climate, were nearly as they are to-day.
The Aleutian islands have also been suggested as a migration route.
But their chain is long, the gap at the western end one of hundreds of miles of open water, scarcely negotiable except to rather expert navigators.
Still weaker would be any supposition of arrival from Polynesia.
Here the distances between the nearest islands and the mainland run to thousands of miles.
Further, all the Polynesian evidence points to a late settling of the eastern islands of the Pacific; a few thousand years ago at most.
Exclusion therefore indicates the Behring route as the only one to be seriously considered.
The migration was scarcely a sudden or single one.
It went on for generations, perhaps for thousands of years in driblets.
Two or three explorers would set across and return, to be followed by a few families.
Others succeeded them.
There would be no crowding, for a long time no resistance at the strait on the part of jealous established settlers.
The open south, always milder, generally more fruitful the farther one went, lay ahead.
It must long [351] have drawn immigrants away from the strait faster than they crossed it.
So the immigrants pushed across the breadth of the continent and down its length, entered the tropics in Mexico, defiled through Panama—and a second continent stretched before them.
How long it took the first wanderers to diffuse themselves from Alaska to the Strait of Magellan, it is impossible to say.
Perhaps a couple of thousand years, perhaps only a few hundred.
Curiosity, the desire to see, are strong in men if fear imposes no restraints.
Sooner or later, at any rate, they were living throughout both continents.
When the Caucasian discovered America he might have commenced at Cape Horn, gone on to a people whose very existence was unknown to those at his starting point, and repeated the step a dozen times until his journey brought him to the Arctic.
Before the rise of the empires of Mexico and Peru the number of links in the chain ignorant of each other would have been greater.
The moving bands of the primitive first-comers no doubt lost touch with each other quickly in even shorter stretches.
A family of brothers might become dominant in a band through the number of their descendants and so color the somatic type of the group, which in turn, favored by fortune and expanding, might lay the hereditary foundation for a sub-racial variety.
Movements of population continued to occur until the present.
They are a sort of boiling of the kettle, not a downhill flow.
They relieved internal strains and vacillated back and forth with circumstances; they represented no drift like the first occupation.
Much of their story may ultimately be worked out and provide a national history of pre-Columbian America.
But the effect of these later pressures and expansions and wanderings on the culture development of the New World as a whole is likely to have been relatively slight.
One can affirm little of this early period except that differences in culture must have begun to develop in conformity with the localized opportunities of environment.
The highland had forged ahead.
Especially, perhaps, was this true of the region of southern Mexico and Guatemala.
Why it was here that civilization first gathered a notable momentum, it is difficult to say; we are dealing with obscure beginnings at a remote period.
An unusual concentration of population is likely to have been an important factor.
At least there are the parallels of Egypt, Babylonia, India.
Mountain and coast, temperate highland and hot lowland, humid and arid tracts, tropical jungle and open country, were only a few hours apart.
In each locality the population worked out its necessary adaptations, and yet it was near enough others of a different adaptation for them to trade, to depend on one another, to learn.
Custom therefore came in contact with custom, invention with invention.
Cultural movement and stimulus would normally be greater than in a culturally uniform area.
Be that as it may, Middle America took the lead.
From this, in a remote archaic period, the cultivated plant was derived.
At least, such seems to be the probability in a somewhat tangled mass of botanical evidence.
Here then the dominant plant of American agriculture was evolved: with it, very likely, the cultivated beans and squashes that are generally associated in native farming even in parts remote from Mexico.
Pottery has so nearly the same distribution as maize agriculture, as to suggest a substantially contemporaneous origin, probably at the same center.
This is the more likely because the art is of chief value to a sessile people, and farming operates more strongly than any other mode of life to bring about a sedentary condition.
Agriculture almost certainly increased the population.
The food supply was greater and more regular; people got used to living near each other where before they had unconsciously drifted apart through distrust; and the proximity in turn, as well as the new stability, would lessen many of the local famines, hostilities, and other hardships to which the smaller and less settled communities had been exposed.
As the death rate went down [354] and numbers mounted, specialization of labor would be first made possible, and then almost forced.
A self-contained community of a hundred cannot permit much specialization of accomplishment and none of occupation.
On the other hand a community of a million inevitably segregates somewhat into classes, trades, guilds, or castes.
The individual with decided tastes and gifts in a particular direction finds his products in enough demand to devote himself largely or wholly to their manufacture.
The very size of the community as it were forces him to specialization, and thus diversity, with its train of effects leading to further stimulation, is attained independently of environment.
The use of tobacco, for instance, is as widely spread as agriculture, but is not necessarily as ancient.
Its diffusion in the eastern hemisphere has been so rapid (§ 98) as to make necessary the admission that it might have spread rapidly in the New World also —faster, at any rate, than maize.
Moreover, a distinction must be made between the smoking or chewing or snuffing of tobacco and its cultivation.
There are some modern tribes—mostly near the margins of the tobacco area—that gather the plant as it grows wild.
The tribes to the north contented themselves with allied species, mostly so inferior from the consumer’s point of view that they have not been taken up by western civilization.
The Colombian and Andean culture-areas used little or no tobacco, but chewed the stimulating coca leaf.
This is a case of one of two competing culture traits preventing or [355] perhaps superseding the other, not of tobacco never having reached the Andes.
Most of the remainder of South America used tobacco.
But this argument will not apply to the many clanless tribes of the California, Plains, and Tropical Forest areas.
It must accordingly be concluded that those American nations that show no formal organization of society on a hereditary basis—or at least the more primitive ones who possess no equivalent or substitute—do without this organization because they never acquired it.
This negative condition may then be inferred as the original one of the whole American race.
These comprise the tribes of one segment of the Northwest Coast area; those of one end of the Southwest with some extension into California; and those of most of the Northern Woodland, with some extension into the Plains.
Another series of tribes live under the same sort of organization but with descent reckoned in the female instead of the male line.
These comprise the peoples of one end of the Northwest Coast; those of one portion of the Southwest; and those of the Southeast, with some extensions into the Northeast and Plains.
These exogamic-totemic series of tribes average higher in their general culture than the clanless and totemless ones.
On the whole, too, they are situated nearer the focus of [356] civilization in Middle America.
The finest carving in North America, for instance, is that of the Northwest—totem poles, masks, and the like.
It would be extravagant to maintain that throughout the North American continent every matrilineal tribe was culturally more advanced than every patrilineal one.
The matrilineal clan organization thus represents a higher and presumably later stage in North America than patrilineal clan organization, as this in turn ranks and temporally follows the clanless condition.
With one exception, the distribution of the same tribes with reference to the South Mexican center agrees with their advancement.
The Northeast is distinctly peripheral, the Southeast a half-way tract connected with Mexico by way both of the Southwest and the Antilles.
The matrilineal Pueblo portion of the Southwest occupies part of the plateau backbone near the southern end of which the Mexican culture developed.
It was along this backbone that civilization flowed up through northern Mexico.
The coasts lagged behind.
They were marginal in Mexico, more marginal still in the Southwest, where the [357] patrilineal tribes lived on or near the Pacific.
This reversed distribution raises the suspicion that the Northwestern social organization may have had nothing to do with Mexico, but may be a purely local product.
This suspicion is hardened by the fact that the Northwest shows a number of other culture traits—some peculiar to itself, others recurring in well separated areas—which it seems impossible to connect with Mexico.
Several of these traits will be discussed farther on.
For the present it is enough to note their existence as an indication favorable to the interpretation of the Northwest social organization as unrelated to Mexico.
For South America the data are too scattering to discuss profitably without rather detailed consideration.
The distributional facts outside Middle America thus point to this reconstruction of events.
The first institution of exogamic groups was on the basis of descent in the male line, occurred in or near Middle America, and flowed outwards, though not to the very peripheries and remotest tracts of the continents.
This new type of organization diffused, but in its briefer history traveled less far and remained confined to the tribes that were in most active cultural connection with Middle America.
Now, however, a seeming difficulty arises.
[26] The solution is that Middle America indeed evolved these institutions and [358] then went a step beyond by abandoning or transforming them.
Obviously this explanation will be validated in the degree that it can be shown that probable causes or products of the transformation existed.
Struggling villages confederated, with a fixed meeting place and established council; the authority of elected or hereditary chiefs grew, until these gave the larger part of their time to communal affairs; towns consolidated.
Public works could thus be undertaken.
Not only irrigating ditches and defenses, but pyramid temples were constructed.
In Middle America this condition must have been attained several thousand years ago.
The Mayas had passed beyond it early in the Christian era.
They were then ruled by a governing class and priesthood, and were erecting dated monuments that testify to a settled existence of the more successful of their communities.
The Pueblos of the Southwest had achieved town life and considerable priestly control.
They had not taken the further step of welding groups of towns into larger coherent units.
In the Southeast, however, while the towns were less [359] compact physically, and probably less populous, political integration on a democratic basis had made some headway.
The institution evolved was essentially a confederacy of the members of a language group, with civil and military chiefs, council houses, and representation by “tribes” or towns and clans.
From the Southeast the idea of the confederacy was carried into the Northeast by the Iroquois, whose famous league, founded perhaps before Columbus reached America, attained its culmination after the French and English settlement and the introduction of firearms.
The Iroquois league was an astounding accomplishment for a culturally backward people.
Its success was due to the high degree of political integration achieved.
[27] Some stage of this sort the Mexican peoples may have passed through.
It was a straggling domain of subjected and reconquered towns and tribes, interspersed with others that maintained their independence, extending from middle Mexico to Central America, containing probably several million inhabitants paying regular tribute, held together by well-directed military force, and governed by a hereditary line of half-elected or confirmed rulers of great state and considerable power.
The exogamic clan organization as such had disappeared.
They may have been the made-over survivals of clans; they were not clans like those of the Southwest, Southeast, or Northwest.
Five successive stages, then, were probably gone through in the evolution of south Mexican society.
The first phase was that of hand-woven basketry, which has already been accredited to the period of immigration, and is beyond doubt ancient.
All Americans made baskets at one time or another.
That basket making goes back to a rudimentary as well as early stage of civilization is further suggested by the fact that perhaps the finest ware is made in the distinctly backward areas, such as the Plateau and California.
A second and a third phase, which are sometimes difficult to distinguish, are those of loose suspended warps and of a simple frame or incomplete loom.
Pliable cords of some sort, or coarse bast threads, are employed.
These two processes are widely spread, but not quite as far as basketry; the northern and southern extremes of the double continent do not know them.
Occasionally, very fine work is done by one or the other of these two methods.
The fourth stage is that of the true or complete loom.
In America the loom is intimately associated with the cultivation of cotton.
The two have the same distribution, except for some use of the plant for the twining of hammocks on a half-loom in portions of the Tropical Forest area.
Disregarding this case as a probable part adaptation of a higher culture trait to a lower culture, we may define the distribution of both loom and cotton as restricted to the Middle American areas, the adjacent Southwest, and perhaps the adjacent Antilles.
This is certainly central.
It was probably used in Mexico.
It may therefore be tentatively assumed to have been known also in the intervening Chibcha area.
It is used to-day in the Southwest, but may have been introduced there by the Spaniards.
This stage accordingly is limited even more strictly to the vicinity of Middle America.
The best and finest fabrics were made in Peru, in part probably as consequence of the addition of wool to the previous repertory of cotton.
This addition in turn probably followed the domestication of the llama by the Peruvians.
The Mexicans had no corresponding animal to tame, and their textiles lagged behind in quality.
Baskets are made of woody rods, cane splints, root fibers, or straws, all untwisted, but it is probable that the ability to twist cordage is about equally old as basketry.
At any rate there is no American people ignorant of cord making.
The materials are occasionally sinews, more frequently bast—that is, bark fibers.
These are rolled together, almost invariably two at a time, between the palm and the naked thigh.
Cordage is used for the second and third stages of weaving.
The cotton employed in loom weaving does not spin well by this rolling method.
It was therefore spun by being twisted between the fingers, the completed thread being wound on a spindle.
This spindle served primarily as a spool or bobbin.
In the Old World the distaff has been used for thousands of years.
This is a spindle with a whorl or flywheel.
It is dropped with a twirl, giving both twist and tension to the loose roving of linen or wool and thus converting it into yarn by a mechanical means.
The New World never fully utilized this device.
The Southwest to-day uses the wheeled spindle, but evidently as the result of European introduction.
Old Mexican pictures and modern Maya photographs show the spindle stood in a bowl, not dropped.
The whorl which it possessed was therefore little more than a button to keep the thread from slipping off the slender spindle.
For Peru this is established.
Thousands of spindles have been found there, normally with whorls too small and light to serve as an effective flywheel.
It may then be concluded that all American spinning was essentially by hand; which is in accord with the absence from all America of any form of the wheel.
The Indian spinning methods were only two: thigh rolling for bast, finger twisting for cotton.
The origin of the higher forms of spinning and weaving in Middle America is confirmed by the tropical origin of cotton, on which these developments depend.
The cotton of the Southwest, for instance, was introduced from Mexico as a cultivated plant.
This may well have been the first variety to be cultivated in the hemisphere.
But clothing of textiles shows a distribution that is culturally significant.
The distribution is that of loom-woven cotton; the salient characteristic is rectangular shape: the blanket shawl, the poncho, the square shirt and skirt.
In the Northwest Coast region hand and half-loom woven capes and skirts of bast were worn more or less.
But these were flaring—trapezoidal, not rectangular— and thus evidently represent a separate development.
In all the cloth weaving areas, and in them only, sandals were worn.
The spatial correlation is so close that there must be a connection.
It may be suggested that the sandal originated, or at least owed its spread, to textile progress.
Again the Northwest Coast corroborates by being unique; it is essentially a barefoot area.
The original textile arts of the race were probably first advanced to the stages intermediate between basket and cloth making in Middle America.
Thence they spread north and south, but not quite to the limits of the hemisphere, being retained in special usage chiefly in the Northwest.
With the cultivation of cotton in Middle America, spinning and the loom came into use, and were ultimately carried to the Southwest, but not beyond.
Cloth garments and sandals promptly followed.
The shaman is an individual without official authority but often of great personal influence.
His supposed power comes to him directly from the spirits as a gift or grant.
[364] He himself, as a personality, has been able to enter into a special relationship, denied to normal persons, with the supernatural world or some member thereof.
The community recognizes his power after it is his: the community does not elect him to his special position, nor accept him in it by inheritance.
His communion with spirits enables the shaman to foretell the future, change the weather, blast the crops or multiply game, avert catastrophes or precipitate them on foes; above all, to inflict and cure disease.
He is therefore the medicine-man; a word which in American ethnology is synonymous with shaman.
The terms doctor, wizard, juggler, which have established themselves in usage in certain regions, are also more or less appropriate: they all denote shamans.
When he wishes to kill his private or public enemy, the shaman by his preternatural faculties injects some foreign object or destructive substance into his victim, or abstracts his soul.
To cure his friends or clients, he extracts the disease object, sometimes by singing, dancing, blowing, stroking, or kneading, most often by sucking; or he finds, recaptures, and restores the soul.
Of the two concepts, that of the concrete disease object is more widely spread; that of the soul theft is apparently characteristic of the more advanced tribes; but the exact distribution remains to be worked out.
The territorial extent of shamanistic ideas and practices is from the Arctic to Cape Horn.
The method of acquiring power from spirits, the nature of the disease object and its process of extraction, the conviction that sickness must be caused by malevolent shamanistic power, there being no such thing as natural death; these and other specific features of the institution are sometimes surprisingly similar in North and South America.
They concern the critical points of human life: birth, death, sometimes marriage and childbirth; but most [365] frequently, or at least most sacredly, they are wont to concern themselves with maturity.
They are thus often puberty ceremonials, made for the welfare both of the individual and of the community, and fitting him or her for reproductive functions as well as for a career as a useful and successful community member.
The girls’ adolescence rites have been described (§ 154) in some detail for California.
With but minor variations, the account there given applies to the customs of many American and in fact Old World peoples.
The boys’ rites come at the corresponding period of life, but their reference to sex and marriage is generally less definite.
Fortitude, manliness, understanding are the qualities they are chiefly intended to test and fix.
Privations like fasting, ordeals of pain, admonitions by the elders, are therefore characteristic elements of these rites.
It is thus not as surprising as it might seem at first acquaintance that identical practices, such as having the boys stung by vicious ants, are occasionally found in regions as remote as California and Brazil: even the particular method may be a local survival of a wide ancient diffusion.
Perhaps most common of all specific ingredients of the rite in America is a whipping of the boys.
Possibly this commended itself as combining a test of fortitude and an emotional memento of the counsel imparted.
At any rate it evidently became an established part of the puberty rites thousands of years ago, and thus acquired the added social momentum of an immemorial custom in many parts of both North and South America.
As emphasis shifted from the individual to the community as represented by those already initiated, the ceremony came to be performed less for the benefit of the individual than for the maintenance of the group, the society as such, with its rites, secrets, and privileges.
Very often, no one was excluded but immature boys and females; yet, if the act of admittance was to have any psychic significance, the exclusion of these elements of the community had to be made much of.
The girls’ adolescence ceremony does not seem to have taken this course of growth, because of its more personal and bodily character, puberty in women being so much more definite a physiological event.
There are women’s societies among some American tribes.
But they seem to be generally a weaker imitation of the men’s societies after these were fully developed, not a direct outgrowth of the original girls’ rite.
Shamanism entered as another strain into the formation of the secret society.
Also, the shamans at times helped the novice shamans train and consolidate their spiritual powers.
The extension of this habit perhaps sometimes led, or contributed, to the establishment of a secret society (§ 158).
Masks are closely associated with secret societies.
They disguise the members to the women and boys, who are told, and often believe, that the masked personages are not human beings at all.
Of course this adds to the mystery and impressiveness of the initiations, especially when the masks are fantastic or terrifying.
Masks and societies thus are two related aspects of one thing.
But they are by no means inseparable.
In the Southwest, among the Pueblos, there are two types of societies.
There is a communal society, embracing all adult males, who are initiated at puberty by whipping and who later wear masks to impersonate spirits and dance thus for the public good.
There are several smaller societies, also with secret rites, which cure sickness, recruit their membership from the cured, and use masks little or not at all.
It is clear here how the two component strains, namely crisis rites and shamanistic practices, have flowed [367] into the common mold of the society idea and become patterned by it without quite amalgamating.
The third is marked by the development of the priesthood.
The priest is an official recognized by the community.
He has duties and powers.
He may inherit, be elected, or succeed by virtue of lineage subject to confirmation.
But he steps into a specific office which existed before him and continues after his death.
His power is the result of his induction into the office and the knowledge and authority that go with it.
He thus contrasts sharply with the shaman— logically at least.
The shaman makes his position.
His influence is essentially personal.
In actuality, the demarcation cannot always be made so sharply.
There are peoples whose religious leaders are borderline shaman-priests.
Yet there are other tribes that align clearly.
The Eskimo have pure shamans and nothing like priests.
The Pueblos have true priests but no real shamans.
Even the heads of their curing societies, the men who do the doctoring for the community, are officials, and do not go into trances or converse with spirits.
Obviously a priesthood is possible only in a well constructed society.
Specialization of function is presupposed.
People so unorganized as to remain in a pre-clan condition could hardly be expected to have developed permanent officials for religion.
As a matter of fact they have not.
Thence they extend throughout the region of more or less accomplished political development in Middle America.
Beyond that, they disappear.
Here once more, then, we encounter a trait substantially confined to the area of intensive culture and evidently superimposed upon the preceding stages.
Even the priesthood is old in Middle America.
This seems reasonably demonstrable.
We do not know its actual beginnings there.
But its surviving conditions at the edge of its area of occurrence may be taken as roughly indicative of its origin.
Among the Pueblos, each priest, with his assistants, is the curator of a sacred object or fetish, carefully bundled and preserved.
The fetish serves the public good, but he is its keeper.
Associated is the concept of an altar, a painting which he makes of colored earth or meal.
In the Plains area, some tribes may be somewhat hesitatingly described as having a priest or group of old men as priests.
Areas as advanced as the Northwest Coast, where distinctive priests are wanting, lack also the bundles and altars.
It looks, therefore, as if the American priesthood had originated in association with these two ceremonial traits of the fetish bundle and painted altar—both of which are conspicuously unknown in the eastern hemisphere.
Temples, however, were already in luxuriant bloom among the Maya in their Great Period of 400 to 600 A. D. The beginnings of their remarkable architecture and sculpture must of course lie much farther back; certainly toward the opening of the Christian era, very likely earlier.
Before this came the presumptive initial stage of priesthood, with bundles and altar paintings or some local equivalent.
If a thousand years be allowed for this phase, the commencement of the [369] priesthood would fall in southern Mexico or Guatemala at least three thousand years ago; possibly much longer.
Peru, perhaps, did not lag far behind.
It looks therefore as if human sacrifice had been a comparatively recent practice, perhaps only one or two thousand years old when America was discovered, and still moving toward its peak.
Outside Middle America, human sacrifice was virtually nonexistent.
There was considerable cannibalism in the Tropical Forest and Antilles, but no taking of life as a purely ceremonial act.
For the Pueblos of the Southwest, there are some slight and doubtful suggestions, but it appears that such deaths as were inflicted were rather punishments than offerings.
The one North American people admittedly sacrificing human life were the Pawnee, a Plains tribe, who once a year shot to death a girl captive amid a ritual reminiscent of that of Mexico.
This has always been interpreted as suggestive of a historical connection with Mexico.
The precise origin of sacrifice is obscure, although it is significant that it was restricted to the area of concentrated population and towns.
In Mexico at least there were no domesticated mammals available.
The ultimate foundation of human sacrifice is no doubt the widespread and very ancient custom of offerings.
Possibly the idea of self-inflicted torture served as a connection.
The Plains tribes sometimes hacked off finger joints as offerings, and in their Sun Dance tore skewers out of their skins.
It may seem strange that so shocking a custom as human sacrifice represented the climax of American religious development.
Yet in a few thousand years more of undisturbed growth, it would probably have been superseded.
This is precisely what happened in the Old World, which may be reckoned as about four to five thousand years ahead of the New.
In the Old World also the really lowly and backward peoples did not sacrifice men.
The practice is a symptom of incipient civilization.
Yet the greater area of the two continents seems never to have had such structures.
Stone buildings are confined to Middle America and the Southwest.
Outside these regions only the wholly timberless divisions of the Eskimo make huts of stone, and for their winter dwellings they are limited to choice of this material or blocks of snow.
The Eskimo hut is tiny, not more than eight or ten feet across, and the weather is kept out not by any skill in masonry or plastering, but by the rude device of stuffing all crevices with sod.
The Eskimo style of “building” in stone would be inapplicable in a structure of pretension.
Made larger, the edifice would collapse.
The art of masonry, like agriculture, pottery, and loom weaving, may therefore be set down as having had its origin in Mexico or Peru, or possibly in both.
In the intervening regions, most dwellings were of thatch or mud, public buildings of stone.
The occurrence of the stone living houses at the peripheries confirms their priority.
Evidently masonry was first employed in Middle America for simple public structures: chiefs’ tombs, water works, platforms for worship.
In its diffusion the art reached peoples like the Pueblos, who lived in small communities, interred their leaders without great rites, and offered no sacrifices in sight of multitudes.
These marginal nations therefore took over the new accomplishment but applied it only to their homes.
Meanwhile, however, the central “inventors” of masonry had grown more ambitious and were rearing ever finer and larger structures, until the superb architecture of the Mayas and the consummate stone fitting of the Incas reached their climax.
Stone sculpture grew as an accompaniment.
It remained rude in Peru, and chiefly limited to idols, in keeping with the simple, massive style of architecture.
Recent excavations in the Southwest have revealed a succession of stages as regards buildings.
The first houses in this region may have been thatched or earth-roofed.
The earliest in which stone was used were small, dug out a few feet, the sides of the excavation lined with, upright rock slabs, and a superstructure of poles or mud-filled wattling added.
Then followed a period of detached one-room houses, with rectangular [372] walls of masonry; and finally the stage of drawing these together in clusters and raising them in terraced stories.
This whole development can be traced within the area.
Yet it by no means follows that it originated wholly within the area.
The knowledge of laying stone in courses, the impulse or habit of doing so, might, theoretically, just as well have come from without; and evidently did actually come into the Southwest from Mexico.
This is a type of situation frequently encountered in culture history problems.
A group of data seem to point to a spontaneous origin on the spot so long as they are viewed only locally, whereas a broader perspective at once reveals them as merely part of a development whose ultimate source usually lies far away.
Yet the terracing is only an incident to rice culture, which is widespread in the Orient, ancient, and evidently of mainland origin.
Town life possesses a material aspect—that of the type and arrangement of dwellings —as well as the social and political aspects already touched on.
The largest towns in America were those of Mexico and Peru, whose capitals may have attained populations of fifty to a hundred thousand.
The Maya towns were smaller, in keeping with the Maya failure to develop an empire.
The largest towns of the Chibcha of Colombia may have held ten or twenty thousand souls.
The most flourishing pueblos of the Southwest seem never to have exceeded three thousand inhabitants.
Southeastern and Northwest Coast towns ran [373] to hundreds instead of thousands of population.
These figures tell the usual story of thinning away from center to peripheries.
But local differences were sometimes significant.
Yet its political and military development was more advanced, at any rate as a unit in the larger group of the confederacy.
The peripheral and backward areas, such as Patagonia and California, and those parts of the Tropical Forest in which nature had denied a supply and remoteness had shut off trade, did wholly without metals.
In the areas of medium advancement, like the Northwest, Southwest, and the ancient Mound Builder region of the Ohio Valley, native copper was beaten out into sheets, trimmed, bent, gouged, and engraved.
It was not smelted from ore nor cast.
Gold, silver, and other metals were not used; iron only sporadically when it could be obtained in the native metallic state from a fallen meteorite.
The supply even of copper was rarely large.
It flowed in trade, much like precious stones among ourselves, to the wealthier groups of nations able to part with their own products in exchange for this substance prized by them for jewelry and insignia but rarely made into tools.
The third stage is that of true metallurgical processes, and is confined to the three Middle American areas.
Here, copper, gold, silver, and so far as they were available tin and platinum, were sought after and worked.
Copper at any rate was extracted from its ores by smelting; all the known metals were fused and cast, both in permanent molds and by the method of melting wax out of a single-time mold.
Alloys were made: copper-tin bronze in Bolivia and the south [374] Peruvian highland, whence its use later spread north, perhaps being carried as far as Mexico (§ 108); copper-arsenic bronze and copper-silver alloy on the Peruvian coast; copper-gold in Colombia and Mexico; copper-lead bronze in Mexico.
Nowhere, however, was metal the standard material for tools, which continued to be mostly of stone or wood.
Metallic tools and utensils, especially knives and axes, were not altogether rare in the bronze region of South America.
The superior hardness of bronze as compared with copper no doubt proved a stimulus in this direction.
In general, metal remained treasure or ornament.
There were not even the beginnings of an iron culture anywhere in the hemisphere.
In the larger outlines, the history of American metallurgy is thus simple enough, as something developed late and never diffused beyond the central region of intensive culture.
As to the sequence of use of the several metals and processes, on the other hand, rather little has been ascertained.
It seems that in these matters South America might have been somewhat in advance of Mexico, both in time and in degree of attainments.
In spite of their relative recency, they can hardly have been less than several thousand years old.
The return of the seasons marked the year.
No one knew his age, nor, as a rule, how many years ago any event had taken place.
It is a mark of pretty high civilization when people know how old they are.
Some tribes allowed twelve moons, others thirteen, in some different individuals disagreed.
Whenever the geese actually flew, debates were settled: it was flying geese month, and every one went on with the series from there.
If he had happened to get a moon ahead or behind, he accepted the event as a correction.
The moon series calendar was used by the majority of tribes in the United States and Canada.
Somewhat more advanced is the solstitial moon series.
This takes one of the solstices, usually the one just before our Christmas, as the fixed beginning and end of the year.
Some tribes went farther and employed landmarks to observe the place on the horizon of the sun’s rising.
Until the solstice this place shifts daily southward, after it northward.
Also, the noonday shadows fall longest at the winter solstice.
Here then was a point in the year which was always the same, whereas the geese might fly or the leaves fall early one year and late the next.
The definiteness thus obtained was followed up by numbering the moons instead of describing them, or by recognizing both solstices as a frame within which there fell two parallel groups of six moons, or of five moons and a slightly longer solstitial period.
Yet the first beginnings of exact astronomical observations had been made and were utilized to give the year and its subdivisions a certain fixity.
The occurrence of the simple solstitial calendar in North America is significant.
It occurs in the Southwest and Northwest: that is, in the area most directly influenced by the higher Mexican center, and the area which made most progress independently of Mexico.
[29] These two stages of the descriptive and the solstitial moon series were long ago passed [376] through in southern Mexico and a need felt for a more precise time reckoning.
No calendar can either serve accuracy or cover long periods which fails to concern itself with the exact arithmetical relation of its smaller units to its larger ones: the number of days in the month and year, for instance.
The first step ahead was undoubtedly a day count, as previously the numbering of the moons had marked an advance over their descriptive naming.
The day count must have revealed the discrepancy between the actual numbers and those assumed for the larger units, such as 30 and 360.
The Mayas, or possibly some previous and forgotten people, invented a “month” of twenty days, probably because they counted by twenties instead of tens.
Eighteen of these months, with five added leap days, made a 365-day year.
It ran its course concurrently with the year as two wheels of 260 and 365 cogs might engage.
The same cogs would meet again at the end of 73 and 52 revolutions respectively, that is, 365 and 260 divided by 5, their highest common factor.
This 52-year period is the one by which the Aztecs dated.
[31] The dates on Maya inscriptions are mostly from their ninth cycle, with some from the end of the eighth and beginning of the [377] tenth.
This period corresponds approximately to the first six centuries of the Christian era.
The beginning of the first cycle would fall more than 3,000 years before Christ.
There is no reason to believe that this time reckoning began then.
It is more likely that a little before the time of Christ the Mayas perfected this system of chronology and gave it dignity by imagining some seven or eight cycles to have passed between the beginning of the world, or some other mythological event, and the actual commencement of their record.
From the close of their eighth cycle, however, the dates are apparently contemporary with the events to which they refer.
This system is so elaborate that it could scarcely have been devised and adopted all at once.
There must have been a time lasting some centuries, perhaps over a thousand years, previous to the Christian era, during which the first day count was being elaborated and perfected into the classical calendar of the early post-Christian Maya monuments.
This calendar did not exhaust the astronomical and mathematical accomplishments of the Mayas.
They ascertained that eight solar years correspond almost exactly with five “years” or apparent revolutions (584 days) of the planet Venus, and that 65 Venus years of a total of 37,960 days coincide with two calendar rounds of 52 solar years.
They knew that their 365-day year was a fraction of a day short of the true year, determined the error rather exactly, and, while they did not interpolate any leap days, they computed the necessary correction at 25 days in 104 years or two calendar rounds.
This is greater accuracy than has been attained by any calendar other than our modern Gregorian one.
As regards the moon, they brought its revolutions into accord with their day count with an error of only one day in 300 years.
Much less is known of South American calendars; but, like the dwindling away from Maya to Aztec to Pueblo and finally to the rudiments of the descriptive moon series of the backward tribes in the northern continent, so there is discernible a retardation of progress as the Maya focus is left behind toward the south.
Beyond them, the Inca, in their greater empire, got along with a system intermediate in its degree of development between the Aztec and the Pueblo ones.
In the Tropical Forest and Patagonian areas there do not seem to have been more than moon name series comparable to those of peripheral North America.
The Aztecs used the rebus method (§ 130), but chiefly for proper names, as in tribute lists and the like.
The Mayas had gone farther.
Their glyphs are highly worn down or conventionalized pictures, true symbols; often indeed combinations of symbols.
They mostly remain illegible to us, and while they appear to contain phonetic elements, these do not seem to be the dominant constituents.
The Maya writing thus also did not go beyond the mixed or transitional stage.
The Peruvians did not write at all.
All such primitive carvings or paintings were rather expressions of emotion over some event, concrete or spiritual, intelligible to the maker of the carving and perhaps to his friends, than records intended to be understood by strangers or future generations.
Connected with the fact that the highest development of American writing took place [379] in southern Mexico, is another: it was only there that books were produced.
They were probably never numerous, and intelligible chiefly to certain priests or officials.
This localization establishes at least some presumption that it was there rather than in South America that the beginnings of cultural progress, the emergence out of primitive uniformity, occurred.
To be sure, it is conceivable that agriculture and other inventions grew up in Andean South America, were transported to Mexico, for some reason gained a more rapid development there, until, under the stimulus of this forward movement, further discoveries were made which the more steadily and slowly progressing Peruvian motherland of culture failed to equal.
Conjectures of this sort cannot yet be confirmed or disproved.
Civilization was sufficiently advanced in both Mexico and Peru to render it certain that these first beginnings now referred to, lay some thousands of years back.
In the main, Mexican and Peruvian cultures were nearly on an equality, and in their fundamentals they were sufficiently alike, and sufficiently different from all Old World cultures, to necessitate the belief that they are, broadly, a common product.
Still, the superiority of the Mexicans in the sciences and arts carries a certain weight.
If to this superiority are added the indications that maize and cotton were first cultivated in the south Mexican area, in other words, that the fundamentals of American agriculture and loom-weaving seem more likely to have been developed there than elsewhere; and if further the close association of pottery with agriculture throughout the western hemisphere is borne in mind, it seems likely that the seat of the first forward impetus out [380] of the wholly primitive status of American culture is to be sought in the vicinity of southern Mexico.
The empire of the Incas was larger and much more rigorously organized and controlled, their roads longer and more ambitious as engineering undertakings, their masonry more massive; their mining operations and metal working more extensive.
The domestication of the llama and the cultivation of certain food plants such as the potato gave their culture an added stability on the economic side.
Organized and directed efforts of large numbers of men were made available to a greater degree than ever before in the New World.
The empire also operated in the direction of more steady industry, but its close organization and routine probably helped dwarf the higher flights of the mind.
In the quality of their fabrics, jewelry, stone fitting, and road building, as well as in exactness of governmental administration, the Peruvians excelled.
It is remarkable how little, with all their progress in these directions, they seem to have felt the need of advance in knowledge or art for its own sake.
They thought with their hands rather than their heads.
The Incas, like the Aztecs in Mexico, represent merely the controlling nation during the last stage of development.
Their specific culture was the local one of the highlands about Cuzco.
Prehistoric remains from the coast both north and south, and in the Andean highland southward of Cuzco in the vicinity of Lake Titicaca and the adjacent parts of Bolivia, demonstrate that this Inca or Cuzco culture was only the latest of several forms of Andean culture.
Other centers, more or less contemporaneous, some of them perhaps still earlier, can be distinguished along the coast.
In short, the inner history of the Andean region is by no means summed up in that picture of it which the Inca domination at the time of discovery presented.
New scientifically conducted excavations throughout the area will no doubt unravel further the succession of local cultural developments.
Their deficiency lay in their lack of specific developments.
They do not show a single cultural element of importance peculiar to themselves.
They chewed coca, slept in hammocks, sat on low chairs or stools; but these are traits common to a large part of South America.
Whatever elements flowed from Mexico to Peru or from Peru to Mexico at either an early or a late period, therefore probably passed through them.
In isolated matters they may have added their contribution.
On the whole, though, their rôle must have been that of sharers, recipients, and transmitters in the general Middle American civilization.
East of the crest of the Andes, on the other hand, the rainfall is heavy, often excessive, the jungle thick, communication difficult and largely dependent on the waterways.
Even the Caucasian has made but the slightest impression on the virgin Amazonian forest at its densest.
The Inca stretched his empire a thousand miles north and a thousand to the south with comparative ease, establishing uniformity and maintaining order.
He did not penetrate the Tropical Forest a hundred miles.
At his borders, where the forest began, lived tribes as wild and shy as any on earth.
The Andean civilization would have had to be profoundly modified to flourish in the jungle, and the jungle had too little that was attractive to incite to the endeavor.
Some thousands of years more, perhaps, might have witnessed an attempt to open up the forest and make it accessible.
Yet various culture elements filtered over the Andes into the hidden lowlands.
The Pan’s pipe, for instance, an element common to the Andes and the Forest, is likely to have originated in the higher center.
Elements like the blowgun, the hammock, the chair or stool, are typical of the northern Forest and Antilles, and may have infiltrated these areas from Colombia or even been locally developed.
The same is true of the cultivation of the cassava or manioc plant, from which we draw our tapioca.
This, the great staple of the Forest region, is better adapted to its humid climate than is maize, which flourishes best in a sub-arid environment.
Cassava may therefore be looked upon as perhaps a local substitute for maize, evolved as a domesticated plant under the stimulus of an already established maize agriculture.
Its cultivation has evidently spread through the Forest region from a single source, since the specialized processes of preparing it for food—the untreated root is poisonous—are relatively uniform wherever it is grown.
Maize is not unknown in the area, but less used than cassava wherever the forest is dense.
A characteristic quality of those Forest culture-traits which are not common ancient American inheritance, is that, whether of Middle American or local origin, they are [383] detached fragments, particular devices having little or no relation to one another, like the hammock and the blowgun, or cassava and the Pan’s pipe.
Original fundamental processes, higher accomplishments necessitating order or organization of effort, are lacking.
This is precisely the condition which might be anticipated when a culture too low to take over a higher one in its entirety had borrowed from it here and there, as the Forest peoples undoubtedly have borrowed from Middle America.
Of these the Brazilian highlands constitute an area of unusually deficient culture.
In parts of them agriculture and pottery seem to be lacking.
These highlands are perhaps to be construed as an interior marginal region representing an isolation within the greater Forest area.
Their remoteness, however, enabled the intervening Forest region to shut them off from Andean influences of consequence, while giving to them only part of its own low cultural content.
It lies close to the foot of the Andes where these broaden out into the southern Bolivian plateau.
It also shades off into the treeless Patagonian region.
It is thus open to influences from three sides, and its culture appears to represent a mixture of the three adjacent ones.
The basis would seem to be the culture of the Tropical Forest, but definite Patagonian as well as Andean elements are traceable.
Many of the most widely spread South American culture traits being lacking here, there is a curious resemblance to the northerly tribes of North America.
Yet even this culturally disinherited area is not without a few local developments of relatively high order.
The most striking is the plank-built canoe of the south Chilean archipelago.
Curiously enough the latter is also a district of comparatively backward culture.
In any event this built-up canoe of the rude people of the extreme south contrasts strikingly with the lack of any real boats among the advanced nations in the Andean area.
The moral would seem to be that it is speculative to base much theory or explanation on any single culture trait.
Of other elements specific to the Patagonian region, there might be mentioned coiled basketry (§ 104) and the bolas.
Except at the extreme south, Patagonian culture was profoundly modified by the introduction of the horse, which soon after the arrival of the Spaniards multiplied on the open plains.
The horse enlarged the ability of the Patagonian tribes to take game, especially in the Pampas in the north, increased their wealth, and strengthened their warlike interests.
It is therefore the gate or transforming station through which Mexican influences flowed on their way to the various areas beyond.
Whatever of Mexican culture the Pueblos received and accepted, they worked over before they passed it on.
This reconstitution gave the culture a new color.
Nearly every one on first coming in contact with Southwestern culture has been struck with its distinctive cast.
Analysis, however, shows few intrinsic elements peculiar to it.
The novelty as compared with Mexico lies in [385] a different emphasis or a new arrangement of the elements.
Masonry, for instance, is used for dwellings instead of temples.
Much of the seeming difference is due to the wooded and rather humid environment; another portion is accounted for by the failure of the Southeastern tribes to build in stone.
But there are differences that go deeper, such as the poverty of Southeastern ritual and the comparative strength of political organization.
The religious dwarfing may be attributed to greater distance from Mexico.
The precise routes of diffusion into the Southeast are not wholly clear.
The culture center of the area lay on or near the lower Mississippi—sufficiently close to the Southwest.
Yet the district which is now Texas intervened, and this was one of distinctly lower culture, largely occupied by tribes with Plains affiliation.
Theoretically it would have been possible for cultural elements to travel from Mexico along the Texas coast to the Southeast.
Yet what little is known about the tribes of this coast indicates that they were backward.
A third possibility for the transmission of culture was from the Antilles, especially by the short voyage from Cuba or the Bahamas to the point of Florida.
Some connections by this route almost certainly took place.
But they seem to have affected chiefly the peninsula of Florida, and to have brought less into the Southeast as a whole than reached it overland.
It was thus the third stage removed from the origins in Middle America.
It was inferior to the Southeast in several points.
[386] Some exceptions within the Northeast can be traced to direct influences or migrations from the Southeast.
Some of these are of surprising bulk, and others have the form of animals.
The industries of the Mound Builders were also on a somewhat higher level, especially as regards artistic quality, than those of the historic tribes of the region.
In detail the Mound Builder culture represents many interesting points that remain to be cleared up.
In the large, however, it was a temporary local extension of the Southeastern culture, from which flowed its occasional resemblances to Middle America.
The most advanced Plains tribes seem rather to have been in dependence on the Southeast.
This is probably to be explained as the result of a flow of culture up the more immediate Mississippi valley.
Contacts between these western Plains and the Southwest no doubt existed, but presumably the Plains tribes were too backward, and too engrossed in their own special adaptation to their environment, to profit much by what they might have borrowed from the Pueblos.
Certain specific culture traits were developed on the Plains.
The nearly exclusive dependence on buffalo stunted the culture in some directions, but led to the originating of other features.
While they never accomplished anything notable in the way of confederating themselves into larger stable groups, nor even in effective warfare, they did develop a system of “coup counting” or military honors which loomed large in their life.
During the seventeenth century the horse was introduced or became abundant on the Plains.
It reached the Indians from Spanish sources, as is shown by their adopting modifications of Spanish riding gear and methods of mounting.
The horse gave them an extension of range and a greater sureness of food supply; more leisure also resulted.
The consequence was a general upward swing of the culture, which put it, as regards outward appearances, on a par with the cultures of other areas that in purely aboriginal times had outranked the Plains.
This development due to the horse is in many ways comparable to that which occurred in the Patagonian area, but with one difference.
The introduction of the horse resulted in their hybridizing two elements so dissimilar as their own low civilization and the Caucasian one.
The Plains culture had a somewhat fuller content.
The Plains tribes were also protected from intimate Caucasian contacts for nearly two centuries, during which they were able to use the new and valuable acquisition of the horse to enrich and deepen their culture without essentially remodeling it.
Warfare continued to be carried on as a species of game with military honors as prizes, but now provided the added incentive of substantial booty of herds easily driven off.
It is nearer in miles to the Southwest and Mexico than is the Northeast, yet agriculture and pottery never reached it.
At the same time the Northwest culture is obviously more than a marginal one.
The explanation is that much of the development of culture in the Middle American region never became established in the Northwest, but that this area manifested a vitality and initiative of its own which led to the independent development of a number of important culture constituents.
The art is in the main of such local origin, since it does not affiliate closely with the art of other areas.
Very important too was the stress increasingly laid on wealth in the Northwest.
Society was stratified in terms of it.
The potlatch, a combination of feast, religious ceremony, and distribution of property, is another peculiar outcome of the same tendency.
The working of wood was carried farther than anywhere else.
All in all, then, it is necessary to look upon the Northwest Coast culture as one that fell far short of the high civilizations of Middle America, in fact barely equaled that of the Southwest, yet as the only one in the New World that grew to any notability with but slight dependence on Middle America.
It is an isolated secondary peak standing aloof from the greater one that culminated in Mexico and Peru and to which all the remainder of the hemisphere was subordinate.
Figure 35 visualizes this historic relation.
Yet why these areas on the Pacific side of North America should have profited so much less by the diffusion of Mexican advancement than the areas on the Atlantic, is not clear.
In the mostly frozen Arctic and [389] Mackenzie tracts, the hostile environment may have forbidden.
But this explanation certainly does not apply to the California area which lies at the very doors of the Southwest and yet refrained from taking over such fundamentals as agriculture and pottery.
Sparseness of population cannot be invoked as a cause, since at least along the coast the density of population was greater than in almost all the eastern half of the continent.
Of the people of these four areas, the Eskimo are the only ones that evinced notable originality.
It is easy to attribute this quality of theirs to the stern rigor of environment.
In fact, it has been customary to appeal to the Eskimo as an example of the popular maxim that necessity is the mother of invention.
Yet it is clear that no great weight can be attached to this simple philosophy.
It is true that without his delicately adjusted harpoon, his skin boat, his snow hut, his dog sled, and his seal oil lamp, the Eskimo could not have maintained an existence on the terrifically inhospitable shores of the Arctic.
But there is nothing to show that he was forced to live in this environment.
Stretches of mountains, desert, and tundra in other parts of the world were often left uninhabited by uncivilized peoples.
His was a sturdy stock that should have had at least an equal chance in a competition with other peoples.
The tribes of the Mackenzie-Yukon and the most northerly part of the Northeast area lived under a climate about as harsh as that of the Eskimo.
A series of the most skilled devices of the Eskimo were wanting among them.
It does mean that he possessed the fundamentals of the culture, and the habits of ingenuity, the mechanical and practical turn of mind, which enabled him to carry it farther and meet new requirements as they came up.
Where and how he acquired the fundamentals is obscure.
It is well to remember in this connection that the physical type of the Eskimo is the most distinctive in the New World, and that his speech has as yet shown no inclination to connect with any other American language.
It is conceivable that the origin of the Eskimo is to be set at a time later than that of the American race and somewhere in Asia.
The fact that at present there are Eskimo villages on the Siberian side of Behring Strait is too recent and local a phenomenon to afford strong confirmation of such a view, but certainly does not operate against it.
Somewhere in the Siberian region, then, within occasional reach of influences emanating from higher centers of civilization in Asia or Europe, the Eskimo may have laid the foundations of their culture, specialized it further as they encountered new conditions in new Asiatic habitats, and evolved only the finishing touches of their remarkable adaptation after they spread along the northernmost shores of America.
Such influences were probably not specially important, but they are discernible.
There may [391] have been as many that reached America and failed of acceptance as were actually taken up.
In another connection (§ 92) it has been pointed out how the tale known as the “Magic Flight” has spread from its Old World center of origin well into northwestern America.
This is constructed, in Asia, of a layer each of wood, sinew, and horn; in its simpler American form, which barely extends as far south as the Mexican frontier, of either wood or horn reinforced with sinew.
Body armor of slats, sewn or wound into a garment, seems to have spread from Asia to the Northwest Coast.
At any rate they are all restricted in America to the part north and west of a line connecting the St. Lawrence and Colorado rivers, the part of the continent that is nearest to Asia.
South and east of this line, apparently, Middle American influences were strong enough to provide the local groups with an adequate culture of American source; and, the Asiatic influences being feeble on account of remoteness, Asiatic culture traits failed of acceptance.
The presumable reason is that the Northwest Coast, having worked out a relatively advanced and satisfactory culture adaptation of its own, had nothing to gain by taking over these elementary devices; whereas to the culturally poorer peoples of the Arctic, Mackenzie, Plateau, and in part of the California, Plains, and Northeastern areas, they proved a valuable acquisition.
A careful analysis of Eskimo culture in comparison with north and east Asiatic culture may reveal further instances of elements that have spread from one hemisphere to the other.
Yet the sum total of such relatively late contributions from the civilization of the Old World to that of the New, during the last one or two or three or four thousand years, [392] is not likely to aggregate any great bulk.
Even within the northwestern segment of North America, the bulk of culture would seem to have been evolved on the spot.
But mingled with this local growth, more or less modifying it in the nearer regions, and reaching its greatest strength among the Eskimo, has been a trickling series of later Asiatic influences which it would be mistaken wholly to overlook.
Sources of knowledge.—212.
Chronology of the grand divisions of culture history.
The Neolithic: its early phase.—218.
Pottery and the bow.—219.
The hewn ax.—222.
The Full Neolithic.—223.
Origin of domesticated animals and plants.—224.
Other traits of the Full Neolithic.—225.
The Bronze Age: Copper and Bronze phases.—226.
Traits associated with bronze.—227.
First use and spread of iron.—229.
Summary of development: Regional differentiation.—231.
The Scandinavian area as an example.
The Full Neolithic and its subdivisions in Scandinavia.—235.
The Bronze Age and its periods in Scandinavia.
Problems of chronology.—237.
Principles of the prehistoric spread of culture.
Earlier than about ten thousand years ago, this hemisphere has no known human history.
In the Old World, conditions are doubly different.
Secondly, for the last ten thousand years, there is a fuller record than for America.
This greater fullness is partly due to the earlier start toward its higher forms which civilization took in the Eastern Hemisphere.
And this relatively early advancement brought it about that by 3000 B.C.
These last five thousand years thus belong to history, rather than to prehistory, in some parts of the hemisphere; and they allow many a close inference as to what happened in the previous five thousand years when writing was as yet unknown or its first systems were being evolved.
These ten thousand years since the close of the Old Stone Age, half of them studied by the methods of anthropology, half also by those of history, and the whole forming the richest field in human culture history, are the subjects of the present chapter and the next.
First, however, it is necessary to refer back to the earliest known development of civilization in the Old Stone Age (Chapter VI), whose close is our present starting point.
The duration of these four ages is diverse and notably diminishing from earliest to latest.
The last three are comprised within the past ten thousand years: 8000 B.C.
To a vague 100,000 B.C.
The last two [395] dates are averages only.
In the wide sense, the outstanding generalizations derivable from these figures are twofold.
As regards the later periods, those of metal and probably the Neolithic, the west lagged behind the east, the north behind the south; Asia preceded and invented, Europe followed and imitated.
As regards the entire duration, a tremendous disproportion is observable.
Within this fraction again the Neolithic takes up half, leaving the two metal Ages to divide the other half between them.
There is a clear tendency toward acceleration of development.
Before this transition, new achievements were rare and their total small.
The supposition is plausible enough, and has been made.
But it is sounder procedure to withhold commitment of opinion.
The inference involves the assumption that approach to our own bodily type is accompanied by higher native intelligence; and the further assumption that higher intelligence will automatically produce advance in civilization.
The application of the assumptions to the facts therefore gives an apparent explanation in terms of an ultimate but really unknown causality.
By accepting this hypothetical causality, it turns attention away from the question of its validity.
But the validity of the causal relation between the body and intelligence, and between intelligence and culture, is precisely a point that needs elucidation.
It needs elucidation as much as does the change of civilization that occurred in Europe about 25,000 years ago; and is a much broader problem—indeed, part of the most fundamental problem that anthropology still faces as unsolved.
Instead of a snapping interpretation of a dubious point in human history in terms of a couple of still more dubious principles, it will be wiser to lay these principles aside, for a time at least, and to reconsider more intensively the facts bearing on the particular point at issue.
The best of these data, and those which arrange themselves most systematically, are those from Europe, which have therefore been presented as if they constituted a self-sufficient unit.
But it is unlikely that the culture should have developed in Europe in complete detachment for a hundred thousand years or that it should have remained identical over the whole of that continent.
It is necessary, in short, to revise the simple outline of Chapter VI by giving heed to geographical and other disturbing considerations.
It seems to have been accompanied at all times and everywhere by smaller, less regularly made implements, some of which were even worked out of flakes [398] instead of cores and subjected to crude blow-retouching.
They may not be of exactly the same age in these regions as in westerly Europe, but they are of the same type, and in view of the continuity of their distribution must be historically connected.
White, uninhabited or unexplored.
In their simple way, culture contacts without migrations may have been substantially as effective in shaping or altering civilization fifty thousand years ago as to-day.
The line of demarcation now is no longer formed by the Rhine and the Alps, but by the Pyrenees.
Northern Spain, southern England, at times Italy and southern Russia, were more or less in this mid-European province.
The Balkans remain insufficiently explored; all northernmost Europe was still uninhabited.
Evidence from the eastern Mediterranean begins to fail.
Italy is wholly without discovered remains.
This view seems reasonable, but is unproved.
It reveals two principal areas: one north of the Danube, the other in southern France.
The former may have been the earlier, from which the culture, or certain phases of it, such as the art of even surface retouch on leaf-shaped blades, were carried westward into France.
In this connection two facts may be significant.
Naturalism was scarcely attempted, figures were highly conventional, the style was one of concentric curves or stippling or hatching.
One naturally looks eastward: to the north lay ice, to the west the Atlantic, to the south a different even though related culture.
All or some of these may have existed, but in the absence of discovery, speculation is of little profit.
A single discovery on this point will be worth more than the most elaborate conjecture.
It would thus be a forced explanation to look upon this art as the outright result of a diffusion or migration: the supposed recipients of the accomplishment would be carrying it farther than its originators.
It is clear that climatic circumstances were not the chief determining factor in the cultural development of early Europe.
Southern Europe and North Africa were not glaciated in the Pleistocene.
This was the period in which the reindeer died out, being replaced by the deer.
Harpoons were accordingly made of deer horn instead of reindeer antler, the spongier texture of the interior of the material necessitating a coarser and broader form.
Perforations to hold the harpoon line now began to be regularly provided.
Bone implements were fewer, chiefly awls or simple dart heads.
Stone implements became less important.
The best made flint forms were minute points or blades of geometric form, often trapezoidal.
Its place was taken by simple conventional designs painted on pebbles, sometimes curiously suggestive of alphabetic symbols, although it is unthinkable that they could at this early time, and among so backward a people as these deer hunters, have served any purpose of writing.
The puzzling designs are more likely to have been used in magic or religion.
The climate was approaching that of to-day, though still cooler.
It may also have persisted longer, into the period which in the south was already early Neolithic.
In Scotland and northern England, on the other hand, the harpoon head is once more to the fore, perhaps because here as in the Pyrenean area forested mountains and the sea were in juxtaposition and deer and salmon could both be taken abundantly.
40) shows the extent to which the manifestations of this culture stage have been traced.
They may prove to extend farther.
Second, in the south, there prevailed a conventional style.
Men and animals are still recognizable, but schematically drawn, and among them are pictographic symbols.
Third, in eastern Spain, a cliff art was realistic in purpose, but crude in execution.
The figures represent people more often than animals: gatherings, dances, long-gowned women, men with bows.
This is the earliest direct or indirect record of the bow and arrow.
It is well to remember in this connection that no specific type of culture, no matter how old, is likely ever to have existed without variation over a whole hemisphere or continent.
The later any type is, the greater is the probability that it has had sufficient time for specific characterization to enable it to be distinguished readily from the contemporary cultures of other areas.
Some include it with the earliest Neolithic phases to constitute a Mesolithic or Middle Stone Age.
The concept of a separate Mesolithic period becomes important in the degree that the original definition of the Neolithic as limited to the age of polished stone remains rigorously adhered to.
In a sense, this definition is a true one, at any rate for Europe and the Near East.
But since the two stone ages were first discriminated fifty or more years ago, a vast body of knowledge has accumulated about them, with the result that the original criterion has become only an approximate one.
The definition of the Neolithic as the age of ground stone is at the present time so over-elementary as to have become inaccurate.
It was not until the latter part of the New Stone Age was reached, what we may call the Full Neolithic, that the grinding and polishing of stone were attempted.
Wherever, in Europe and the Near East at least, there is universal agreement that a stage of development was Neolithic, pottery is present.
And conversely, wherever pottery occurs, no one has yet doubted that a true Neolithic stage existed.
Second in importance is the bow, which in general appeared contemporaneously with [411] pottery.
The evidence for its existence is sometimes less clear.
Pottery is imperishable and unmistakable.
The bow and arrow, on the other hand, are made of materials that decay in a few years, under ordinary conditions.
Only the stone or bone point preserves, and this cannot always be distinguished with positiveness from the head of a light spear or even from a small knife blade.
But such is not the case.
These two culture elements, pottery and the bow, signalized an enormous advance over the past.
Both required definite technical skill to manufacture.
And both were of the greatest service.
Plants whose seeds or parts before were inedible, or almost so, were added to the diet as soon as they could be boiled.
The bow made possible long range fighting, the free pursuit of large game, and the capture of many small mammals and birds which previously it must have been difficult to take.
The harpoon was developed chiefly for fishing.
It would be of little help in killing birds, rabbits, and the like, or large and dangerous animals like wild cattle.
A good working chisel, wedge, awl, or needle, for instance, must be smooth.
This finish is difficult in chipped stone, but easily attained in bone or horn by rubbing.
It was not therefore until stone grinding came into use in the later Neolithic, that bone and horn began to fall in significance as materials.
But they had performed their service.
It is unlikely that stone polishing would have been attempted but for the experience and long habits of the polishing process as acquired in dealing with the softer materials.
The animals may still have been half wild at this period, since their own skeletons are rare in the middens.
Evidently the species was not yet firmly attached to man; its members went off to die in solitude.
This is what has generally been predicated on hypothetical grounds of the history of dog and man.
This view the prehistoric evidence seems to confirm.
Such persistence is natural: a survival of a low type among higher ones does not mean much.
It is the appearance of new and superior inventions that counts.
The Early Neolithic can be summed up, then, in these five traits: pottery; the bow and arrow; abundant use of bone and horn; the dog; and the hewn ax.
Even this criterion is less deep-going than might be thought from all the references that prehistorians have made to it, since the new process was put to limited service.
The mill is the principal artifact that can be added to the list.
It is only toward the end of the Neolithic in Europe, after metal was already in use in the Orient and Mediterranean countries, that perforated and well ground stone axes appear; many of these make the impression of being stone imitations, among a remote, backward people, of forms cast in bronze by the richer and more advanced nations of the South and East.
Much more important than the ground stone ax in its influence on life was the [414] commencement, during the Neolithic, of two of the great fundamentals of our own modern civilization: agriculture and domestic animals.
These freed men from the buffetings of nature; made possible permanent habitation, the accumulation of food and wealth, and a heavier growth of population.
Also, agriculture and animal breeding were evidently introduced only after numbers had reached a certain density.
A sparse population, being able to subsist on wild products, tends to remain content with them.
A fertile area with mild winters may support as high as one soul per square mile without improvement of the natural resources; in large forests, steppes, cold climates, and arid tracts, the territory needed for the subsistence of each head becomes larger in a hunting stage of existence.
All of these seem to derive from Mediterranean or west Asiatic sources.
Of non-edible plants there was flax, which served textile purposes and involved loom weaving.
The subject is as intricate as it is interesting, because of difficulty which biologists experience in tracing the modified tame forms back to the wild species with certainty.
The mere fact of continued domestication, even without conscious selection in breeding, often alters a species more [415] from what may have been its old wild form than this differs from another wild species.
His bones in the oldest lake dwellings seem to come from wild individuals that had been hunted.
Later, though still in the Neolithic, long-horned tame cattle appear in the lake dwellings.
A similar story applies to the pig.
The first domesticated swine of Switzerland were small, long-legged, and easily distinguishable from the wild boar of the region.
It thus is likely that they were imported domesticated.
In the Bronze Age, pigs grew larger, due perhaps to crossing with the wild species.
Sheep were certainly brought into Europe, as there is no corresponding wild form; the goats, too, have their nearest relatives in Asia.
They were perhaps tamed before sheep.
At any rate, goats prevailed in the earlier lake dwellings, whereas later, sheep outnumbered them.
Similar arguments apply to the origin of the cultivated plants in Europe.
For some of these, such as wheat, wild relatives—possible ancestors—are known from Asia, but not from Europe.
The instances of diffusion from north to south are few: oats, rye, and hemp are perhaps the principal.
These plants, however, were carried southward slowly and accepted reluctantly, whereas the northerners were in general avid of any southern or Oriental form which [416] would bear their climate, as the progressive spread and increased use of new forms shows.
Furthermore, even oats, rye, and hemp appear to be Asiatic in origin, and thus to have entered Europe merely from the east, instead of southeast.
Two or three thousand years passed before cattle were used before the plow or to draw wagons.
Both the plow and the wheel were unknown in Europe until well in the Bronze Age, after they had been established for some time in Asia.
Still later was the use of milk.
Here again Asia and Egypt have precedence.
Many other elements of culture appear in the Full Neolithic.
Houses were dug into the ground and roofed over with timbers and earth.
Upright pillars of undressed stone were erected—either singly as “menhirs” or in “alignments”—in connection with religious or funerary worship.
Pottery was ornamented in a variety of geometric decorative styles, usually incised rather than painted; their sequences and contemporary distributions in several areas are gradually being determined.
Metal was at first too rare, too difficult to mine and smelt and work, to be used extensively.
It served for special weapons, tools, and ornaments of the wealthy.
The life of the mass of the population went on in much the old channels for generations or centuries after the new material had become known.
This was true especially of peoples in oreless regions, or too backward to have learned the art of metal working.
To such nations, the first bronze came as an imported rarity, to be guarded as a treasure or heirloom.
Of even less immediate effect than the discovery of bronze, was that of the first metals known, copper and gold.
The latter is of course too scarce and too soft to serve for [417] anything but ornaments; and pure copper also, even when hardened by hammering, is of little use for many mechanical purposes.
It makes a fairly efficient dagger, a rather mediocre ax, and a poor knife.
The result was that a recognizable period of copper preceded the true Bronze Age, yet that it was essentially a last phase of the New Stone Age, with the metal creeping in as something subsidiary.
Bronze is an alloy of tin with copper, harder than the latter, easier to melt, and casting better.
In many properties it resembles brass, by which term it is referred to in the English Bible; but must not be confounded with it.
Brass is an alloy of zinc with copper, of much later discovery, apparently in Asia, and until recent centuries little used in Europe.
As regards bronze, even a two per cent addition of tin to copper results in a perceptible hardening; and five to ten per cent produce a greatly superior tool metal.
The origin of bronze is a problem of some difficulty, because the earliest known users of bronze, the peoples of the Near East, possessed little or no tin.
The chief source of the tin of later antiquity was Spain and England.
But at the outset of the Bronze Age, the Orientals did not even know of the existence of these countries, while their natives, still ignorant of copper, could not have mined tin for the purpose of hardening that basic metal.
Before 3000 B.C., in the period of the first dynasties ruling over united Egypt, the art had been established in that country, since bronzes low in percentage of tin have been discovered from that era.
Within a few centuries, bronze began to be used in Crete and Troy, and by 2500 B.C.
That the use of bronze over these widespread areas is a connected phenomenon, a case of single origin and diffusion, is clear from the manner in which the art spread from its center of invention like a wave which arrived later the farther it had to travel.
The spread is confirmed by the fact that certain implement forms such as early triangular daggers and later swords traveled with the material.
But it would be an error to infer from the continued backwardness of the northern peoples that they were wholly passive and recipient.
In their simpler, more barbaric way, they remodeled much of what they had carried to them, altered the form, decorated it in their own style, made much of some item which filled but an insignificant place in the more complex civilization of the southeast.
The fibula or safety-pin, for instance, was seized upon with avidity by the central and north European nations, made ornate and tremendously enlarged, until it sometimes measured half a foot in length and more than half a pound in weight with spiral whorls, bosses, pin clasps, or attached rings as big as a palm.
The Baltic nations, the farthest reached by this diffusion, in particular threw themselves into the development [419] of the fibula with zest, success, and a large measure of decorative taste.
Even longer is the history of the sword.
This has two lines of historic development.
The one-edged sword or saber tends to curvature and is essentially a hewing weapon, not intended for thrusting, or only secondarily so adapted.
Its ancestor is the Egyptian bronze dagger, which in turn is probably derived from a copper and ultimately a flint blade of dagger length.
The Egyptian dagger never grew to more than half-sword length, but the type was early carried to Crete and Italy and Spain.
By 2500-2000 B.C.
The handle was a separate piece, riveted on.
Gradually the length grew greater, the breadth less, the edges more nearly parallel, the point sharper; the half-sword and then the sword evolved out of the dagger.
The handle, or its spike, came to be cast with the blade.
For three thousand years, and from the southern Mediterranean in its progress to the North Sea, the sword grew longer and longer, but always by gradual modification: the whole series of forms shows a transition in both time and geography.
It is a far more abundant metal than copper, and though it melts at a higher temperature, is not naturally harder to extract from some of its ores.
The reason for its lateness of use is not wholly explained.
It is known that fair amounts of copper were worked in this way by many tribes of North American Indians, who got their supplies from the Lake Superior deposits and the Copper River placers in Alaska.
If the same thing happened in the most progressive parts of the Eastern Hemisphere some 6,000 years ago, acquaintance with the metal may before long have been succeeded by the invention of the arts of casting and extracting it from its ores.
When, not many centuries later, the hardening powers of an admixture of tin were discovered and bronze with its far greater serviceability for tools became known, a powerful impetus was surely given to the new metallurgy, which was restricted only by the limitations of the supply of metal, especially tin.
Progress went on in the direction first taken; the alloy became better balanced, molds and casting processes superior, the forms attempted more adventurous or efficient.
For many centuries iron ores were disregarded; the bronze habit intensified.
Finally, accident may have brought the discovery of iron; or shortage of bronze led to experimenting with other ores; and a new age dawned.
And it is interesting that the New World furnishes an exact parallel with its three areas and stages of native copper, smelted copper and gold, and bronze (§ 108, 196), and with only the final period of iron unattained at the time of discovery.
Finds of this sort have been made in Switzerland, Germany, Greece, and the Caucasus.
Once however the extraction of the new material had become known, its abundance was so great as to further its employment, which grew fairly rapidly, [422] though held back by several factors.
One of these retarding causes was the prevalence of the casting process, which had become definitely established for bronze and was carried on with great skill, whereas iron lends itself to ready casting only in a foundry and for objects of larger size than were in customary use among the ancients.
They forged their iron, and this new art had to be gradually learned.
Wrought iron is comparatively soft.
A bronze knife will cut or shave better than a forged iron one.
It was not until it was discovered that the iron from certain ores could be converted into steel by tempering—plunging the heated implement into water—that the new metal became a tool material superior to bronze.
The invention of tempering seems to have followed fairly soon after the discovery of iron.
But some centuries elapsed before this art became at all general.
Finally, conservative fashion operated to delay the undisputed supremacy of iron.
The first four books of the Old Testament, the composition of whose older parts is usually placed synchronous with that of the Iliad—about 850 B.C.—but whose outlook is the conservative one of religion, mention iron still more rarely: four times as against eighty-three references to bronze—“brass” the Authorized Version calls it.
Which nation first made iron available to the world has not yet been ascertained.
It could scarcely have been the most civilized people of the region, the Babylonians, because their alluvial country contains neither ore nor stone.
Italy learned the new material from the Etruscans about 1100 B.C.
Babylonian and Assyrian records seem to refer to it some few centuries earlier.
The Jews in the time of Saul, 1000 B.C., are said by the Bible to have had little iron and no steel, a fact that made possible their oppression by the Philistines of the coast.
This people, apparently descendants of the Minoan Cretans, have recently been alleged as the discoverers of the art of steel making; though whether with reason, remains to be proved.
In the Far East, the history of iron is little known.
The metal must have been new then: it was called “dark blue bronze.” The Hindus later carried knowledge of iron and steel-working to the Malaysian East Indies.
By the early part of the seventh century before Christ, iron had become common enough to be taxed.
But it was used for hoes, plowshares, hatchets, needles, and domestic purposes only.
Not until the fifth century B.C.
Even in the first century after Christ the natives of southernmost China were fighting with bronze weapons in their struggle against amalgamation with the empire.
Japan has a definite Iron Age, well known through excavations.
It is thought to have begun about the fourth century B.C.
This approximate contemporaneity with China, whereas in nearly all the remainder of its culture Japan borrowed from China and followed long behind it in time, suggests that the Japanese or neighboring Koreans may have learned of iron directly from the north Asiatic teachers of the Chinese.
It prevailed along the Adriatic and Danube as far as Bosnia and Hungary; over all but northern Germany; in Switzerland; and in eastern France.
Its flow was northwestward.
Its general flow was northeastward.
But the quality of the cultures remained homespun, backward, and barbaric as compared with the plasticity and polish which contemporary Greek civilization had attained.
It was a time of villages, small towns, and scattered homes; of sacred groves instead of temples; of boggy roads, of ox-carts and solid wooden wheels; of a heavy, barbaric, warlike population, half like European peasants, half like pioneers; self-content, yet always dimly conscious that in the southern distance there lay lands of wealth, refinement, and achievement.
The coins in use were Greek, or local imitations of Greek money, their figures and legends often corrupted to complete meaninglessness.
Writing was still absent.
The first is that successive phases of culture, even in the earliest times, cannot be identified, much less really understood, by reference to any single criterion such as this or that [426] technique of working stone or the knowledge of this or that metal.
In every case the culture is complex and characterized by a variety of traits whose combination produces its distinctive cast.
In the Neolithic, Bronze, and Iron Ages, regional diversity increases.
Egypt and China, India and France, present deeply differentiated pictures in 3000 B.C., and again in 1000.
Their cultures have throughout a separate aspect.
And yet innumerable connections link them.
The very bronze and iron that name the later ages, the grains and animals that are the basis of their economic life, were intercontinentally disseminated, and represent in most of the lands that came to possess them an import from an alien focus of growth.
And currents usually run both ways.
China received metals, wheat, cattle and horses, cotton, architecture, religion, possibly the suggestion of script, from the west; but she gave to it silk and porcelain, gunpowder and paper.
The Near East probably gave to Europe most of the elements of civilization which the latter possessed during the Neolithic, Bronze, and Iron periods; but much which the Near East had, it failed to transmit.
Writing flowed into Europe a full two thousand years after bronze, with which it was coeval in origin.
Often the most convincing evidence as to the composition and direction of the culture currents is provided by highly specialized matters: styles of pottery decoration, shapes of ax heads, forms of ornamental safety-pins.
It is because these data offer the longest clues through the labyrinth, because on their sure sequences can be strung hundreds of otherwise non-significant or detached facts.
But the results are as yet incomplete; they are and promise to remain forever complex; and their systematic presentation in coherent narrative awaits a larger and future treatment.
It has therefore no Old Stone Age history.
Denmark was ice-free.
But what is now the Baltic stretched as an open sound from the North Sea across southern Finland and northwestern Russia to the Arctic Ocean.
Denmark and the German coast must still have been cold, as the remains of the sub-arctic flora show, and were without human inhabitants.
The rivers continued to flow into it; it became brackish and almost fresh, and the fauna changed.
The Scandinavian flora once more included real trees, chiefly pines and birches.
Here he appears to have lived on rafts floating on a lake, which subsequently filled with peat.
Whatever fell overboard, became embedded in the growing peat and was preserved.
The inhabitants cut their raft logs and firewood with axes of bone and elk horn, some of them perforated for handles.
The dog accompanied these people, perhaps was already half tame.
The climate was milder than before, and the forests changed from birches and pines to oaks.
The men of this period lived largely on oysters and scallops, whose shells piled up [429] about their habitations by millions, forming ridge-like mounds sometimes hundreds of yards long.
Among the shells are ashes, bones of the land animals and birds that were hunted, and lost or broken utensils.
Others were no longer made: harpoons, the minute flint blades, and engraved objects.
But new forms had come in: above all, pottery and the stone ax—evidences that this was an early period of the Neolithic, even though polished stone was still lacking.
It seems to have been lashed to an elbow handle: there was no groove or perforation.
The pottery was coarse, dark, and undecorated except sometimes for rows of crude dot impressions along the edge.
Another new implement was a handled bone comb with four or five teeth.
It appears to have been employed for carding rather than hair-dressing.
The bow was in use: arrowheads bore a cutting edge in front.
The dog was the only domestic or semi- domesticated animal; probably a Spitz-like breed, perhaps of jackal origin.
He managed to gnaw most of the bones that have been preserved in the shell layers.
The Asturian remains are also shell deposits.
Their lower levels contain bones of cattle that had perhaps been domesticated; middle strata add the sheep; and in the uppermost, pottery appears.
The northern ax is replaced by a handheld pick.
It would thus seem that pottery and the hewn ax were the characteristic general criteria of this Early Neolithic stage, with domesticated animals and agriculture coming in earlier in southern and middle Europe, whereas the northerners continued to depend longer on shellfish and game.
Axes were polished, cattle kept, grain grown.
Four Stages of development are discernible.
Burials in soil.
Burials in dolmens, chambers of three to five flat upright stones, roofed with one slab.
The same is true of perforated stone axes, ground into ornamental curves, such as are natural in cast metal.
Burials in stone cysts, progressively decreasing in size.
Chipped daggers and curving axes reminiscent of bronze forms continue.
The first bronze appears, its percentage of tin still low.
But arts that in the Orient had appeared almost simultaneously with bronze—writing, masonry, wheel turning of pottery—did not reach Scandinavia until after bronze had been superseded by iron there.
The consequence was that the Northern culture remained on the whole thoroughly barbarous.
And yet, perhaps on account of this very backwardness, an aloofness resulted which drove the Scandinavian bronze-workers to follow their own tastes and develop their own forms and styles, often with taste as exquisite as simple.
In other words, a local culture grew, much like the analogous local cultures in America which have been traced in previous chapters.
Yet the basis of this Northern bronze culture [431] was southern and Oriental invention; and the south and east continued to influence Scandinavia.
But the southern fibula, whatever its type or period, was one-piece and elastic, the northern at all times made of two separate parts, and without real spring.
Connection with other countries is evident from the Northern bronze itself, at least the tin of which, if not the alloy, was imported.
Yet the finds of the Scandinavian Bronze Age, numerous as they are, do not contain a single specimen that can be traced to Egypt or to Greece.
Even pieces made in middle Europe are rare.
And molds, ladles, unfinished castings, prove that the North cast its own bronze on the spot.
First knowledge of the art had evidently seeped in from the region of Switzerland, Austria, and Hungary, which in turn derived it from the Italian and Balkan peninsulas, which at a still earlier time had learned it from Egypt or Asia.
It appears, then, that it would be equally erroneous to regard the Scandinavian Bronze Age as an independent development or to regard it as a mere copy or importation from the Orient.
Its origin lies in the great early focal point of civilization in the Near East; its specific form, the qualities which it took on, are its own.
The disseminated ingredient, the basis due to diffusion, must be admitted as fully as the elements of local development which mark off a distinct Northern culture-area, or sub-focus of cultural energy.
This interplay of forces is typical also of the Iron and New Stone Ages, and it is the number of local centers of culture growth, their increasingly rapid flourishing as time went on, and the multiplication of connections between countries, that render the prehistory of Eur-Asiatic civilization so difficult.
The Southwest stands to southern Mexico as Scandinavia does to the Orient: suffused by it, [432] stimulated by it, created by it, almost; yet at all times with a provincial cast of its own.
The Southwestern specialist can trace a continuous evolution on the spot which tempts him to forget the obvious and indisputable Mexican origins.
Correct understanding requires the balancing of both views.
2500-2100, Neolithic, with copper, and 2100-1900, with occasional bronze, have already been mentioned.
Burial in stone cysts.
Little decoration of bronze, and that only in straight lines.
Daggers mounted on staves like ax heads.
Occasional cremation of corpses, the ashes put into very small cysts.
Decoration of bronze in engraved spirals.
Bronze vessels with lids.
Spiral ornament decaying.
Ornamentation plastic, rather than engraved, often produced in the casting.
Rows of concentric circles and other patterns replace spirals.
Sporadic occurrence of iron.
Iron increasing in use; decorative bronze deteriorating.
Whether an invention was made in Babylonia in 5000 or in 3000 B.C.
In the one case, the megaliths represent a local achievement, perhaps independent of the stone architecture of Egypt; in the other event, they are likely to be a belated and crudely barbarian imitation of this architecture.
It is really only the relative chronology that counts within the Old Stone Age.
The durations are so great, and so wholly prehistoric, that the only value of figures is the vividness of their concrete impression on the mind, and the emphasis that they place on the length of human antiquity as compared with the brevity of recorded history.
The Neolithic is too brief to show notable traces of geological processes.
By these aids, comparison has gradually built up a chronology which is accepted as approximate by most authorities.
Of course, these figures must not be taken as accurate.
Estimates vary somewhat.
Yet the dates cited probably represent the opinion of the majority of specialists without serious deviation: except on one point, and that an important one.
On this matter, there was for many years a wide discrepancy among Orientalists.
All this looks direct and sure enough.
But did the king’s scholars really know when they told him that just 3,200 years had elapsed since his [435] predecessor’s reign, or were they guessing?
The number is a round one: eighty forties of years, such as the Old Testament is fond of reckoning with.
The trend of modern opinion, based on a variety of considerations, is that the Babylonian historians were deceiving either the king or themselves.
The bearing of the discrepancy is this.
The scholars who are in more or less agreement that bronze reached Mediterranean Europe about 2500 and Northern Europe about 1900, were generally building on the longer chronology of the Near East.
This allowed an interval of over a thousand years in which bronze working could have been carried to Spain, and two thousand to Denmark.
With the shorter chronology for Egypt and Babylonia, the time available for the transmission has to be cut down by a thousand years.
Should the European dates, therefore, be made correspondingly more recent?
Or is the diminished interval still sufficient—that is, might a few centuries have sufficed to carry the bronze arts from the Orient to Sicily and Spain, and a thousand years to bear them to Scandinavia?
The interval seems reasonable, and is accordingly the one here accepted.
But it is possible that if the shorter chronology becomes proved beyond contradiction for Egypt and Babylonia, the dates for the Neolithic and Bronze Ages of Europe may also have to be abbreviated somewhat.
His scheme of approximate dating is reproduced, with some simplifications, in Figure 42.
The development of prehistoric civilization in Europe.
His absolute dates are generally considered too low, but their relative intervals are almost undisputed.
Five principles and three extensions are set up by Müller: 1.
The south [of Europe, with the Near East] was the vanguard and dispensing source of culture; the peripheral regions, especially in the north [of Europe] followed and received.
The elements of southern culture were transmitted to the north only in reduction and extract.
They were also subject to modifications.
These elements of southern culture sometimes appeared in the remoter areas with great vigor and new qualities of their own.
But such remote appearances are later in time than the occurrence of the same elements in the south.
Forms of artifacts or ornaments may survive for a long time with but little modification, especially if transmitted to new territory.
Separate elements characteristic of successive periods in a culture center may occur contemporaneously in the marginal areas, their diffusion having occurred at different rates of speed.
Marginal cultures thus present a curious mixture of traits whose original age is great and of others that are much newer; the latter, in fact, occasionally reach the peripheries earlier than old traits.
The basic idea of these formulations is that of the gradual radiation of culture from creative focal centers to backward marginal areas, without the original dependence of the peripheries wholly precluding their subsequent independent development.
They speak of this view as an “Oriental mirage.” They see more specific differences than identities between the several local cultures of the two regions, and tend to explain the similarities as due to independent invention.
Since knowledge of ancient cultures is necessarily never complete, there is a wide range of facts to which either explanation is, theoretically, applicable.
Within the fully historic period, there have been numerous undoubted diffusions, of which the alphabet, the week, and the true arch may be taken as illustrations.
At least in [438] the earlier portion of the historic period, the flow of such diffusions was regularly out of the Orient; which raises a considerable presumption that the flow was in the same direction as early as the Neolithic.
On the other hand, indubitably independent parallelisms are very difficult to establish within historic areas and periods, and therefore likely to have been equally rare during prehistory.
Then, too, the diffusion interpretation explains a large part of civilization to a certain degree in terms of a large, consistent scheme.
If the Etruscans devised the true arch and liver divination independently of the Babylonians, there are two sets of phenomena awaiting interpretation instead of one.
To say that they are both “natural” events is equivalent to calling them accidental, that is, unexplainable.
To fall back on instinctive impulses of the human mind will not do, else all or most nations should have made these inventions.
The diffusion point of view simply accepts certain intensive focal developments of culture as empirically given by the facts, and then relates as many other facts as possible to these.
We know many of the events of civilization, know them in their place and order.
We know as yet as good as nothing of the first or productive causes of civilization.
It is extremely important that this limitation of our understanding be frankly realized.
It is only awareness of darkness that brings seeking for light.
Scientific problems must be [439] felt before they can be grappled.
But within the bounds of our actual knowledge, the principle of culture derivation and transmission seems to integrate, and thus in a measure to explain, a far greater body of facts than any other principle—provided it is not stretched into an instrument of magic and forced to explain everything.
The early focal area.—239.
Culture growth in dynastic Egypt.—242.
The Sumerian development.—243.
The Sumerian hinterland.—244.
Iranian peoples and cultures.—246.
The composite culture of the Near East.—247.
Other contributing nationalities.—249.
Growth and spread of Chinese civilization.—253.
Central and northern Asia.—257.
Indian caste and religion.—259.
Relations between India and the outer world.—260.
The East Indies.—263.
Melanesia and Polynesia.—264.
The influence of other cultures.—269.
The West African culture-area and its meaning.—271.
Civilization, race, and the future.
Obviously this principle should apply in the field of history as well as prehistory, and should be even more easily traceable there.
In the Western Hemisphere it is plain that the great hearth of cultural nourishment and production has been Middle America—the tracts at the two ends of the intercontinental bridge, the Isthmus of Panama.
These two lands lie at no great distance from each other: they are closer than Mexico and Peru.
Like these two, they are also connected by a strip of mostly favorable territory—the “Fertile Crescent” of Palestine, Syria, and northern Mesopotamia.
Curiously, the two countries also lie in two continents connected [441] by a land bridge: the Isthmus of Suez is a parallel to that of Panama.
Both in Egypt and in Babylonia we find a little before 3000 B.C.
Copper was abundant and bronze in use for weapons and tools.
Pottery was being turned on wheels.
Economic life was at bottom agricultural.
The same food plants were grown: barley and wheat; similar beer brewed from them.
The same animals were raised: cattle, swine, sheep, goats; with the ass for transport.
Architecture was in sun-dried brick.
Considerable walled cities had arisen.
Their rulers struggled or attained supremacy over one another as avowed kings with millions of subjects.
A regulated calendar existed by which events were dated.
There were taxes, governors, courts of law, police protection, and social order.
A series of great gods, with particular names and attributes, were worshiped in temples.
Had Sumerian culture blossomed far away, say on the shores of the Pacific instead of the lower Euphrates, its essential separateness, like that of Middle American civilization, might be probable.
The same is true of the adjoining regions.
This cannot be a series of coincidences.
The causes can only be conjectured.
Perhaps when agriculture came to be systematically instead of casually conducted, these annually overflowed bottom lands proved unusually favorable; their population grew, necessitating fixed government and social order, which in turn enabled a still more rapid growth of numbers, the fuller exploitation of resources, and division of labor.
This looks plausible enough.
But too much weight should not be attached to explanations of this sort: they remain chiefly hypothetical.
That culture had however by 3000 B.C.
These two civilizations had evidently arisen out of a common Near Eastern high level of Neolithic culture, much as the peaks of Mexico and Peru arose above the plateau of Middle American culture in which they were grounded.
They were rather collateral kin—brothers, or better, perhaps, the two most eminent of a group of cousins.
Attempts to derive Egyptian hieroglyphic from Babylonian Cuneiform writing, and vice versa, have been rejected as unproved by the majority of unbiased scholars.
But it is likely that at least the idea of making legible records, of using pictorial signs for sounds of speech, was carried from one people to the other, which thereupon worked out its own symbols and meanings.
It does not consider the origin of the alphabet explained away by a reference to another and earlier system of writing.
It does bring the alphabet into some sort of causal relation with [443] the other systems, without merging it in them.
It is along lines like this that the relation of early Egypt and Babylonia to each other and to the other cultures of the ancient Near East must be conceived.
Its developmental stages must have reached much farther back.
Hieroglyphic writing, for instance, had taken on substantially the forms and degree of efficiency which it maintained for the next three thousand years.
An elaborate, conventional system of this sort must have required centuries for its formative stages.
A non-lunar 365-day calendar was in use.
This was easily the most accurate and effective calendar developed in the ancient world, and furnished the basis of our own.
It erred by the few hours’ difference between the solar and the assumed year.
One of these was completed in 2781; which gives 4241 B.C.
This is considered the earliest exactly known date in human history.
Of course, a calendar of such fineness cannot be established without long continued observations, whose duration will be the greater for lack of astronomical instruments.
Nor would oral tradition be a sufficient vehicle for carrying the observations.
Permanent records must have been transmitted from generation to generation; and these presuppose stability of society, enduring buildings, towns, and a class with leisure to devote to astronomical computations.
It is safe therefore to set 4500 B.C.
From 4500 on, then, is the time of the Predynastic Local Kingdoms.
Beyond this time there must lie another: the Predynastic Tribal period, before towns or [444] calendars or writing or metal, when pottery was being made, stone ground, boats built, plants and animals being domesticated—the typical pure Neolithic Age, in short.
Yet with all its prehistoric wealth, Egypt has not yet produced any true Neolithic remains.
It is hardly likely that the country was uninhabited for thousands of years; much more probably have Neolithic remains been obliterated.
Apparently they have been buried on the floor of the Nile valley under alluvial deposits.
Just when these terraces were formed, it is difficult to say in terms of European Pleistocene periods; but not later than the third glacial epoch, it would seem, and perhaps as early as the second.
From excavations to the base of dated monuments it is known that during the last 4,000 years this alluvium has been laid down at the rate of a foot in 300 years in northern Egypt.
As it there attains a depth of over a hundred feet, the process of deposition is indicated as having begun 30,000 or more years ago.
The smallest of these figures computes to a lapse of 18,000 years—nearly twice as long as the estimated age of the earliest pottery in Europe.
It is always necessary not to lay too much reliance on durations calculated solely from thickness of strata, whether these are geological or culture-bearing.
But in this case general probability confirms, at least in the rough.
If the fisher folk camped on their oyster shells on the Baltic shores were able to make pottery by 8000 B.C., there is nothing staggering in the suggestion that the Egyptians knew the art in 16,000 B.C.
They have had writing more than twice as long as the North Europeans.
The dates themselves, then, need not be taken too literally.
They are calculated from slender even though impressive evidence and subject to revision by perhaps thousands of years.
One can cut away several thousand years and retain the essential situation unimpaired: 8000, or 7000 B.C., still leaves Egypt in the van; helps to explain the appearance of eastern grains and animals in Europe around 6000-5000 B.C.
A long Full Neolithic, then, is both demanded by the situation in Egypt and indicated by such facts as there are; a long period in which millet, barley, split-wheat, wheat, flax, cattle, sheep, and asses were gradually modified and made more useful by breeding under domestication.
There were three phases of prosperity and splendor.
The first was the Old Kingdom, 3000-2500, culminating in the fourth dynasty of the Great Pyramid builders, in the twenty-ninth century.
The second was the Middle or Feudal Kingdom, with its climax in the twelfth dynasty, 2000-1788.
There followed a slow nationalistic decline, a transient seventh century conquest by Assyria, a brief and fictitious renascence supported by foreign mercenaries, and the Persian conquest of 525 B.C., since which time Egypt has never been an independent power under native rulers.
A waning of cultural energy, at least relatively to other peoples, had set in before the military decline.
By 1000 B.C.
She still loomed wealthy and refined in contrast with younger nations; but these were producing more that was new.
The first dynasty had some low grade bronze; by 2500 bronze containing a tenth of tin was in use.
Iron was introduced about 1500 or soon after, but for centuries remained a sparing Asiatic import.
In fact, the conservatism that was settling over the old age of the civilization caused it to cling with unusual tenacity to bronze.
The first masonry was laid in place of adobe brick to line tomb walls in the thirty-first century; and within a century and a half the grandest stone architecture in human history had been attained in the Pyramid of Cheops.
This was a burst of cultural energy such as has been equalled only in the rise of Greek art or modern science.
Later it was blown into vessels, usually small bottles, and only gradually attained to clearness.
With it came the war chariot.
Wheeled vehicles seem to have been lacking previously.
The alphabet, the arch, the zodiac, coinage, heavy metal armor, and many other important inventions gained no foot-hold in Egypt until after the country had definitely passed under foreign domination.
The superior intensity of early Egyptian civilization had evidently fostered a spirit of cultural self-sufficiency, analogous to that of China or Byzantine Greece, which produced a resistance to innovation from without.
At the same time, inward development continued, as attested by numerous advances in religion, literature, dress, the arts, and science when the Old Kingdom and New Empire are compared.
In the eleventh and twelfth dynasties, for instance, the monarchy was feudal; in the eighteenth lived the famous monotheistic iconoclastic ruler Ikhnaton.
Egypt was isolated by deserts, Babylonia open to many neighbors, and so was invaded, fought over, and never unified as long as Egypt.
The civilization was therefore never so nationally specific, so concentrated; and its records, though abundant, are patchy.
It was the Semites who, coming in from the Arabian region, took over this writing, together with the culture that accompanied it.
Of the local origins of this Sumerian city-state civilization with its irrigation and intensive agriculture, nothing is known.
It kept substantially abreast of Egypt, or at most a few centuries in arrears.
In certain features, as the use of metals, it seems to have been in advance.
Egypt is a long-drawn oasis stretched through a great desert.
Babylonia lies adjacent to desert and highland, steppe and mountains.
Within a range of a few hundred miles, its environment is far more varied.
Not only copper but tin is said to have been available among neighboring peoples.
The result is that whereas Egyptian culture makes the superficial impression of having been largely evolved on the spot by the Egyptians, Sumerian culture already promises to resolve, when we shall know it better, into a blend to which a series of peoples contributed measurably.
The rôle of the Sumerians, like that of their Semitic successors, was perhaps primarily that of organizers.
The date of the first occupancy of these [450] sites has been set, largely on the basis of the rate of accumulation of the deposits—an unsafe criterion—at 18,000 and 8000 B.C.
These dates, particularly the former, are surely too high.
But a remote antiquity is indicated.
Both sites show adobe brick houses and hand-made, painted pottery at the very bottom.
Whatever the date of the introduction of copper in these regions, it was very likely anterior to the thirty-first century, when bronze was already used by the Sumerians.
The languages of these early west Asiatic peoples have not been classified.
Some have thought to detect Turkish, that is Ural-Altaic, resemblances in it.
But others find similarities to modern African languages.
This divergence of opinion probably means that Sumerian cannot yet be safely linked with any other linguistic group.
The region at present is Turkish, but this is of course no evidence that it was so thousands of years ago.
The speech of the region might conceivably have been Indo-European, for it lies at the foot of the Persian plateau, which by the Iron Age was occupied by the Iranian branch of the Indo-Europeans, who are generally thought to have entered it from the north or northwest.
But again there is not a shred of positive evidence for an Indo-European population at this wholly prehistoric period.
The one thing that is clear is that the early civilization of the general west Asiatic area was not developed by the Semites who were its chief carriers later.
Several great waves can be distinguished.
The Indo-Europeans entered southwest Asia later and permeated it more locally than the Semites.
Their personal and god names as preserved in Assyrian Cuneiform inscriptions show them to have been an Iranian people.
The latter are not recognizably referred to in their [452] permanent home on the Iranian plateau until about 1000, but may well have settled there a thousand years earlier.
The long contact between Iran and the Tigris-Euphrates valley and their frequent political unity since 600 B.C.
Much of Arab and Turkish civilization is really Persian, and goes back ultimately to Semitic Babylonian and Sumerian origins.
The centuries before and after 1000 B.C.
Their contacts enabled each to acquire many of the new devices developed by the others, to combine these with their own attainments, and thus to be a source of culture stimulation over again for the others.
Within this Crescent, again, its southeastern end, the drainable and irrigable alluvial plain of Babylonia, averaged in the lead from the earliest known Sumerian times until shortly before the Christian era.
Yet political dominance often shifted elsewhere: to Egypt, which conquered to the Euphrates in the fifteenth century B.C.
Culturally, too, almost every one of the many nations or tracts comprised within the west Asiatic area developed a degree of independence; each added features or modified those which it borrowed; each gave to its local civilization a cast of its own, without losing touch with the others.
In the two or three centuries following, they established a commercial and maritime supremacy over the Mediterranean that led to the founding of Carthage, direct trade as far as Spain and indirect to Britain, and transmission of the alphabet and other knowledge to the Greeks.
Never more than a secondary political power, they penetrated other countries peacefully, brought in their system of measures and weights, their writing, and even their language.
Assyria had become half Aramaic speaking by the time of her fall, and the every-day language of Palestine in the days of Jesus and for some centuries before was Aramaic.
As however Assyria and Babylonia first threatened and then engulfed them, and their national impotence became more and more evident, they confided less in themselves, as they had done in the brief days of their little tenth century glory, and trusted increasingly in their god as their salvation.
Historically the monotheistic idea was not new.
Ikhnaton of Egypt had proclaimed it more than half a thousand years before the Hebrew prophets.
The concept may actually have been carried over; but it certainly drew sustenance of its own on Hebrew soil and first became established there as a cardinal, enduring element of a national civilization.
Here then is another tremendously spread cultural element of deep significance that originated as a local west Asiatic variant.
In Asia Minor evolved the concept of a great primal mother goddess, known to the Greeks as Cybele.
Some people near the Black Sea in eastern Asia Minor seem to have been the first to develop the working of iron and perhaps of steel.
Thence it spread, as the animal [456] of royalty, aristocracy, and the special arm of chariot warfare, until it reached Egypt some three hundred years later.
Three great periods, named the Early, Middle, and Late “Minoan” after the legendary Cretan king Minos, are distinguishable in the abundant remains which excavation has brought to light; each of these is divisible into three sub-periods designated I, II, III.
Underneath the Bronze Age deposits were thick strata from the Neolithic, with unpainted pottery.
With the Early Minoan, about 3000 B.C., painted pottery as well as bronze came in, to be followed by the potter’s wheel and a system of hieroglyphic writing unrelated to the Egyptian.
The beginning of the Late Minoan, from the sixteenth to the fourteenth century B.C., saw the culmination of Cretan civilization.
Then something violent happened, the palaces were destroyed, and after a brief decadence Minoan culture passed out at the arrival of the first of the historic Greeks, at the opening of the Iron Age, about 1250 B.C.
The Minoans left no chronology of their own and their writing is unread.
But datable [457] Egyptian objects found in Cretan strata of identified period, and Cretan objects characteristic of particular periods found at datable Egyptian sites as the result of trade, have made possible an indirect but positive chronology for Minoan culture.
The second sub-periods of Early, Middle, and Late Minoan respectively were contemporary with the Sixth, Twelfth, and Eighteenth Dynasties on the Nile.
From 2000 B.C.
Industry, commerce, games, a light, practical style of architecture, above all a graceful realistic art, flourished particularly from Middle Minoan III to Late Minoan II.
The Minoans were a Caucasian people of Mediterranean race.
When their home power crumbled, a fragment appears to have taken refuge in Asia and founded the Philistine cities which for a time pressed the tribal Hebrews and which gave their name to Palestine.
The table outlines the principal correlations.
It is not until the seventh century that true history begins in Greece, and in the main only to the sixth that the rudiments of that characteristic Hellenic philosophy, literature, and art can be traced, which were released after the Persian wars early in the fifth century.
More often, perhaps, he settled alongside him, possibly oppressed him, but learned from him.
But such problems are intricate, and usually answerable, if at all, from stray indications scattered among masses of literary and historical data controllable only by the specialist, whose primary interests tend in other directions.
Where these documented indications fail, the problems become speculative.
When they appear in history, they are already differentiated into their familiar main divisions.
The Bronze Age Scandinavians seem likely to have been Indo-Europeans and perhaps of the Germanic branch; for the Neolithic an identification would be mere guessing.
And after all, such considerations concern speech, or race, which can be associated with any culture.
Our present concern being primarily with the latter, it will be more profitable to pass on from these questions and turn to regions remote from those in which Occidental civilization assumed its modern form.
Yet the Chinese have long had a civilization identical in many of its constituents with our own: civil government, rimed poetry, painting, trousers, wheat and barley, our common domestic animals, bronze and iron, for instance.
Their repetition in China and in the West as the result of independent causes would be remarkable.
Evidently many if [461] not all of this group of common traits represent absorptions into the civilization of China, or diffusions out of it into the West, much as the larger part of early European civilization was imported out of the nearer Orient.
In the broader perspective of culture history, then, China no longer stands aloof.
The roots of her civilization are largely the same as those of our own.
In this light, understanding of Chinese civilization involves two steps.
The first is the tracing of the elements derived from the west or imparted to it.
The second is the recognition of how these were remodeled and combined with elements of local growth and thereby given their peculiarly Chinese cast and setting.
Beyond the beginning of the Chou dynasty, about 1100 B.C., or more exactly, beyond a point when this dynasty was about three centuries old, in 827 B.C., the Chinese possess only legendary history, in which slight strands of fact are interwoven with fabricated or fabulous constituents.
This presumption led to the conscientious manufacture by native historians of dates for inventions which were really made outside of China.
They may have come from middle Asia or still farther west by a national migration, as has sometimes been conjectured: there is nothing to show that they did, and a great deal to suggest that they had lived in or near their seats of that period long before.
Of this there is no evidence.
For one of the most advanced [462] peoples of its time to remove itself and its civilization complete and unimpaired would be without parallel in history, and indeed is inconceivable as soon as one turns from the vague idea to face specific details of the process.
We tend to overlook this fact because it is the transient Hun and Mongol invasions that chiefly obtrude into both western and Chinese history.
Whenever the nomads ceased boiling over, they receded from the historians’ view.
Obviously they could not have migrated and fought and burnt and slain among each other continuously.
In this underlying phase they were the connectors of Near and Far East.
In each case sea communication came later.
It was scarcely before Mohammedan times that ocean trade between China and the west became important.
They do not use milk or its products, wool, nor bread-leaven.
It has been suggested that the cluster was transmitted to China before these traits had been added to it; and that when they finally might have reached China, they found its people satisfactorily established in a culture containing substitutes for these traits, and therefore resistive to them.
There are evidently two fundamentally distinct economic systems here, characteristic respectively of Europe and west and north Asia, and of southeastern Asia; and evolving in the main independently.
The first civilized China, that of the Chou period, that which produced Confucius as its literary standardizer, and has chiefly shaped Chinese traditions and institutions ever since, belonged to the great northern and western cycle; was in fact its easternmost outpost.
The [464] connection has indeed been asserted, but no satisfactory evidence of specific correspondences has been adduced.
The most that it seems valid to maintain is that a remote connection is thinkable; a connection not extending beyond a limited number of characters or the idea or method of writing.
The earliest Chinese characters preserved on bronzes are nearly two thousand years younger than the most ancient inscriptions of the system which developed into the classic Cuneiform.
Both systems are fairly crystallized when they first come to our knowledge.
Their formative stages, in which such connection as they might have would be most apparent, are obscure.
It is well to remember that Cuneiform and Egyptian hieroglyphic, which were virtually contemporaneous and much nearer to each other geographically, have not yet been brought into specific relation as regards their origins.
The chief functions of the over-king were to perform sacrifices, to admonish the kings and princes, and to govern his small dynastic domain.
Unity lay not so much in an effective organization as in an idea, the feeling of a common race and especially of a common civilization.
This idea has persisted to the present.
Both were frontier states, less cultivated and hardier than the others, and regarded as barbarian or only half Chinese.
By the seventh to ninth centuries after Christ, when the empire flourished once more under the Tang dynasty, the mass of southern China may be considered to have been substantially assimilated.
Even the southern coast, which was the last area to be integrated, and which retains to-day the greatest dialectic differentiations and autonomous tendencies, had become part of the Chinese polity and civilization.
The consequence was that when in the thirteenth century the Mongols and in the seventeenth the Manchus conquered the empire, they accomplished little more than the overthrow of one dynasty by another.
The course of Chinese culture went on undisturbed, as it had in several previous historic periods when [466] half of the realm passed temporarily under the sway of nomads or barbarians from the north.
A considerable measure of the cultural predominance of China over her neighbors is to be ascribed to her more numerous population, which in turn was partly due to the cultural advance.
The Chinese were the first nation to maintain a system of fairly reliable census records.
A thousand years later, between 1021 and 1580, eight censuses yielded from 43 to 100 millions, with an average of 62 millions.
Under the Manchus the population gradually rose from 125 millions in 1736 to 380 in 1881.
To-day, the northern half of China is about twice as populous as the southern, and the eastern half exceeds the western in the same ratio.
This superior density of population in the northeast reflects the fact that ancient China was the northeast.
Many ingredients of modern Chinese civilization, and most of its distinctive color, have been present in it since the opening of the historic period.
Such are the use of hemp and silk as the typical textile materials; of jade as the precious stone of the nation; the tremendous, life-long moral authority accorded to parents, and the associated worship of ancestors; the unusual respect and rewards for learning; a professed contempt for war and emotional activity; aversion for mythological and metaphysical, scientific, or any other sort of speculation, and coupled therewith an unflagging interest in practical ethics, in the cultivation of character, in the finer shaping of the relations of individuals.
These and other leanings endow Chinese civilization with something persistently idiomatic, with a quality of coherent originality.
If this civilization were less great, China and the countries influenced by it would be spoken of as constituting what among barbarous and savage peoples we call a culture-area.
In the widest perspective, they are such.
Their cultures have risen far above those of the intervening and peripheral nations.
Until quite recent centuries, the three have run their courses with approximately equal achievement.
And while exchanging elements since prehistoric times, they have each molded both what they borrowed and what they devised into a unified and distinctive design, have stamped it with original patterns.
Of course, this distinctness of the three great regions of Old World civilization does not imply that diffusion of culture elements between them ever ceased.
It is the form more than the content of civilization that is peculiar to the three areas.
From India, for instance, China derived Buddhism, which was accorded a reception under the Hans and cultivated with fervor in the following centuries.
Cotton came in the wake of the religion—first as a rare and valuable textile, then to be grown.
In recent centuries the West acted as transmitter for several elements of American origin, tobacco, for example, and maize, which quickly became an important food-plant in parts of China.
Gunpowder is said to have been used for fireworks in China in the fifth century, for war in the twelfth, but its employment for the propulsion of missiles from firearms is due to introduction by the Altaic nations in the fifteenth century.
From the fourth century B.C.
The old war chariot, for instance, [468] went out of use about contemporaneously in China and the West.
Printing from engraved blocks was in vogue in the sixth century after Christ, from movable clay types in the dynasties between the Tangs and the Mongols, from metal types not much later, since the art was established among the imitating Koreans in the fifteenth century.
The system of awarding office on the basis of literary examinations took root under the Hans and became organized under the Tangs.
The earliest poetry, three thousand years ago, was rimed, and had four or five monosyllabic words in the line.
In the Tang time, the line became extended to seven words; and still later was the origin of the peculiar rhythm of alternating tones—a system by which every other word was one bearing the “even” tone and those between any of the other tones.
Paper making is said to date from the Hans, and paper money was first issued—disastrously as in some of the first Western attempts —under the Mongols.
They seem on first contact to promise a picture of the pre-Chinese culture of the area, but examination shows their customs to be a blend of primitive and advanced, ancient and recent elements.
They eat meat from their herds, use no milk, but wear woolen clothing.
They grow neither cotton nor rice.
They raise oats, buckwheat, maize, and potatoes.
Two of these plants are of north or west Asiatic origin; the others are American.
Plows are used.
No pottery is made, but iron is worked into weapons and tools by native smiths.
They marry cousins.
Religion resembles that of the more backward Indo-Chinese and Malaysian peoples.
There is a native system of writing, which seems to derive from Chinese stimulus, if not sources.
It is obvious that this culture has fused together very old elements that are characteristic of southeastern Asia, with elements that have flowed in from remote sources or during the most recent centuries.
It is also clear that certain ingredients of Chinese culture have been freely absorbed and others rejected by this mountain people.
Included marginal cultures, on the contrary, being of necessity exposed to subsequent influences, are regularly a mixture of belated and recent ingredients, no matter how well integrated these may have become.
In its turn, the peninsula transmitted to Japan: until about a thousand years ago, Chinese writing and culture reached Japan mainly via Korea.
The spread of Chinese civilization was perhaps largely of the usual, slow, diffusing kind, but was several times accelerated by the settlement in [470] Korea of groups of Chinese refugees, colonists, or adventurers; for instance in Chou and Han times.
The center of power and civilization within Korea has gradually moved southwards, which suggests the waning of original central Asiatic affiliations as Chinese ones became stronger.
By the beginning of this period not only the writing but the classic books of China had been introduced.
Since the fourteenth century Confucianism has been the state religion—though the people had long before become Buddhists—and literary examinations for office of the Chinese type have been in vogue.
This race is different from the Japanese, and has often been classified as Caucasian (§ 27).
The shell deposits show the aborigines to have been fishers and hunters, without agriculture or edible domestic animals.
They had the bow, dog, incised hand-made pottery, and ground stone axes, and were thus approximately in an early Neolithic stage.
Iron was brought in at a time not precisely determined, but likely to have been about the fourth century B.C., by the so-called Yamato people—evidently the ancestors of the Japanese of to-day—who seem to have come from Korea and at any rate [471] occupied the southern islands first.
Fifteen centuries ago the northern third of the main island was still in Ainu possession.
These early Japanese erected megalithic chambers or corridors as tombs for their princes, covering them with mounds of earth.
More than 3,000 of these structures are known.
The early emperors were buried in double mounds, some of them of great area.
From the fifth to the seventh century Korean influence was strong; the Chinese writing and classics were imported from that country.
Later relations between the two nations were more intermittent, perhaps because of the growing consolidation and strength of Japan from the eighth century on.
The cultural debt of Japan to China is great, but less than that of Korea.
The Japanese added 47 purely phonetic syllabic characters to the Chinese writing, in order to represent their own proper names, grammatical forms, and the like.
These characters would have sufficed for a simple, efficient, and purely native script, but have remained a mere supplement to the ideographic Chinese system (§ 105).
The mandarin and examination system of China were never taken over by the Japanese, who clung to their feudal customs more than two thousand years later than China.
The ancestor worship of the Chinese and the official Confucian religion also did not become established in Japan, the state cult being Shinto, the crystallization of a primitive set of rites and of a mythology which has parallels in the Occident, in the East Indies and Oceania, and even in North America, rather than in China.
An early Malaysian strain in both Japanese race and culture has been alleged, but this is a subject on which more evidence is needed.
Japanese speech does not elucidate the origins of the nation, the language—like that of Korea—not being determined as related to any other.
The physical type, on the other hand, and this applies also to Korea, is allied to that of China.
There appears to be considerable evidence of such progressive desiccation; but its degree, and still more the extent of its influence upon culture and emigration, remain to be ascertained.
In short, it is wise to guard against a natural overestimation of the sensational, cataclysmic aspects of the history of the interior Asiatic peoples.
It is their spasmodic irruptions which the self-centered nations of the West, of India, and of China, have been chiefly concerned with.
Hebrew and [473] Hellenic, Arab and Germanic tribes did crash cities and empires before them, but they tore down only what was already moribund, and brought in new systems of thought, new methods of feeling and organization, which, however crude at first, soon added new qualities to culture.
The chief distinction of the north Asiatics is that, excepting some terror-striking massacres, they were both less subversive and less constructive culturally than Semites and Indo-Europeans.
They barely dented the civilization of the West as they barely dented that of India and China.
The area has always been relatively though not extremely peripheral.
The horse, indeed, can be set down as one important gift of the Ural-Altaic peoples or their predecessors to general civilization.
Biological considerations also point to interior Asia as the most likely area of first domestication of several of the earlier fundamental animals of culture, especially the sheep and goat.
The probability of the central Asiatic peoples having been the transmitters of metals, cattle, grains and other important groups of culture elements from [474] the Near to the Far East has already been mentioned, as has the established trade between China and the Mediterranean world in Roman times (§ 251).
Finally, it appears that the Turks and Mongols had at least a hand in the early use of gunpowder for firearms; and, as already mentioned, the first state paper money, that of China, was issued by a Mongol dynasty.
It is scarcely rash to predict that the intensive study of the interior Asiatic peoples from both prehistoric and historic sources, without speculative bias or plunging of opinion, will prove one of the most illuminating contributions to the history of general civilization.
Yet the career of the several divisions has been diverse.
Both these nations have long since become integrally absorbed into European culture.
They are the only Ural-Altaic peoples with this experience.
The later so-called Mongol conquests, those of [475] Tamerlane and the Indian Moguls, were made by armies mainly of Turks under dynasties tracing back to former Mongol leaders.
The Turks in general have inclined to Mohammedanism on coming into contact with the world religions, the Mongols to Buddhism, although Christianity in its Nestorian form once made considerable numbers of converts among both.
In northern and eastern Siberia there live, besides the Samoyed, a series of non-Ural- Altaic peoples, truly peripheral and retarded in culture, who seem once to have occupied larger areas but to have shrunk or been partially absorbed before Ural-Altaic expansion.
How far they may be considered as following a positively similar culture, except in direct response to an extreme climate, is also doubtful.
Their rigorously marginal position and depriving environment stamp their culture with a preponderance of negative traits.
Reindeer-breeding among these groups appears to be due to a transmission, in the sense of being a reflex of contact, an imitation of the cattle or horse breeding of the more favorably situated nations to the south.
It is also interesting and probably significant that the American Eskimos never domesticated the reindeer, although they depended largely upon its hunt.
Racially the array of north and central Asiatic peoples shades from pronounced Caucasian to extreme Mongoloid type.
The Mongols have given name to their whole larger racial stock, and the Tungus-Manchu and northeast Siberian savages clearly form [476] part thereof.
The Hungarians to-day are not only Caucasians but Alpines; the Finns definite Nordics; the Lapps a strange partial graft of Nordic traits on broad faced and broad headed Mongolian physique.
Its 300,000,000 inhabitants constitute nearly a fifth of humanity.
Historically, India forms a continent as fully as does Africa.
Nearly everywhere, but especially in the south, there is an evident admixture of a dark skinned, broad nosed, long headed type.
So far as this race can be reconstructed, it seems to have been less Negroid than the Australian of to-day; that is, it possessed more Caucasian resemblances.
This hypothesis has this to commend it: it squares with the facts that the Hindu in spite of his dark complexion makes almost universally the impression of being essentially “white” in race; and that he differs outstandingly from what a mulatto-like blend of Negro and Caucasian would be.
In the north and east of India, Mongolian resemblances begin to appear, as the natural result of thousands of years of contact of two stocks.
It would seem that the proportions of racial blood in India, and in the rough their geographical distribution, parallel the proportions of the numbers of speakers of tongues belonging to the several families.
However, while the races have blended, the languages have remained distinct.
As almost everywhere, the linguistic classification is therefore clearer cut in India than the racial one.
The ancient culture of India is inadequately known.
It seems dubious whether there was a true Bronze Age in India.
More pre-iron implements of pure copper seem to have been found than of tin bronze.
At any rate, their culture resembles that of many less advanced populations to the east, well out into Oceania.
As regards its history within India, this is almost certain: the old culture is nowhere any longer pure, but has regularly absorbed elements of the advanced civilization that surrounds it; and conversely has contributed to the latter.
When the Dravidians first begin to creep into history, shortly before the Christian era, they already possess cities, kingdoms, commerce, writing, and philosophy.
They have on the whole contributed less to Indian civilization than the Indo-Europeans: its center always lay in the north; but they have long formed an integral part of it.
When Indo-European as a whole is designated as Aryan, it is by an extension of the term.
The region of India to which the Vedas almost wholly refer is the Indus drainage, that is the northwest, the parts adjoining the Iranian highland, whence the invaders came or through which they passed.
Vedic Aryan culture was of late Bronze Age type.
Whether the bronze was really such, or copper, it is mentioned more frequently than iron, as in Homer and the older books of the Bible.
It smacks more of the Europe of its time than of the contemporary Orient.
The temples and writing, walled towns and kingdoms, district gods and royal tombs of Egypt, Babylon, Canaan, Minoan Greece are wanting.
A few centuries after the Vedas, the culture depicted by the literary remains is profoundly altered.
The scene has shifted to the Ganges valley.
There are cities and palaces, wealth and pomp.
There are kings, priests, townsmen, peasants, hermits and ascetics.
Caste is in vogue.
Cotton and rice are in use.
There is a deal of philosophizing; life appears complex and difficult; pessimism is abroad, soul rebirth taken for granted, spirituality emphasized.
Concepts to which western science later returned, the atom and ether, are familiar.
In all essentials, post-Christian Hinduism had been blocked out in this [480] pre-Christian period.
Only a few elements like money and writing are lacking.
This change from the Vedic age is not fully accounted for, and the time usually allowed for its occurrence is insufficient.
Buddha was born B.C.
563 or 557.
Caste seems a thing of development.
It is absent in the Vedas, but Buddhism is already in a measure a protest against it.
It seems difficult to squeeze such growths into a few hundred years.
It is true that the florescence of Greece came with a rush; but Greek civilization rose from the debris of the older Minoan one and was in contact with the cultures of Asia.
In India there is no sign of an antecedent high civilization, and a greater dearth of known foreign influences between 1000 and 600 B.C.
The transposition of the cultural center eastward must enter into the problem.
Or possibly the movement and development in the east began while the Vedas were still being composed along the Indus, and were ignored by them.
Or, conceivably, the Aryans on the Ganges may have been the first comers, who quickly altered in the direction of their future civilization but remained obscure to our vision during the period in which the Vedas were being made or retained by the later comers of the Punjab, in whose memories and sub-arid environment their former steppe culture remained more unmodified.
These are only speculations: they emphasize the gap in our understanding of this important chapter of world culture history.
Nowhere else is it so complex, so systematically worked out and endlessly reinforced by ritual and taboo, so pervasive of conduct and thought.
If so, it has failed egregiously, as the physical anthropology of modern India shows.
The explanation is obviously inadequate.
Castes do represent race to a certain extent, but they also represent nationalities, tribes, common residence, religious distinctness, occupations, cultural status.
Whatever sets off a group in any way may be sufficient to make it a caste in India.
If groups diverge within an established caste, they become recognized as sub-castes, perhaps finally to develop into wholly separate castes.
Clearly we have here a generic system, a pattern of organizing society, into which every sort of group as it actually forms is fitted.
Caste is a way of thought which the Hindu has tried to universalize.
All Indian castes are in theory strictly endogamous: intermarriage is intolerable.
All possess an intrinsic, unchangeable worth.
Each possesses an occupation, a mode of life and customs, a set of prescribed rituals, inherently peculiar to it.
The greater the restrictions and prohibitions incumbent upon it, the less it relaxes to comfort and indifference, and the more spiritual it is, the higher its grade.
The wider the gap of non-intercourse, of non-contact with lower castes, the greater becomes its purity.
There is no elevating a caste.
The very attempt to rise is a vice that brings degradation as a result, since castes are eternal, founded in nature, absolute, so that alteration is of necessity a sullying.
Such is the Hindu scheme—which in actuality is lived up to in no single point.
Perverse as the system seems to men reared in other cultures, it must be admitted to possess completeness, self-consistency, and the desire to preserve inward worth.
It differs [482] from the basic assumptions of our civilization in that it sees value as something already existing and therefore to be maintained, not to be created; it tries to fit life into a theoretical pattern; it is futureless.
Yet all the facts show that as historical realities castes have changed enormously and are changing now.
Such is the hold of patterns on men’s minds.
The theorizing which the Hindu does about caste is characteristic of him in all cultural manifestations.
The relation which can be thought out between one fact or act and others, the compartment to which it can be assigned in a system, are of more interest to him, as compared with the fact itself, than to peoples of other civilizations.
On the other hand the astronomical and still more the physical and biological sciences remained backward: they were concerned with concrete objects.
It is probably no accident that chess and our “Arabic” position numerals with a symbol for zero (§ 109) are Hindu inventions, and that it is only in India that priests have for age after age been ranked higher than rulers.
It is natural that a culture of such inclinations should exalt the mind and soul above the body.
It is also intelligible that these qualities should have imparted to Indian religion a superior degree of spiritual intensity which was appreciated by the nations to the north and east when Buddhism was presented to them, and caused them to embrace it.
Like Christianity, however, Buddhism found no permanent favor among the people and in the land of its origin.
It flourished in India for a time, but was rarely looked upon as more than a sect; after something over a thousand years it died out completely, except in Ceylon, at the very period that its hold on non-Indian nations to the north and east was strengthening.
Its place was taken in India by the miscellaneous assemblage of cults, all theoretically recognizing Brahman ascendancy, that in the aggregate constitute what is known as Hinduism.
Hinduism is not a religion in the sense that Christianity, Mohammedanism, Buddhism are “religions.” It recognizes no personal founder, no head or establishment; it tends to exclude foreigners rather than to convert them; it is national instead of universal.
It accepts and reinforces the existing institutions of its particular culture: caste, for instance, which Buddhism tried to transcend.
Hinduism is therefore comparable to the ancient Greek and early west Asiatic religions in consisting of a series of locally or tribally different cults never integrated or fully harmonized, conscious and tolerant of one another, resting on common assumptions and similar in content, everywhere in accord with tradition and usage, resistive to organization into a larger whole but tied into a certain unity through reflecting a more or less common civilization.
Hinduism is also comparable to Confucianism and Shintoism with this difference.
These grew up analogously, but early became associated with the central government or imperial authority, to which India never attained.
They gradually became official religions, as which they survive; such religious piety as the population of China and Japan experiences finding its outlet chiefly through Buddhism.
Buddhism may be said to have failed in India because it aimed at being a world religion; because it tried to be [484] international instead of national, to overlie all cultures instead of identifying itself with one.
The Hindu like the Jew preferred remaining within the limits of his nationality and particular civilization.
In fact, as already mentioned, more is known about this importation than of what it encountered in India.
In the post-Vedic period, the introduction of the Semitic alphabet suggests that other cultural ingredients also flowed into India from the west without direct record being preserved of their transmission.
The Persian and Macedonian conquests extended only over the westernmost margin of India and were of little direct influence.
Sculpture, architecture, astronomy, drama, coinage, derived new impetus, in some cases even their origin, from this source.
In some instances the Hindus were no more than copiers of Hellenistic models: Greek hangs and folds were given to sculptured garments, Greek astronomical measurements taken over without change.
Yet as the centuries wore on and new imports along these lines lessened and then died out, the introduced elements became more deeply incorporated into Indian civilization, modified and encrusted more and more heavily by distinctive Hindu styles, until now their superficial appearance makes an impression of independent native growth.
The working over of the Semitic alphabet into its Hindu forms may be taken as typical of the nature and degree of this remodeling of the Hellenistic culture imports.
Soon after 700 A.D. commenced a series of Mohammedan invasions and conquests— Arab, Afghan, and Mongol-Turkish—also from the northwest, and of course accompanied by a new series of culture influences—firearms, for instance, and the true [485] arch—which in their turn underwent absorption and partial transformation.
Eastern Africa was influenced, largely through the medium of Arab sea trade.
Towards the north and northeast as far as Mongolia and Japan, India has been a dispenser of culture content and has taken little in return.
On the basis of speech, four groups are to be distinguished.
It contains a Chinese element, but perhaps by absorption rather than by original connection.
The movement of population has clearly been out of inner Asia into the peninsula.
The Mon-Khmer are situated like half submerged remnants.
Burma on the map hangs from Tibet like the outgrowth that it probably is.
The Malay peninsula is Siamese in its narrow or neck portion.
The head is inhabited by three racial groups.
This race, if it is such, is generalized, with certain Caucasian and other Negroid but few Mongoloid resemblances.
The third racial group of the peninsula are the Malays, who, at least in large part, are emigrants in comparatively recent centuries from Sumatra.
The old native culture was allied to that of the East Indies and the islands beyond—whatever the speech may have been.
Even to-day backward tribes of both regions, especially inland, often show strikingly similar customs: the use of bark cloth, for instance, separate houses for unmarried men and girls.
The two other civilizations have flowed in from India and China.
The Indian influence has been both wider and deeper than the Chinese.
It brought in Buddhism and writing, and colored art and architecture.
This Indian influence began more than two thousand years ago, and while it may have weakened somewhat after India’s return from Buddhism to Brahmanism, it has never ceased.
As there were no notable Indian conquests, this influence is an excellent example of the normal, gradual type of cultural pervading.
Australia deserves to be set apart on account of its continental size, isolation, and ancient biological independence.
Oceania proper falls into five natural divisions.
Two primary facts stand out in regard to the inhabitants.
However, there is no people in the East Indies that has wholly escaped the influence of Asiatic culture: the difference is always one of degree, although ranging from what is currently called semi-civilization to savagery.
The profoundest influence has been exerted by India.
This began nearly two thousand years ago and remained active for over a thousand; it introduced architecture, sculpture, writing, monarchy, religion, iron, cotton, and a host of other elements of higher culture.
The earlier Indian influence was Buddhist and its seat of power centered in southern Sumatra; the later was Brahman and reached its zenith in Java.
The number of immigrants was probably small, their effect enormous.
The influence of China came later and was less than that of India.
In the thirteenth century the Sumatran Malays were converted to Mohammedanism and began a career of expansion which culminated in the complete conquest of Java by 1478, carried their faith over much of the area, and was checked only by the advent of the Spaniards, Portuguese, and Dutch.
Bamboo is perhaps capable of serving more different cultural uses than any one other plant.
It makes satisfactory houses, rafts, knives, spears, bows, arrows, blowguns, textiles, cooking vessels, receptacles, and musical instruments, with a minimum of labor.
It is best worked with metal tools, and has therefore perhaps experienced its most thorough utilization at the hands of peoples too backward to secure a large supply of metals for themselves but able to obtain a limited stock of iron from their neighbors.
This primitive culture of course varied locally.
It was also not of unitary origin.
It [490] certainly contained elements that were older than others, or that originated in different parts of the area.
Rice and fowls for instance are likely to be more recent than skull cult and use of bamboo.
The culture may even resolve, when it shall have been analyzed more intensively, into two or more fairly separable strata.
But, taken in block, it must once have prevailed with fundamental similarity from eastern India well out into the Pacific, since everywhere within this tract there are to-day hill and jungle peoples whose culture conforms at least roughly to the type.
It is necessary to remember, however, that nowhere does this culture survive in purity.
To some degree the influence of the greater Asiatic civilizations has made itself felt among the most aloof tribes.
They have everywhere been exposed in some degree to contact with cultures of subsequent level.
Metals, rice, the buffalo, disappear.
The growing of taro and other tropical plants, the pig and fowl, the use of bamboo where nature permits, skull cult or cannibalism, remain.
How far such traits represent secondary local developments or on the other hand survivals from a Negroid culture phase anterior to that of primitive Malaysian-Southeast Asiatic culture, is not clear.
Local diversity of custom is unusually great in both New Guinea and Melanesia.
Micronesia and Polynesia present a different although allied set of problems.
The [491] Polynesians in particular manifest a remarkable uniformity of speech and, on the whole, of culture, especially in view of the thousands of miles of ocean through which their island groups are dispersed.
This uniformity suggests that the language and culture became characterized in a limited area from which they spread over Polynesia after or while contact with the remainder of the world was lost.
Royal lineage, for example, bears to the Polynesians a powerful implication of sanctity, of descent from the gods, such as is unparalleled among any truly primitive people.
Religion and mythology also contain an abstract, spiritual strain that is almost reminiscent of Buddhism.
Yet there seems no single specific idea or name that can be traced to an Asiatic source; and the essentially ancient ideas of magic and taboo are strong—the word taboo itself is Polynesian.
There are structures and sculpture in stone, sometimes monumental, but never more than barbaric in quality.
On the other hand, the dog, pig, and fowl, cultivated plants like taro, bark cloth, cannibalism, and human sacrifice are shared with the island regions to the west.
The various Polynesians possess genealogies and often migration traditions which on comparison, and after computation of the number of generations, seem to point to two waves of migration, both within the Christian era, perhaps about the fifth and tenth centuries respectively.
Something of the mysteriousness which the discoverers felt continues to attach to the origin and history of this people, and is deepened by the fact that the affiliations of their racial type [492] remain ambiguous.
The race is distinctive: sub-Negroid, it might be called.
The languages relate to no other.
The culture is primitive and well characterized.
The isolation of Australia was aided by the fact that the one approach to it other than by a sea-voyage of some length, the approach across Torres Straits, was blocked by New Guinea, the area of most backward culture in Oceania.
The Australians lacked not only all agriculture and domestic animals, but pottery, the bow, and apparently the harpoon.
These deficiencies would at once stamp their culture as pre-Neolithic in type, were it not that they grind some stone implements.
All in all, Australian culture is unusually meager on the industrial and economic side.
Houses, clothing, weapons, boats, tools, are most scantily developed: often lacking and always rude.
This poverty of Australian material culture cannot be explained wholly from the prevailing desert character of a large part of the continent, since the natives of the most favored regions were not appreciably better off as regards variety of arts conducive to comfort.
Social organization is much more complicated than the arts.
Most of the Australians are divided into moieties, which frequently are subdivided into four classes or eight-sub- classes, all exogamous.
A frequent peculiarity is that the child belongs to a different class from both its parents.
Frequently there are also hereditary totemic groups.
These may be subdivisions of the moieties or descend independently of them.
The moiety scheme of course [493] prescribes equally that one must marry into the opposite moiety and out of one’s own.
This means not only that certain relatives are within the absolutely prohibited degrees, but that others are prescriptive spouses.
These are only a few of the innumerable ramifications and variations of Australian social organization.
The origin of these social schemes is in dispute.
Some ethnologists interpret them as original inventions of the Australians, manifestations of their peculiar primitiveness.
Others look upon then as evolved somewhere in the region between India and Melanesia where analogous institutions are frequently encountered, and as carried into Australia by diffusion or migrations.
Moreover, the strongest development of this type of organization within Australia is on the whole in the northern part, the tribes that show least or none of it being in the south, farthest from the presumptive entrance via New Guinea.
The most probable course of events would appear to have been the importation of the basic pattern of exogamy, followed by its diffusion with numerous new growths in Australia.
Religious status fits the same interpretation.
Ceremonial practices are often, both [494] abundant and elaborate, but ring the changes on fundamentally primitive concepts like imitative magic, bewitching, taboo, adolescence and other crisis rites.
On this foundation the Australians developed their locally varying superstructures of religion, which often differ conspicuously in specific content, and into which they poured a notable quantity of imagination or social creativeness.
They evolved nothing of a fundamentally “higher” type of cult because of their unusual degree of insulation from all the more important later streams of culture.
To return to material culture, it may be noted that the boomerang groups with Australian rites and social organization in being a highly specialized form of a fundamentally simple and presumably early type, namely the throwing stick or flat club.
The Australians alone added the twist which gives the boomerang its peculiar flight.
They may have been led to evolve this feature through not having higher types of weapons such as bows and arrows to engage their interest and energies.
At any rate, the discovery of the quality imparted by the twist may have been made by accident, such as the warping of an implement, and random experimenting may have brought the improvements.
Whether the relatively unimportant implements of ground stone in Australia represent an invention made there or should be considered one of the small group of culture elements which like the moiety system may have been imported subsequently to the main stock of Australian culture, remains to be ascertained.
It constitutes an ultimate periphery.
Of what little culture Australia had received from the remainder of the hemisphere, Tasmania again received only a part.
They lacked everything that the Australians lacked; and in addition lacked spear-throwers, boomerangs, shields, and ground stone tools.
They had chipped knives, axes, scrapers, and similar tools; wooden spears and clubs; bark rafts; windbreak huts; cordage and baskets; paint; ornaments of bone and other animal parts.
Their religion and society therefore perished almost unrecorded.
Their racial type is preserved in skeletal material and photographs.
It is clear that it differed from that of the Australians.
Their hair was woolly.
The only considerable forested area lies in its west central portion; the remainder ranges from parkland through steppe to desert.
As regards its races, it is important to remember that the northern third or half of Africa is inhabited by native “whites.” There is much confusion on this point.
We tend to say African when we mean Negro.
It is true that almost across the breadth of Africa there is a transition zone in which it is arbitrary to classify the population as definitely Negro or Caucasian.
But over the vaster bulk of the continent, there is never doubt as to the substantial distinctness of the racial stocks.
There is a bronze art with casting in lost molds in Benin.
This is of undetermined origin.
It may be ancient; but so far as can be told to-day, iron came into use in much of Africa as early as bronze, and is worked by modern tribes who do not know bronze.
Some of them are later than the similar European megaliths, [497] since iron horse-bits have been found associated with them.
It is evident from this summary that Europe and Africa have been closely associated in their prehistoric culture, especially in its remote stages.
Apparatus and technique are usually simple, but efficient.
Smiths often constitute a caste, sometimes a wandering one.
Some tribes rank them highly, others repute them wizards, nearly all accord them a special social position.
There is no other area so large and culturally so backward as Africa south of the Mohammedan belt, in which an iron industry flourishes.
The existence of the art therefore raises a problem.
Some have thought that its origin was indigenous, that perhaps even Egypt derived its knowledge of iron from Negro peoples.
On the whole, however, it is much more probable that the reverse holds.
In the more than three thousand years since iron was worked in Egypt, the process could readily have been transmitted through the continent.
It is only recently that a beginning has been made in tracing them out in detail in the Nile Sudan.
For so intensive a civilization as that of Egypt to exist in juxtaposition to the southeastern Hamitic tribes and the Negroes for five or six thousand years without radiating innumerable elements of culture into their life would be unparalleled.
In fact the dynastic Egyptians used materials like ostrich feathers that were imported from far south, and depicted Negroid physical types.
The trade and association involved must have flowed both ways.
The elements most typical of Egyptian [498] civilization, and its fabric and organization, need by no means have been imparted along with the elements that were transmitted.
The fact that they were not seems to be what has delayed wide recognition of Egyptian influence in Negro Africa.
The general character of the culture of a modern central African tribe and of the ancient Egyptians being so profoundly different, diffused culture ingredients would therefore often appear among the Negroes in a different form, and always in a different setting, thus tending to disguise their historic connection.
The failure of certain Egyptian traits to seep through Africa is also readily accounted for.
A backward population broken up into small communities without much stability would have difficulty fitting such an art as writing into their scheme of life, in fact would find it useless.
On the other hand, so obviously utilitarian an art as iron working might be quickly taken up, once it had been brought into a simple technique.
In the same way, an adaptable domestic animal or plant would tend to be accepted and diffused, while a concomitant scheme of political organization or elaborated religious system might fail to make even a beginning of penetration.
It is in this way that several animals of Asiatic origin came to be kept through considerable parts or almost the whole of Africa; the horse, camel, sheep, fowl, for instance, of which at least the first two entered through the gateway of Egypt.
This does not mean that all constituents of African culture have their origin in Egypt; still less that the colors or patterns of African cultures can be derived from that country.
However great a bulk of culture may be absorbed by one people from another, the organization which is given this, the stamp put upon it, is necessarily more or less distinctive, because the introduced constituents meet others already established; and especially because the recipient culture, even if low, already possesses a form of its own into which it unconsciously attempts to fit the new content, and into which, unless the influx is sudden and great, it usually succeeds in fitting the imports for a time.
Yet the resolution of such a suspicion is not always easy.
On these points the necessary information is often still incomplete.
The bronze, cereals, tamed animals, and many other culture elements of Europe, including religious traits like the ax cult, can be derived from the Near East.
But the cities, monarchies, temples, inscriptions, astronomy, and art of the Orient had not penetrated to farther Europe.
It enjoyed an organization of its own, followed local and at least partly original trends, possessed what might metaphorically be called an organic unity as great as that of any Oriental culture.
As far back as the strictly historic period extends, its Mediterranean shore has been generally under the control of peoples belonging to Western civilization—Carthaginians, Romans, or Arabs.
As in the case of Egypt, it is unthinkable that the cultures thus planted in the north could have been wholly without effect on the remoter parts of the continent.
In fact, for the Arabs, who both penetrated the farthest and are the most recent comers, influence far into the Sudan is manifest.
The other exposure was toward the east, and here, as might be expected, Indian influences, chiefly sea-borne through Arab restlessness, have been potent.
Eastern Africa has hump-backed cattle, cotton, the pit-loom, perhaps the fowl, from this source.
In these lights, much of African culture which cannot yet be definitely traced to an [500] extra-African source and which until recently was generally assumed to be of purely native origin, may prove to be due to transmission from Asia or Europe.
The powerful kingdoms repeatedly established by successful leaders among both Sudan and Bantu Negroes, kingdoms embracing diverse tribes and sometimes continuing under the same dynasty for several centuries, may be due to Egyptian or Mohammedan example.
The same can be said for the prevalence of slavery, which is both more widespread and more important economically in Africa than in any other large region of similarly retarded cultural level.
Possibly the frequency of polygyny belongs in the same category.
It is true that Negro economic life is generally so organized that wives represent investment and create wealth.
This fact might be the result of the influence of old economic tendencies upon introduced polygyny.
Or the form of marriage might be the outcome of the economic scheme of life characteristic of Africa.
Yet even in the latter case an indirect foreign causation can be suspected, since primitive peoples, at any rate those unquestionably beyond the influences of the Eur-Asian civilizations, like the Australians and Americans, generally do not place heavy social stress on wealth.
The African point of view as regards economic success, with the African attitude toward marriage as a consequence, may therefore be partly due to extra-African stimulus and example.
Such stimulus seems more easily demonstrable for the proverbs and riddles which abound in Africa, since proverbs were completely and riddles almost wholly wanting in the western hemisphere, and are therefore not the native and spontaneous outflow of the human mind which our own familiarity with them might tempt us to take for granted (§ 90).
The totemic and exogamic institutions of Negro Africa (§ 110) are difficult to understand.
Their distribution, both in totality and as regards their several forms, is patchy.
Clans sometimes coexist with castes or occupational classes, sometimes tend to coincide with them.
The reason would seem to be that the Australian and American cultures developed in isolation and from within, undisturbed; whereas Africa has long been subjected to a cultural bombardment which constantly mingled new traits with old, foreign with acclimated, and acclimated with indigenous.
The native cultures were therefore unable to follow the relatively smooth sequence of development by area or stage which occurred in Australia and America; the injected ferments caused a cultural bubbling in which elements dissociated, combined, intensified, or disappeared according to intricate circumstances.
It is possible that other phases of African culture owe their appearance of randomness under classification to the same set of causes.
Culturally they also stand apart as an exceptionally primitive people, lacking the agriculture, cattle and fowls, and iron working of the Negroes.
They are expert hunters, stalking or wearing down game until it is within range of their poisoned bone or stone pointed arrows, while the women pry up roots with stone weighted digging sticks.
They live under rock shelters or on the leeward side of rude windbreaks.
It is as if the peripherally situated Bushmen had retained up to the present, and with few additions, the culture that [502] prevailed in Europe ten thousand years ago.
The Hottentots, who are neighbors of the Bushmen and approach them in physical type, appearing to be a mixture of Bushman and other blood, are culturally less retarded, having cattle and iron.
They live among Negro tribes, acknowledge their kings, trade forest and hunting products for the agricultural yield and manufactures of the Negroes, and speak dialects of the latter’s languages.
They thus constitute a racially accentuated caste or economic class within Bantu culture; and although shy and backward, cannot be said to preserve a relatively pure early culture as do the Bushmen.
This is marked by a number of traits which within Africa are approximately confined to it.
These traits include the cultivation of the banana but general absence of millet and cattle; gabled houses of thatch, other Africans building domed or conical structures or mud dwellings; clothing of palm fiber or bark; straight self-bows with pointed ends and encircling ridges for the attachment of the looped cord of rattan; shields of wood or cane, in place of which other Africans employ leather bucklers, shields of hide, or parrying sticks; face masks for religious purposes; carvings of the human form; slit wooden drums; xylophones; and a number of other traits.
Two interpretations can be suggested for this consistent and geographically limited association of traits.
As the latter is also Negroid territory, [503] an ancient connection is conceivable.
This would obviously have to be old enough to precede the Egyptian, west Asiatic, and Indian-East African culture developments.
This explanation fits well with the principle that, other things equal, superposed culture strata appear centrally, underlying ones survive marginally.
Proof, however, must depend on whether the parallel traits are really specifically similar, whether they constitute a reasonably large proportion of the culture of the two areas, and whether they are lacking in the intervening region.
This evidence is naturally difficult to assemble.
The other interpretation is less incisive.
It looks upon the resemblances as at least partly conditioned by environment; and would tend to explain the remainder as due to a diffusion, early indeed, but gradual and applying to single elements or small clusters of traits rather than to an association of traits large enough to form a culture and moving as a single block.
In this connection it is significant that the Oceanic area is one of tropical forest, and the West African area the only large forested tract in its continent.
And the carving of wood, while not due to the forest, was at least made possible by it.
In short, diffusion may have been the motive power involved, but like environmental conditions in the two areas caught and helped to preserve such elements as were diffused—stabilized the culture once it was adapted to the soil and rendered it more resistive to importations of traits worked out in different climates.
This interpretation at any rate makes smaller assumptions than its competitor, and serves as an illustration of the need of environmental conditions being kept in mind in the explanation of culture, even though the essential explanation be in social or cultural terms.
But culture must be carried by races of some sort; and it may be of interest to consider whether the sweep of culture history reveals certain races as the most favorable carriers or as inherently constituted to be producers and dispensers of civilization (§ 44-46).
On the whole, the greatest share of culture production has fallen to Caucasians.
The part of the Mongoloids must not be underestimated.
Even if the foundation of Chinese civilization prove to be largely western, its main structure is native, and the alien elements that flowed in during the last three thousand years have been thoroughly adapted to this structure.
The fact that derivative civilizations like the Japanese have succeeded in reaching a high degree of organization and refinement argues still further for the vigor of Chinese culture.
Then, the East Indians, another Mongoloid branch, have shown a fair power of assimilation.
In the past two thousand years they may be said to have accepted and digested at least as much of Hindu and Mohammedan civilization as the North Europeans took over from Mediterranean sources between 1500 B.C.
The share of the Negroids in the higher advances has been small.
Africa, to be sure, lies off to one side from the great Eur-Asian axis, and like southern India and Arabia has suffered from constituting almost a blind alley.
East Africa lies open to Egypt which six and five and four thousand years ago represented the apex of civilization.
It is hard to believe that this difference is due wholly to desert and jungle and tropical heat.
There is a parallel in the Oceanic Negroes.
The Australians may be disregarded in this connection, both on account of the isolation of their continent and the doubt whether they are to be reckoned as a branch of the Negroid stem.
It may be only geographic accident that writing and iron and kingship and Hindu and Arab religion traversed the Oceanian islands as far as the brown Mongoloids inhabited them, but stopped dead at the threshold of the blacks.
It is of course not fair to argue from cultural accomplishment to racial faculty unless all times and parts of the world are considered equally, and not safe to interpret the evidence too rigorously then.
But the consistent failure of the Negro race to accept the whole or even the main substance of the fairly near-by Mediterranean civilization, or to work out any notable sub-centers of cultural productivity, would appear to be one of the strongest of the arguments that can be advanced for an inferiority of cultural potentiality on their part.
Yet the weakness of correlation of race faculty and civilization, except in the most general way, can be driven home to North Europeans and North Americans as soon as the relative parts played in culture history by the several Caucasian divisions are examined.
On the ground of long continued lead in productivity, of having reared the largest portion of the structure of existing civilization, the Mediterranean branch of the Caucasian race would have to be awarded the palm over all others.
With the Hindus added as probably nearly related, the dark whites have a clear lead.
This may have included the Sumerians, if they were not Mediterranean; comprised the Hittites; and contributed important strains to the other peoples of Western Asia and Greece and Italy.
By comparison, the Nordic branch looms insignificant.
Up to a thousand years ago the Nordic peoples had indeed contributed ferment and unsettling, but scarcely a single new culture element, certainly not a new element of importance and permanence.
For centuries after that, the center of European civilization remained in Mediterranean Italy or Alpine France.
It is only after 1500 A.D. that any claim for a shift of this center to the Nordic populations could be alleged.
In fact, most of the national and cultural supremacy of the Nordic peoples, so far as it is real, falls within the last two hundred years.
Against this, the Mediterraneans and Alpines have a record of leading in civilizational creativeness for at least six thousand years.
It is clear therefore that any fears of the arrest and decay of human progress if a particular race should lose in fertility or become absorbed in others, are unfounded.
Such alarms may be attributed to egocentric imagination.
They resemble the regrets of an individual at the loss which the world will suffer when he dies; what he really fears is his own death.
To contribute to this larger tolerance and balance of mind is one of the functions of anthropology.
[2] The place or “station” Grimaldi must not be confused with the Grimaldi race mentioned below.
The Grimaldi race is therefore really not the most representative one of the locality Grimaldi; but as it has not yet been discovered elsewhere, there seems no choice but to call it by that name.
It would result in both more accuracy and a better balancing of the limits if the three types of head form were set, as has been suggested, at 81 and 77 in place of 80 and 75.—The index of the skull (strictly, the cranial index) is two units less than that taken on the living head.
[6] The distribution of the races is described as it existed before the era of exploration and colonization that began toward the end of the fifteenth century.
Although for practical purposes they have been submerged by Caucasians in the greater part of the Americas, Australia, and South Africa, it is the native races whose distribution is referred to.
[7] Noun incorporation is really an etymological process rather than a grammatical one.
This construction, which is perfectly natural and logical, happens to be so alien to the genius of the Indo-European languages that it has been singled out as far more notable and significant than it deserves.
Pronominal incorporation is discussed below (§ 60).
The implements are referred in part to the Pliocene, that is, late Tertiary, and are said to be accompanied by hearths.
The evidence to be adjudicated is technical, and some years will probably elapse before expert opinion settles into tolerable agreement on the authenticity of the objects as artifacts and their age.
[10] It will be noted that the second of these tables is an amplification of the upper part of the first.
[13] Of course this does not mean that the tribes beyond the edge are without culture.
They would normally be under influences from other centers.
And in a certain degree every people possesses initiative and is constantly tending to invent or produce culture, though perhaps only of a simple order.
[14] It has not been.
[15] Grammarians generally recognize a greater number because they follow the example of ancient grammarians and are interested in the history or theory of language.
[18] This section will not be found confusing if it is read with the following points clearly in mind.
A tribe corresponds in savage or barbarous life to the state or nation among ourselves.
[19] Three out of four, to be exact; but two eastern areas, which are almost in contact and perhaps rather closely connected in history, are for convenience treated here as if they were one.
Nor would it prevent each separate continental development from undergoing its own history of diffusion, as represented in § 185.
[21] It seems quite doubtful whether any American people held seven as a mystic number in pre-Columbian times.
The case most frequently cited is that of the Zuñi.
Moreover, the number which the Plains tribes most frequently used in regard to sacred matters was four.
The mystic value of seven may therefore be traceable to European influence wherever it appears in America.
[22] Except perhaps for the fragments of the Baal Lebanon bowl.
[25] Maize is the name of the plant in England, continental Europe, and Latin America.
In the United States “corn,” short for Indian corn, is in current usage; but this word means grain or cereal in general.
[26] The contrary has been alleged.
To dispose of the allegations seriatim would involve the minute examination of much evidence.
A segregation of society into groups based primarily on blood kinship, co-residence, town quarters, occupation, social rank, or subordination to a chieftain is not a clan organization.
Nor is the unilateral reckoning of descent a sufficient criterion.
Our modern family names descend patrilineally without any historical connection between them and a clan organization.
In general, statements as to the existence of clan systems in Middle America, at least among the advanced nations of Mexico and Peru, rest either on a loose use of terms; on the assumption that they must have existed at the time of discovery; or on a forward projection into the historic period of the belief that they had once existed.
This belief is accepted here without such projection.
[27] Why the Southwest with its solid towns of a thousand and more inhabitants, its generally greater advancement, and proximity to Mexico, should never have progressed to larger political units, is not wholly clear.
The reason may be that the Pueblo was a heavily ritualized culture, whose emphasis was on the priest, not the governor or councilor.
They were also disinclined to fight.
Southeastern religion was quite simple in comparison, an important priesthood lacking, and the warlike spirit rather strong.
Yet even it differs from the living room of the same region chiefly in use.
Structurally it may be somewhat larger, or circular instead of rectangular, but does not depart widely from the dwellings.
Functionally it is a development of the primitive “men’s house,” not a temple.
See § 106.
[31] The years in this reckoning were somewhat short: 360 days.
Nevertheless, the unorthodox terminology has the merit of condensing detail with a broad sweep.
[35] In France, four or five periods are distinguished: 2500-1900; 1900-1600; 1600-1300; 1300-900 B.C.
The first of these is a time of copper rather than bronze, with northern France still Neolithic.
If five periods are admitted, an era around 1300 B.C.
This bronze culture shows definite resemblances on the one hand to that of the Danubian area—and, it may be added, of the Caucasus; on the other, to the ancient bronzes of China.
[37] In India, “Hindu” means any native who adheres to the higher cults of native origin which collectively constitute the “religion” known as Hinduism; in effect, the non-savage and non-Mohammedan inhabitants.
Hindus and Mohammedans are contrasted in local usage.
In this book, Hindu is synonymous with Indian, irrespective of religion.
[38] The Malays proper, whose home until the twelfth or thirteenth century lay in Sumatra, are to be distinguished as a particular people from the Malaysian or East Indian group which we name after them, in the same way that the Mongols are a nation which is but one of many that constitute the Mongolian race and Mongoloid stock.
A similar situation exists in Madagascar, which in race is predominantly Negroid, but whose speech is purely and whose culture largely Malaysian.
[40] The population attained only to a minority fraction of a million, perhaps not over 150,000 all told.
[41] It may be corroborative of this interpretation that totemism and exogamy are more irregularly distributed, and therefore more difficult to reconstruct as to their history, in South than in North America.
The Tropical Forest area, in which these institutions occur in South America, has long been exposed to the influence of the higher civilization of the Andean region, much as Africa has been exposed to Europe and Asia.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!)
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement.
If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession.
“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.
It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.
There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.
There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.
Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States.
If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed.
Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work.
You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.
The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work.
Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change.
If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges.
Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that: • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.
The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.
Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns.
Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.” • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark.
Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from.
If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund.
If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.
If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come.
In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.
Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.
To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States.
U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses.
Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone.
In some of their faces, indeed, I detected no expression whatever, but on none could I perceive the slightest gleam of satisfaction with their lot.
No wonder: few men are of the stuff that makes a good recluse.
Put him by himself, he pines for lack of mental aliment, just as a flower fades for want of [Pg 8] daylight in the dark.
A multitude of fools forms an inspiriting spectacle, a solitary specimen becomes a sad and solemn warning.
No shave, no wash, no morning greeting, and no evening wine.
How many, I wonder, preserved their sanity in the ordeal?
How many, returning dazed and bewildered to the haunts of men, tottered about in helpless, wandering, maundering imbecility?
Were there not some hard, boisterous natures who plunged wildly into the excesses of a world so long forsworn, with all the appetite of abstinence, all the reckless self-abandonment of the paid-off man-of-war’s man on a spree?
No; few people are qualified for recluses.
I am proud to be amongst the [Pg 9] number.
I live in a desert, but my desert is in the very heart of London.
The waste is all round me though; I have taken good care of that.
Do not you as I did.
A man who sells [Pg 10] chickweed, perhaps I should say, who would sell chickweed if he could, is the only passenger.
Of the houses on each side of me, one is unfinished, the other untenanted.
Towards dusk in the late autumn, when the weather is breaking, I must admit the situation is little calculated to generate over-exuberance of animal spirits.
Sequestered, no doubt, shady too, particularly in the short days, and as remote from the noise or traffic of the town as John o’ Groat’s house, but enlivening—No.
On first beginning to reside here, I confess I felt at times a little lonely and depressed.
And who is “Bones”?
Contemplative, affable, easily pleased, and an admirable listener, he is yet on some points reserved to a degree that might almost be termed morose; while in his personal appearance there is a dignity of [Pg 11] bearing, an imposing presence, which forbids the most intimate associate to attempt a liberty.
Neither of us are great talkers quite so early in the evening.
As I look at him now leaning back in a graceful attitude, with one thigh-bone thrown carelessly over the other, he reminds me of so many people I knew when I lived in the world, that I seem to fancy myself once more a denizen of that revolving purgatory which goes by the name of [Pg 12] general society.
Poor A—— was almost as fleshless, B—— much more taciturn, and C —— decidedly not so good-looking.
“Bones,” however, possesses a quality that I have never found in any other companion.
His tact is beyond praise.
Under no circumstances does he become a bore—that is why we get on so admirably together.
Like a ghost, he speaks only when spoken to.
If he didn’t rattle so on the slightest movement—a fault of anatomy, indeed, rather than temper—as a companion he would be—perfection.
It is a dull, close evening.
Were it not so near winter one might predict a thunderstorm.
The smoke from my meerschaum winds upwards in thin blue wreaths, uninfluenced by a breath of outward air, though the windows are open to the deserted street, black and silent as the grave.
I see a youth bold, healthful, courageous, full of an impossible chivalry, a romantic generosity that delights to lavish no matter what—money, love, hope, happiness, coining heart and intellect into gold that he may squander it on the passers-by.
I see a strong man crushed—a proud head grovelling in the dust, a high spirit broken, a cowering wretch imploring that his punishment may be lightened ever such a little, trembling and wincing like a slave beneath the scourge.
Are the recurring centuries but so many ciphers added to the sum of a thriftless, objectless expenditure?
The subject is by no means limited.
I have some experience in it of my own.
Why is the whole world still at sixes and sevens?
What is the object of it all?
Is there the slightest appearance of a result?
Any tendency towards a goal?
Shall we ever get anywhere, or are we travelling perpetually in a circle, like squirrels in a cage, convicted pickpockets on the treadmill?
By the way, who convicted the pickpockets, and sentenced them?
The sitting magistrate, of course; and do the awards of that worthy functionary produce any definite result in the [Pg 16] direction of good order and morality, or must his daily incubation, too, be wasted upon addled eggs?
Do you remember the story of the man who cut his throat because he was so tired of dressing and undressing every day?
Don’t shake your head—I beg pardon, your skull—you told it me yourself.
I can appreciate his prejudices, but how did he know there might not be buttons and buttonholes where he was going?
That is, supposing he went anywhere—if he didn’t, he was wasted altogether.
If he did, perhaps he was of no use when he got there.
Wasted again—only a human life after all.
Not much when you think of it amongst the millions that cling about this old globe of ours, rising, swarming, disappearing like the maggots on a dead horse, but of no light importance to the bearer when you remember its weight of sorrows, anxieties, disappointments, and responsibilities, not to mention the Black Care sitting heavily at the top to keep the whole [Pg 17] burden in its place.
Life is a bubble, they say.
—Wasted, too, unless the fish eat him, and then who knows?
None of us perhaps may ever eat the fish.
I won’t make your flesh creep, for unanswerable reasons.
I don’t even think I shall freeze the marrow in your bones.
I could tell you some strange stories, but I dare say your own experiences are more remarkable than mine.
I will only ask you to reflect on the amount of suffering that came under our daily notice when we lived in the world, and say whether every pang of mind or body, every tear shed or swallowed down, [Pg 18] every groan indulged or repressed, were anything but sheer waste?
Can you not recall a hundred instances of strength sapped by drink, of intellect warped by madness, of beauty fading under neglect, or withered by disappointment?
Does she know she may live to see that smooth, soft, wondering brow scored deep with sorrow, or lowering black with sin—that round rosy cheek hollowed by depravity, or bloated with excess?
Worst of all, the merry, guileless heart embittered by falsehood, and hardened with ill-usage till it has ceased to feel for others, even for itself!
What is the use of them?
If you come to that, what was the use of the Emperor Theodore, or the King of the Cannibal Islands, or any other potentate who remains utterly unimpressed when we threaten ‘to break off diplomatic relations’?
Again, what is the use of them?
“One moment,” said he, with his courteous grin.
A man may roll in wealth and be none the worse for it.
No; the real enemy with whom every man has to contend confronts him in the morning at his glass, and sticks persistently to him throughout the day.
To eat is the first [Pg 24] necessity of man.
Grant this, as you cannot but concede the position to be unassailable, and you talk to me in vain of sentiment, philanthropy, benevolence, all the loathsome affectations of sympathy with which the earth-worm tries to impose upon its kind.
A man begins by being honest.
Because without honesty, down the particular groove in which he spins, he cannot earn his daily bread.
When he has enough of this and to spare, he turns his attention to decent apparel, a commodious house, a general appearance of respectability; that is, he aims at being respectable—in other words, at imposing on those who have been less successful in the universal scramble than himself.
Soon he buys a warming-pan, a Dutch oven, china ornaments for his chimney-piece, and the History of the Prodigal to hang about his walls.
By degrees, as wealth increases, he moves into a larger residence, he rolls upon wheels, he replaces the china ornaments with a French clock; the Prodigal Son with modern oil-paintings, and [Pg 25] hides the warming-pan in the housemaid’s closet up-stairs.
About this period he begins to subscribe to charitable institutions, to give away what he does not want, to throw little pellets of bread at the monster who is always famished and always roaring out of doors, lest it should come in, and snatch the roast beef off his table.
Some day a team of black horses with nodding plumes, and a red-nosed driver, come to take him away, ‘very much respected,’ and, forgive the personality, there is an end of him, as far as we are concerned.
Why his very virtues, as he called them, were but payments, so to speak, keeping up the insurance for his own benefit, which he persuaded himself he had effected on the other world.
The food he ate, the clothes he wore, the house he lived in— were not these simply wasted?
His efforts were waste, his wear-and-tear of body and mind were waste, above all, his sorrows and his sufferings were sheer, unpardonable waste.
Yes; here I take my stand.
I leave you every enjoyment to be found in creation, physical, moral, and intellectual.
I make you a present of the elephant wallowing in his mud-bath, and the midge wheeling in the sun; I give you Juliet at her window, and Archimedes in his study; but I reserve the whale in her death-flurry, and the worm on its hook.
I appeal to Jephthah sorrowing for his darling, and Rachel weeping for her [Pg 27] children.
He affects a trick of holding his fleshless finger and thumb pressed together and suspended in air, before he delivers himself of an opinion, that can only have originated in a practice he has since been compelled, for obvious reasons, to forego.
False premises, and a false conclusion.
I deny them all; but the weather, even in my light attire, feels somewhat too close for wordy warfare.
[Pg 28] Besides, I hold with you, that an ounce of illustration is worth a pound of argument.
I will ask you, therefore, as I know you have been in Cheshire, High Leicestershire, and other cattle-feeding countries, whether you ever watched a dairymaid making a cheese?
If so, you must have observed how strong and pitiless a pressure is required to wring the moisture out of its very core.
My friend, the human heart is like a cheese!
One, having everything the world can bestow, is nevertheless further endowed with that which his needy brother would give all the rest of the world to possess.
For the first, the pressure has not yet been put on, though his time, too, may come by-and-by.
For the second, that one darling hope, it may be, represents the [Pg 29] little black drop left, and so it must be wrung out, though the heart be crushed into agony in the process.
You talk of suffering being pure waste; I tell you it is all pure gain.
You talk of self as the motive to exertion; I tell you it is the abnegation of self which has wrought out all that is noble, all that is good, all that is useful, nearly all that is ornamental in the world.
Shut the house-door on him, and the man must needs go forth to work in the fields.
It is not the dreamer wrapped in his fancied bliss, from whom you are to expect heroic efforts, either of mind or body.
You must dig your goad into the ox to make him use his latent strength; you must drive your spurs into the horse to get out of him his utmost speed.
Wake the dreamer roughly—drive spurs and goad into his heart.
He will wince and writhe, and roll and gnash his teeth, but I defy him to lie still.
He must up and be doing, from sheer torture, flying to one remedy after another till he gets to [Pg 30] work, and so finds distraction, solace, presently comfort, and, after a while, looking yet higher, hope, happiness, and reward.
Let him weep his heart out if he will!
I tell you that the deeper the furrows are scored, the heavier shall be the harvest, the richer the garnered grain.
I won’t discuss the question any further.
I’ll go back into my cupboard, if you please.
Now, in my opinion, to take your skeleton out and air him on occasion, is very good for both of you.
It brings him to his proper dimensions, which are apt to become gigantic if he is hidden too scrupulously in the dark, and it affords opportunities for comparison with other specimens of the same [Pg 33] nature entertained by rival proprietors in the line.
If I kept mine, as some do, in close confinement, I should be in a continual fidget about his safety; above all, I should dread his breaking out at untoward seasons, when he was least expected, and least desired.
But “Bones and I” have no cause to be ashamed of each other.
There is no disgrace nor discomfort attached to either of us in our cheerful companionship.
It was colder last night.
So we made fast the shutters, stirred the fire, and drew our chairs in for a comfortable chat.
Something in the sound of that waking blusterer out of doors recalled to me, I know not why, the image of a good ship, many long years ago, beating on the wide Atlantic against a head-wind, that seemed to baffle her the more for every plunge she made.
Again I seemed to watch the dark wave race by our quarter, with its leaping crest of foam, the trickling deck, the battened hold, the diving bowsprit, the dripping spars, the soaking canvas, with its row of [Pg 35] reef-points like the notes on a music-score.
Makes her drive piles, as we say, and speak Spanish about the bows; but she behaves beautifully!
Bless you, she likes it!
Yes, I expect we shall have it hotter and heavier too, after sundown.
A head-wind, no doubt.
I’ve just been jotting off the reckoning; you’ll find the chart below, in my cabin.
We’ve made a longer leg than common on the starboard tack.
I’ve left a pencil-mark at the exact spot where we went about.
The scene thus conjured up awoke its corresponding fancies.
Unless indeed it refers to immorality, the downward career of which beats the rolling stone of Sisyphus in a canter.
But on all other journeys through life, it seems to me that not only the first steps, but the first leagues, are intensely laborious and unsatisfactory.
All crowns, I grant you, like those of the Isthmian Games, are mere parsley at best; but in [Pg 37] these days no competitor ever wins that worthless head-dress till he is so bald that common decency demands a covering.
Where are the heaven-born statesmen now, to rule the destinies of continents at twenty-six?
Where, in short, will you point me out a single instance of any individual attaining fame until his zest for it has passed away— winning his pedestal till his poor legs are too tired to stand straight thereon—making his fortune till he is too old to enjoy it; or, indeed, getting anything he wants when he wants it?
Lazarus has no dinner—Dives has no appetite—Struggler, who thinks he has both, is sure to be kept waiting that extra half-hour, which sickens him, and finds he can’t eat his soup when it comes!
And how confidently we start in the glorious ignorance of youth, heads erect, backs straightened, footsteps [Pg 38] springing like a deer, with an utter disregard of warning, a sovereign contempt for advice.
Like myself, I doubt not you have scaled many a hill, even when you carried more flesh than you do now.
Don’t you remember, in the clear, pure mountain air, how near the top looked from the valley down below?
A few more strides— hurrah!
Not yet discouraged, only a little startled and annoyed; till another and another have been gained, and so surprise becomes disappointment, vexation, misgiving, discomfiture, and lastly, but to the strongest natures, despair!
Even with these, when the real summit has been at length [Pg 39] attained, all their long-looked-for enjoyment resolves itself into the negative satisfaction of rest; and for one who thus arrives exhausted at his destination, think how many a footsore, quivering, way-wearied wanderer must lie out all night shelterless, on the barren, wind-swept hill.
I have heard good judges affirm that even at Newmarket they are apt to overtrain their horses.
You would have no ‘small end to the horn,’ as my friends over the water say; and what sort of music do you think you could blow out of it?
You would be always going down-hill, instead of up.
And think where your journey would end at last!
You object to the mill, you say, and yet it is that same process of grinding which converts the grain into flour fit for bread.
You have alluded to statesmen, commanders, and poets, who, in seven-leagued boots, as it were, reached the top of the hill at one stride.
Nelson’s chivalrous and romantic disposition preserved him from the overweening vanity and self-esteem that might have been looked for as the result of such brilliant achievements at so early an age.
His mad, absorbing passion, too, may have scored many a furrow in the hero’s heart, while his young brow remained smooth and fair as marble.
He who has been long climbing the ladder finds that when he looks over the parapet all sense of elevation and consequent giddiness is gone.
Whatever others may think, to his own perceptions he is on a level with the rest of his kind—can judge of them, and for them, from the same point of view; and, more important still, experiences no misgivings that he may topple down and break his neck.
But when he has reached the fancied resting-place so [Pg 43] ardently desired, what does he find?
A keener air, a scantier foothold, a sentry-box instead of a feather-bed, a stern necessity for further exertion, where he expected indulgence and enjoyment and repose.
This last you may buy at your will for a handful of silver, or, at most, a talent of gold; and there are few, alas!
Which would [Pg 45] you rather wear, the bronze Victoria Cross, or the Star and Ribbon of the Garter?
Depend upon it, that to the young champion of the games, flushed, exulting, treading upon air, that vegetable coronal represented everything most desirable and precious in earth or heaven.
From many a long summer’s day of toil and abstinence, from panting lungs and aching muscles, from brows covered with sweat, and feet with dust, he has wrested the endurance of the camel, the strength of the ox, and the footfall of the deer.
What mole working underground is so blind as humanity to its own good?
Why, that same grinding to powder is the only means by which the daintiest flour can be obtained.
The finest nature, like the truest steel, must be tempered in the hottest furnace; so much caloric would be thrown away on an inferior metal.
Capacity for suffering infers also capacity for achievement; and who would grudge the pain about his brows, when it reminded him he was wearing an imperial crown?
With some it goes on through a [Pg 47] lifetime; others get the worst of it over in a few years.
It is just as much a necessity of humanity as hunger or thirst, or sorrow or decay.
There is no escape.
I can understand his feelings perfectly.
Does it not happen to most of us, at least once in a lifetime, thus to be “exceeding glad of the Gourd,” and in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred with the same result?
You have been in a hot climate?
Do you not remember the delight of getting out of your tent, or “booth” as we still call them at our village merry-makings, to sit under anything like a tree or shrub, where, shaded from the sun, you could catch the welcome breath of every [Pg 49] breeze that blew?
The French officers in the Crimea used to build for themselves trellised out-houses of branches interlaced, swearing volubly the while, and appearing to derive from these bowers no small comfort and refreshment.
There were hundreds of them [Pg 50] shot to gigantic dimensions and exploded with the South Sea bubble of the last century.
Thousands owed their birth and disappearance to the railway fever of five-and-twenty years ago.
Not a few were called into existence by a blockade of the Southern ports, during the late war of opinion in the United States, and destroyed by its suspension at the peace.
It seems to be a law in the moral as in the physical world that the endurance of things must be in proportion to the length of time required to bring them to maturity.
The same in the animal creation.
Like Minerva from the brain of Jove, the butterfly [Pg 51] springs into its sunny existence, winged, armed, and clothed in gorgeous apparel, all at once; but when the night-breeze shakes the perfume from your garden-flowers, and the evening bank of clouds is coming up from the west, you look for that ephemeral masterpiece in vain.
Forbid it, Atropos!
Think of the old fogies, now sufficiently numerous, who would overflow the clubs!
Think, when it came to our own turn, of the numbers of Gourds we should have raised, outlived, buried, but, alas!
What do you know about the [Pg 53] duration of life, the ceaseless wear-and-tear, the gradual decay, the last flickers of the candle, leaping up, time after time, with delusive strength, until it goes out once for all?
You can tell where Noah was, but do you know where the candle went to when it left the great sea-captain in the dark?
In the meantime stick to your text.
The morbid spirit possesses you, and well I know it will only come out of the man with much talking.
Tell us something more about the Gourd, and the worm that smote it.
It was only one of your ghastly jests, was it?
I am satisfied.
There can be no bone of contention—I mean no subject of dispute—between you and me —we have not the ghost of a reason—I mean the shadow of a cause—for disagreement.
I confess my weakness: I own to a fatal tendency to digression.
But I refrain—I return to my Gourd—I am back in Nineveh with the prophet once more.
Lavish profusion—marble, and bronze, and gold—gleams and dazzles and flashes in the streets.
Who is there that has not bowed his head in misery, and wondered whether [Pg 57] he could be so wretched anywhere else as here, in the mocking sunlight, with his Gourd withered before his face?
It is gone—gone.
There is the very spot on which it stood but yesterday, so green, so fresh, so full of life, so rich in promise!
And to-day—a blank!
It seems impossible!
Few of us can boast more courage than Jonah when the Gourd is fairly withered away.
The children’s rocking-horse, the wife’s pianoforte, all the well-known trifles of daily use and ornament, must be cast into the chasm, as the Romans threw their effects into that awkward rent in the Forum.
His friends are astonished, and bless themselves.
His relations had predicted the catastrophe long ago.
Whose dancing eyes never met your own but with the merry, saucy, confiding glances that seldom outlast a fifth birthday, and to whom you could no more have said an unkind word than you could cut off your right hand.
Yesterday it was chasing butterflies across the lawn, and you carried it yourself with laughing triumph, rosy, happy, and hungry, in to tea.
But the worm had begun its work, even then.
This morning you missed the glad little voice at breakfast, and, looking at the jam on the table, a sad misgiving, stifled as soon as born, shot through you like a knife.
There rose a mist to dim your own when the patient little voice asked gently, ‘Is that papa?’—and noticing two or three neglected playthings on the counterpane, you walked [Pg 60] to the window and wept.
But, so far as I can see, either wise men do not fall in [Pg 61] love, or they allow wisdom to slip out of their grasp in the very act of making that fatal stumble.
There is sure to be an insect that stings, or a sunbeam that dazzles, or a cold wind in the nape of your neck.
Nevertheless, the vegetable, so long as it exists, is not only the delight of your heart, but the very sustenance of your brain.
That is the fatal part of the disease.
Your Gourd connects itself with everything you think, or do, or say, spreading her roots, as it were, over every foot of land you possess, shutting out earth’s horizon with her [Pg 62] slender stem, and, worse than all, poking her dainty head between you and heaven.
There is no more freshness in the meadows, no more promise in the smile of spring.
Summer’s vivid glow has faded, and the russet of autumn is no longer edged with gold.
Hope’s rosy hues have ceased to tinge the morning, and the glory has departed from noonday.
That stimulant will do more to heal your wound over than any other remedy I can think of, except the planting of a fresh seedling to await another failure; but God help you [Pg 63] if yours is a nature less susceptible of wrath than of sorrow!
Where your Gourd grew, nothing green will ever spring up again!
What say you, Bones?
You and I can surely afford to look at these things from a comprehensive, philosophical, and indulgent point of view.
No more Gourds are likely to grow for either of us; and although your style of figure is, perhaps, less entitled to defy the worm than mine, yet I think you have but little to fear from the kind which caused such an outbreak of temper in the disgusted prophet.
The whole story [Pg 64] of the Gourd, I need not point out to you, is a lesson.
It was intended as a lesson for Jonah, it is intended as a lesson for ourselves.
Forgive me for observing that you seem to have entirely lost the point of it, and, as usual in our discussions, you have sacrificed argument to declamation.
“And that?” he asked, with the courtesy which distinguishes his manner under all circumstances.
“Is the borer-worm!” I replied, brutally enough; and I am afraid he was a little hurt, for he rose at once and went into his cupboard, while I walked off moodily to bed.
How strangely things come back to one!
I fancied myself once more on the yellow wave of the broad Danube; once more threading those interminable green hills that fringe its banks; once more wondering whether the forest of Belgrade had been vouchsafed to Eastern Europe as a type of Infinity, while its massive fortress, with frowning rampart and lethargic Turkish sentries, was intended to represent the combination of courage and sloth, of recklessness and imperturbability, of apparent [Pg 66] strength and real inefficiency, which distinguishes most arrangements of the Ottoman Empire.
It lets the ship steer herself; and she makes, I believe, as bad weather of it as might be expected under such seamanship.
Of those tall, handsome men, with the scowl never off their brows, their hands never straying far from the bellyful of weapons they carried in their shawls.
Of those swarthy wild-eyed women, with their shrill, rapid voices, their graceful, impatient gestures, carrying each of them the available capital of herself and family strung in coins about her raven hair, while on every tenth face at least, of both sexes, could not fail to be observed the wan traces of that wasting disease which seems to sap strength and vitality, gradually, and almost surely, as consumption itself.
Yes, I think for every score of peasants I could have counted two of these ‘fever-faces,’ as the people themselves call their ague-ridden companions, though I ascertained after a while, when I came to know them better, that they attributed this decimation of their numbers, and faded appearance of the victims, rather to supernatural visitation than epidemic disease.
They believe that in certain cases, where life has been unusually irregular, or the rites of [Pg 68] religion reprehensibly neglected, the soul returns after death to its original tenement, and the corpse becomes revivified under certain ghastly conditions of a periodical return to the tomb and a continual warfare against its kind.
So the Vampire, as this weird being is called, must steal from its grave in the dead of night, to sit by some familiar bedside till the sleeper shall be steeped in the unconsciousness of complete repose, and then puncturing a minute orifice in the throat, will suck its fill till driven back to its resting-place by the crimson streaks of day.
Night after night the visits must be [Pg 69] repeated; and so, week by week, the victim pines and droops and withers gradually away.
There is no apparent illness, no ostensible injury, but the frame dwindles, the muscles fall, the limbs fail, the cheek fades, and the death-look, never to be mistaken, comes into the great haggard, hollow, wistful eyes.
You would like to know something more?
Well, it compromises nobody.
You will not quote me, of course.
I don’t mind telling you the story of a life, such as I knew it; a life that by some fatality seemed to drag down every other that came within the [Pg 71] sphere of its attractions to sorrow, humiliation, and disgrace.
I have no brain to swim, no pulses to leap, no heart to ache left, and yet the memory stirs me painfully even now.
Whether I should do so if I had my time to come again, is a different question, but we will let that pass.
Being then young, tolerably good-looking, sufficiently conceited, and exceedingly well-dressed, I had betaken myself one evening to your Italian Opera, the best, and I may add the dearest, in Europe.
Ere I had inspected a quarter of it, my glasses were up, and I will tell you what they showed me—the most perfect face I ever saw.
Straight nose, thin and delicately cut, large black eyes, regular eyebrows, faultless chin, terminating a complete oval, the whole set in a frame of jet-black hair.
I saw that the lady by her side was a foreigner with whom I had long been acquainted; so edging my way into the passages, in two minutes I was [Pg 73] tapping at their box-door like a man who felt pretty sure of being let in.
We were four in the box.
Another gentleman was placed close behind the lady who first attracted my attention.
I had only eyes just then, however, for the wild, unearthly beauty of my new acquaintance.
My sensations were so strangely compounded of admiration, horror, interest, curiosity, attraction, and dislike.
The eyes were deep and dark, yet with the glitter in them of a hawk’s, the cheek deadly pale, the lips bright red.
She was different from anything I had ever seen, and yet so wonderfully beautiful!
I longed to hear her speak.
Presently she whispered a few words to the man behind her, and [Pg 74] I felt my flesh creep.
Her gestures, too, were in accordance with the sad, suggestive music of her voice—quiet, graceful, and somewhat listless in the repose, as it seemed, rather of unhappiness than of indolence.
I tell you I was not susceptible; I don’t think boys generally are.
If ever I saw a calf led to the slaughter it was Count V——, a calf, too, whose throat few women could have cut without compunction.
What made me think of a stag I once found lying dead in a Styrian pass, and a golden eagle feasting on him with her talons buried in his heart?
‘At present she is a Madame de St. Croix, an Englishwoman, nevertheless, and a widow, but not likely to remain so long.’ And with a mischievous laugh she gave me her hand as I left the box, bowing to Madame de St. Croix and also to the Hungarian, who in his happy pre-occupation was perfectly unconscious of my politeness.
The Hungarian was still completely engrossed with Madame de St. Croix.
I have not yet forgotten the look on his handsome face when she drove off with her friend.
I had seen a pretty picture, I had heard a strain of sweet music, I had turned over the page of an amusing romance—there was an end of it.
I had not been ten minutes in the room when my ears thrilled to the low, seductive accents of that well-remembered voice.
There she was again, masked, of course, but it was impossible to mistake the slim, pliant figure, the graceful gestures, the turn of the beautiful head, and the quiet energy that betrayed itself, even in the small, gloved hand.
She was talking to a well-known Russian magnate less remarkable for purity of morals than diplomatic celebrity, boundless extravagance, and devotion to the other sex.
To be on terms of common friendship with such a man was at [Pg 78] least compromising to any lady under sixty years of age; and it is needless to say that his society was courted and appreciated accordingly.
The Russian talked volubly, and she leaned towards him, as those do who are willing to hear more.
The Hungarian was pale as death.
As friends accosted him [Pg 79] in passing, he bowed his head kindly and courteously while his whole face softened, but it was sad to see how soon the gleam passed away and the cloud came back, darker and heavier than before.
The man’s heart, you see, was generous, kindly, and full of trust— such a heart as women like Madame de St. Croix find it an interesting amusement to break.
I hate him!
I tell you.
Everybody hates him.
He was almost like an Englishman.
Do you think, if I’d been his second, I’d have put him up [Pg 81] with pistols against the best shot in Europe?—and at the barrier too!
It’s not like at home, you know.
I then learned that, in consequence of a trifling dispute after last night’s ball, a duel had been fought at daybreak, in the snow, between Count V—— and a Russian nobleman, in which the former was shot through the heart.
They were to walk up to a handkerchief, and the Russian potted him at forty yards the first step he made.
They may say what they like about the row originating in politics—I know better.
They quarrelled because Madame de [Pg 82] St. Croix had left V—— and taken up with this snub-nosed Tartar.
First, she ruined my poor friend.
I know all about it.
He hadn’t a rap left; for if she’d asked him for the shirt off his back, he’d have stripped like beans!
Then she broke his heart—the cheeriest, jolliest, kindest fellow in Europe—to finish up by leaving him for another man, who kills him before breakfast without a scruple; and if the devil don’t get hold of her some fine day, why he’s a disgrace to his appointment, that’s all!
There, within ten paces of me, sat Madame de St. Croix, if I was still to call her so, apparently not an hour older than the first time we met.
The face was even paler, the lips redder, the cruel eyes deeper and darker, but in that flickering light the woman looked more beautiful than ever.
She was listening quietly and indolently, as of old, to a gentleman who sat with his back to me, telling his own story, whatever it might be, in a low, earnest, impressive voice.
I raised my hat when I caught her eye, and she bowed in return politely enough, but obviously without recognition.
The [Pg 84] movement caused her companion to turn round, and in two strides he was by my chair, grasping me cordially by the hand.
The last man in the world, I should have thought, to be made a fool of by a woman.
Well, there he was, her bounden slave!
Absurdly happy if she smiled, miserable when she frowned, ready to fetch and carry like a poodle, perfectly childish about her, and utterly contemptible.
If she had really cared for him, the temptation must have been irresistible, and she would have bullied him frightfully.
But no, there was always the same repose of manner, the same careless kindness, the same melancholy, the same consciousness of an unquestionable [Pg 85] superiority.
One of his reasons, he soon confided to me, for being so fond of her was, that they never had an angry word!
For a week or two I saw a good deal of them.
She was always the same, and I found myself, day by day, becoming more conscious of that nameless charm about her, which I should despair of being able to describe.
Yet as often as I met the glance of those deep, dark, unearthly eyes, a shudder crept over me, such as chills you when you come face to face with a ghost in your dreams.
The colonel, I have said, was devoted to her.
He was rarely absent from her side, but if by chance alone with me, would talk of her by the hour.
It [Pg 86] was his haven, his anchorage, his resting-place, and he might glide down into old age, and on to death, perfectly happy, because confident, that with her heart and her force of character, she would never change.
He could not be jealous of her.
She was so frank, so confiding, so sincere.
He knew all about poor V——, who was shot in a duel, and the Russian general, banished to Siberia.
How fortunate she had broken with him before his disgrace, because, in the loyalty of her nature, she would surely have followed him into exile, although she never cared for him in her heart, never!
No, nor for any of the others; never had been fairly touched till now.
Him, the colonel, she really did love.
He had proved his devotion so thoroughly (I found out afterwards, though not from him, that my friend had been fool enough to sacrifice both fortune and profession for her sake), he was so reliable, she said, [Pg 87] so kind, and so good.
In short, he was perfectly happy, and could see no cloud in his horizon, look which way he would.
I had heard of her, indeed, at intervals both in London [Pg 88] and Paris.
She was very choice, I believe, in the selection of her victims, despising equally an easy conquest and one of which the ravages could be readily repaired.
The women hated her, the men said she was charming.
For my part I kept out of her way: we were destined to meet, nevertheless.
Here I came on deck, weak, exhausted, but convalescent, drinking in the sunshine and the scenery with that thirst for the beautiful which becomes so fierce after the confinement of recent illness.
I was approaching middle age; I had ventured body and mind freely enough in the great conflict; and yet, I thank [Pg 89] heaven, had hitherto been spared the crushing sorrow that makes a mockery of the noblest and purest enjoyments of earth, causing a man to turn from all that is fairest in sight and sense and sound with the sickness of a dead hope curdling at his heart.
But then I had kept clear of Madame de St. Croix.
She looked younger than ever!
Even in the searching glare of a southern noon not a line could be detected on the pure, pale forehead, not a crease about the large, wistful, glittering eyes.
He was a man remarkable for his enterprise and unfailing success in commerce as for his liberality, and indeed extravagance, in expenditure.
He chose to have houses, pictures, horses, plate, everything of the best, was justly popular in society, and enormously rich.
Nevertheless, while time wore on, I gradually ceased to think of her beauty, her heartlessness, her mysterious youth, or her magic influence over mankind.
Presently, amongst a thousand engrossing occupations and interests, I forgot her as if she had never been.
Nay, I once steered a hansom cab up Bond Street in the early morning, freighted with more subalterns than I should like to specify of her Majesty’s Household Troops, but I never thought I should come to a bath chair!
Of these things I thought, and through them still, as at all times, moved the pale presence of an unforgotten face, passing like a spirit, dim and distant, yet dear as ever, across the gulf of years—a presence that, for good or evil, was to haunt me to the end.
The man was in all the bloom and beauty of youth; the woman, though looking a few years older, did not yet seem to have attained her prime.
I could scarcely believe my eyes!
Yes, if ever I beheld Madame de St. Croix, there she sat with her fatal gaze turned on this infatuated boy, leading him gradually, steadily, surely, to the edge of that chasm into [Pg 95] which those who plunged came to the surface nevermore.
It was the old story over again.
How well I remembered, even after such an interval, the tender droop of the head, the veiling eyelashes, the glance so quickly averted, yet, like a snapshot, telling with such deadly effect; the mournful smile, the gentle whisper, the quiet confiding gesture of the slender hand, all the by-play of the most accomplished and most unscrupulous of actresses.
By sight, if not personally, I then knew most of the notabilities of the day.
The boy, for such I might well call him in comparison with myself, seemed too good for his fate, and yet I saw well enough it was inevitable.
He had already made himself a name as a poet of no mean pretensions, and held besides the character of a high-spirited, agreeable, and unaffected member of society.
Add to this, that he was [Pg 96] manly, good-looking, and well-born; nothing more seemed wanting to render him a fit victim for the altar at which he was to be offered up.
Like his predecessors, he was fascinated.
The snake held him in her eye.
The poor bird’s wings were fluttering, its volition was gone, its doom sealed.
Could nothing save it from the destroyer?
I longed to have back, if only for a day, the powers which I had regretted so little half-an-hour ago.
Weak, helpless, weary, and worn-out, I yet determined to make an effort, and save him if I could.
Prompt to obey her lightest wish, he bounded off in search of it, and following slowly, she passed within two paces of my chair, bending on its helpless invalid a look that seemed to express far less pity for his condition than a grudging envy of his lot.
There was not a moment to lose.
I took courage from a certain wistful look that gave softness to her eyes, and I spoke out.
Why time stands still for you is a secret I cannot fathom, but the end must come some day, put it off however long you will.
Far as it stretches behind you, every footstep in your track is marked with sorrow—more than one with blood.
Show mercy now, as you may have to [Pg 98] ask it hereafter.
Life is all before this one, and it seems cruel thus to blast the sapling from its very roots.
It is no fault of mine.
It is fate.
For him—for the others—for all of us.
Sometimes I wish it had not been so.
Mine has been an unhappy life, and there seems to be no end, no resting-place.
I can no more help myself than a drowning wretch, swept down by a torrent; but I am too proud to catch at the twigs and straws that would break off in my hand.
I would change places with you willingly.
Yes—you in that bath chair.
I am so tired sometimes, and yet I [Pg 99] dare not wish it was all over.
I like a woman who goes into extremes, either for good or evil.
Great recklessness, equally with great sensibility, has its charm for such a temperament as [Pg 101] mine.
Yet surely a magician need not come all the way from Africa to teach the public this strange rate of exchange.
In all the relations of life, but chiefly in those with which the affections are [Pg 104] concerned, we constantly see gold for silver offered with both hands.
That “it is better to give than to receive” we have Scriptural warrant for asserting.
That — “Sure the pleasure is as great In being cheated as to cheat,” we learn from Butler’s quaint and philosophical couplets.
I am not going to assert that the man who puts down sovereigns and takes up shillings has really the worst of it; I only maintain that the more freely he “parts” with the former, the more sparing will he find the latter doled out to him in return.
Perhaps the strongest case in point is that of parent and child.
In the animal world I know few arrangements of Nature more beautiful than the absolute devotion of maternity to its offspring, so long, though only so long, as its assistance is required.
A bird feeding her young, a tigress licking her cubs, a mare [Pg 105] wheeling round her foal—each of these affords an example of loving care and tenderness, essentially feminine in its utter forgetfulness of self.
Each of these squanders such gold as it possesses, the treasure of its deep instinctive affection, on ingratitude and neglect.
The nestlings gape with hungry little beaks, when they hear the flap of wings, not to greet the coming provider, but that they may eat and be filled.
The cubs huddle themselves up to their mother’s side for warmth and comfort, not for her cruel beauty nor her fierce protecting love.
The foal, when it gets on its long legs, will follow your horse or mine as readily as its dam.
They take all, to give back nothing in exchange.
The former gives gold, the latter does not always return silver.
Do not deceive yourself.
You love your children more than your children love you.
I can prove it in three words.
They are dearer to you than your own parents.
And this inequality of affection is but one more of the beautiful arrangements made by that Providence which bestows good so liberally in proportion to evil.
So you toil, and slave, and scheme for the child’s benefit, forgiving its errors, repairing its follies, re-establishing its fortunes, just as, long ago, you used to rebuild with loving patience those houses of cards the urchin blew down with such delight.
But, as of all human affections, this, if not the strongest, is certainly the [Pg 107] deepest and most abiding, so when wounded does it inflict on our moral being the sharpest and most enduring pain.
There is no prospect of alleviation to amuse his fancy—no leavening of pique to arouse his pride.
Hurt to the death, the sufferer has scarce manhood enough left to conceal his wounds.
In that conflict between man and woman which is perpetually going on, and without [Pg 108] which the world, if more comfortable, would undoubtedly be less populous, gold is invariably given for silver with a lavish extravagance, akin to the absurdity of the whole thing.
Why is love like the handle of a teapot?—Because it is all on one side.
The game has yet to be invented in which both players can win; and perhaps were it not for the discomfort, anxiety, worry, sorrow, and suffering entailed by the unequal pastime, it would cease to be so popular.
As it exists at present, there is nothing to complain of on the score of flagging interest.
At first, indeed, before the cards are cut, the adversaries sit down calmly and pleasantly enough.
An hour hangs heavy on their hands, and they think thus to drive it agreeably away—beginning simply for “distraction,” as the French call it, though ending in the English acceptation of that uncomfortable word.
Ere the first tricks are turned, however, the game grows exciting.
“I propose.” “How many?” “Hearts are [Pg 109] trumps.” “I mark the king.” The stakes increase rapidly in value, and presently gold comes pouring lavishly out of one player’s pocket, against silver dribbling unwillingly from the other’s.
The winner, too, like all gamblers, seldom cares to keep the fruit of his good fortune, but loses it again at another table to some stronger adversary, who is beggared in turn elsewhere.
Yet still in all places, and under all circumstances, wherever this game is played there is the same inequality in the stakes.
“Gold for silver.” Such are the terms; and the old players, to do them justice, those who have lost and won many a heavy wager, are generally careful to begin at least by venturing the commoner metal.
But even of these the discretion is not to be trusted as the game goes on.
Will you have the satisfaction hereafter of standing on the higher ground?
Will you exult in your forethought, your philosophy, the accurate knowledge of human nature, that has preserved you scatheless through the combat?
It depends entirely on character and temperament.
Men and women vary so much in this, as in every other phase of feeling.
The latter, when they do take the more generous view of their position—when they can bring themselves to choose “the better part,” accept it, I think, with a more complete abandonment of pique than the former.
Perhaps their pride is of a nobler order: no doubt their vanity is less egotistical than our own.
She looked upon him coldly as the winter moon looks on a frozen lake; she turned from him pitilessly as the bending poplar turns from the south wind, whispering its longing and its sorrows, wooing her even with its tears.
Or a time of eager comrades, trampling squadrons, short sharp words of command, a bugle sounding the Advance, a cocked-hat glancing through the smoke; a numb sick helplessness that glues the cheek into the dust where it has fallen, and a roll of musketry, feebler, farther, fainter, and more confused, till its warlike echoes die out in the hush of another world.
At such moments as these, I say, to have given gold for silver while we could, can surely be no matter of regret.
“What I spent I had.” I enjoyed it, wasted it, got rid of it: derive from it now as much enjoyment as can ever be extracted from past pleasures of which self-indulgence was the motive—that is to say, none at all!
“What I saved I lost.” Undoubtedly.
It has been an error of judgment, a bad speculation, a foolish venture, a dead loss.
“But what I gave I have.” [Pg 117] Ah!
There I did good business: took the turn of the market; invested my capital in a bank that pays me cent.
The silver I had in return has been left long ago on earth: perhaps there was barely enough to make a plate for my coffin; but the gold I gave is in my own possession still, and has been beaten into a crown for me in heaven.
“It is better to give than to receive.” With few exceptions the great benefactors of mankind have been in this world defrauded of their wages.
Columbus died perhaps the poorest man in the whole kingdom he had spent his lifetime to enrich.
The fable of Prometheus has been enacted over and over again.
Those who scale the heavens that they may bring down fire to enlighten and comfort their fellow-men, must not hope to escape the vulture and the rock.
I have always thought that wondrous story the deepest and the most suggestive in the whole heathen mythology.
Its hero was the first discoverer, the first free-thinker, the first reformer.
He was even proof against the seductions of woman, and detected in Pandora’s box the multiplicity of evils that secured the presence of Hope within its compass, and prevented her flying back to the heaven whence she came.
By science man baffles the elements, or renders them subservient to his purpose.
He was a herbalist, a doctor, a meteorologist, and universal referee for gods and men.
He taught [Pg 119] the latter all the arts necessary to extort a livelihood from the earth; showed them how to yoke their oxen and bridle their steeds.
It is not for me to enlarge on a topic so sacred and so sublime.
Enough for us and such as we are, if by lavishing gold for silver freely on our brother, we can cast but one humble mite into the treasury of our God.
There is much talk in the world about ingratitude.
People who do good to others at cost [Pg 120] or inconvenience to themselves are apt to expect a great flow of thanks, a great gush of sentiment in return.
They are generally disappointed.
Those natures which feel benefits the most deeply are often the least capable of expressing their feelings, and a speechless tongue is with them the result of a full heart.
Besides, you are sure to be repaid for a good action at some time or another.
Like seed sown in the Nile, “the bread cast upon the waters,” it may not come back to you for many days, but come back at last it most certainly will.
Would you like your change in silver or in gold?
Will you have it in a few graceful, well-chosen expressions, or in the sterling coin of silent love with its daily thoughts and nightly prayers; or, better still even than these, will you waive your claim to it down here, and have it carried to your account above?
To these I can offer no encouragement, no advice.
Their grapes are ripened, their harvest is yellow, the light is already shining on them from the golden hills of heaven.
It is the golden haze of “middle distance” that sheds on her this warm and tender light.
She is all the more attractive that we see her through a double veil of retrospection and regret, none [Pg 123] the less lovely because her beauty is dimmed and softened in a mist of tears.
Letter after letter they have flared, and blackened, and shrivelled up.
There is an end of them—they are gone.
The bold, familiar scrawl of the tried friend and more than brother; why does he come back to me so vividly to-night?
The stout heart, the strong arm, the brave, kind face, the frank and manly voice.
I cannot believe you have forgotten me even there.
And the pains-taking, up-and-down-hill characters of the little child—the little child [Pg 124] for whom the angels came so soon, yet found it ready to depart, whose fever-wasted lips formed none but words of confidence and affection, whose blue eyes turned their last dim, dying looks so fondly on the face it loved.
And there were letters harder to part with than these.
Never mind, they are burnt and done with; letters of which even the superscription once made a kind heart leap with pleasure so intense it was almost pain; letters crossed and re-crossed in delicate, orderly lines, bearing the well-known cipher, breathing the well-known perfume, telling the old, false tale in the old, false phrases, so trite and worn-out, yet seeming always so fresh and new.
The hand that formed them has other tasks to occupy it now; the heart from which they came is mute and cold.
Hope withers, love dies—times are altered.
What would you [Pg 125] have?
It is a world of change.
Is a man the greater or wiser that he lived a hundred years ago or a thousand?
Are reputations, like wine, the mellower and the more precious for mere age, even though they have been hid away in a cellar all the time?
Is a thing actually fairer and better because I have almost forgotten how it looked when present, and shall never set eyes on it again?
We haven’t an artist left.
Show me a fellow who would make a match with Barclay to-day.
Barclay, sir, if he were alive, would walk all your best men down after he came in from shooting.
Ask your young friends which of ’em would like to drive the mail from London to Edinburgh without a greatcoat!
I don’t know what’s come to the present generation.
It must be the smoking, or the light claret, perhaps.
They’re done, they’re used up, they’re washed out.
Why, they go to covert by railway, and have their grouse driven to them on a hill!
I was at Newmarket, I tell you, when the Squire rode his famous match—two hundred miles in less than nine hours!
Don’t tell me.
He was rubbed down by a couple of prize-fighters (there were real bruisers in those days, and the best man used to win), dressed, and came to dinner just as you would after a five-mile walk.
Pocket Hercules, you call him—one in a thousand?
There were hundreds of such men in my day.
Why must you never again become possessed of such a hunter as Tally-Ho?
Did that abnormal [Pg 129] animal really carry you as well as you think, neither failing when the ground was deep nor wavering when the fences were strong?
Is it strictly true that no day was ever too long for him?
Perhaps you do not give them so liberal a chance of proving their courage, speed, and endurance.
But were they really as fond, and fair, [Pg 130] and faithful as they seem to you now?
Had they no caprices to chill, no whims to worry, no rivals on hand, to drive you mad?
Like the sea, those eyes that look so deep and blue at a distance, are green and turbid and full of specks when you come quite close.
Was it all sunshine with Mary, all roses with Margaret, all summer with Jane?
What figures the modern women make of themselves, you say.
How they offend your eye, those bare cheek-bones, those clinging skirts, those hateful chignons!
What is it, I say, that causes us to look with such deluded eyes on the past?
Is it sorrow or malice, [Pg 131] disappointment or regret?
Are our teeth still on edge with the sour grapes we have eaten or forborne?
Man longs for the impossible, and what is so impossible as the past?
That which hath vanished becomes therefore valuable, that which is hidden attractive, that which is distant desirable.
The whole story is wild and absurd to a degree, yet not without a saddened interest, owing to the mournful refrain quoted above.
The countess, having received the news of the arrival of this gallant stranger, hastened to the shore and took him by the hand.
He opened his eyes, and at once overpowered by his disease and her kindness, had just time to say inarticulately that having seen her he died satisfied.
The countess made him a most splendid funeral, and erected to his memory a tomb of porphyry inscribed with an epitaph in Arabian verse.
[Pg 133] She commanded his sonnets to be richly copied and illuminated with letters of gold, was seized with a profound melancholy, and turned nun.
It has some pathos and sentiment.
Thou who hast made all things and who formed this love of mine so far away, give me strength of body, and then I may hope to see this love of mine so far away.
Surely my love must be founded on true merit, as I love one so far away.
If I am easy for a moment, yet I feel a thousand pains for her who is so far away.
No other love ever touched my heart than this for her so far away.
The stronger the imagination the more vivid the phantom that fills it; but on the other hand, the waking is more sudden and more complete.
If I were a woman instead of a—a—specimen, I should beware how I set my heart upon a man of imagination, a quality which the world is apt to call genius, with as [Pg 135] much good sense as there would be in confounding the sparks from a blacksmith’s anvil with the blacksmith himself.
Such a man takes the first doll that flatters him, dresses her out in the fabrications of his own fancy, falls down and worships, gets bored, and gets up, pulls the tinsel off as quick as he put it on; being his own he thinks he may do what he likes with it, and finds any other doll looks just as well in the same light and decked with the same trappings.
Narcissus is not the only person who has fallen in love with the reflection, or what he believed to be the reflection, of himself.
Some get off with a ducking, some are drowned in sad earnest for their pains.
One of the most characteristic and inconvenient delusions of humanity is its incapacity for enjoyment of the present.
Nobody has the wisdom to sit down for half-an-hour in the shade listening to the birds overhead, examining the flowers underfoot.
Not the real hereafter of another world, but the delusive hereafter of this.
Tell a lad of eighteen that he must wait a year or two for anything he desires very eagerly, and he becomes utterly despondent of attaining his wish; but an old man of seventy is perfectly ready to make arrangements or submit to sacrifices for his personal benefit to be [Pg 137] rewarded in ten years’ time or so, when he persuades himself he will still be quite capable of enjoying life.
The people who purchase annuities, who plant trees, who breed horses for their own riding are all past middle age.
Perhaps they have seen so many things brought about by waiting, more particularly when the deferred hope had caused the sick heart’s desire to pass away, that they have resolved for them also must be ‘a good time coming,’ if only they will have patience and ‘wait a little longer.’ Perhaps they look forward because they cannot bear to look back.
Perhaps in such vague anticipations they try to delude their own consciousness, and fancy that by ignoring and refusing to see it they can escape the inevitable change.
After all, this is the healthiest and most invigorating practice of the two.
Something of courage seems wanting in man or beast when either is continually looking back.
I think with the fools, I honestly confess, but I have also a theory of my own on this subject, which I am quite prepared to hear ridiculed and despised.
My supposition is that ideas, feelings, delusions, name them how you will, recur in cycles, although events and tangible bodies, such as we term realities, must pass away.
I cannot remember in my life any experience that could properly be called a new sensation.
When in a position of which I had certainly no former knowledge I have always felt a vague, dreamy consciousness that something of the same kind must have happened to me before.
Can it be that my soul has existed previously, long ere it came to tenant this body that it is so soon about to quit?
Can it be that its immortality stretches both ways, as into the future so into the past?
There are some things we would give anything to know, things on which certainty would so completely alter all our ideas, our arrangements, our hopes, and our regrets.
Ignorant of the coast to which we are bound, its distance, its climate, and its necessities, how can we tell what to pack up and what to leave behind?
To be sure, regarding things material, we are spared all trouble of selection; but there is yet room for much anxiety concerning the outfit of the soul.
For the space of a minute he seemed to ponder, and when he did speak, all he said was this— “I know, but I must not tell,” preserving thereafter an inflexible silence till it was time to go to bed.
Can it be cultivated in hothouses by Scotch head-gardeners with high wages and Doric accent?
We climb for it, we dive for it, we creep for it on our belly, like the serpent, eating dust to any amount in the process; but do we ever succeed in plucking such a specimen as, according to our natures, we can joyfully place in our hats for ostentation or hide under [Pg 141] our waistcoats for true love?
Do you remember Sir Walter Scott’s humorous poem called the “Search after Happiness”?
They floored him, they seized him, they stripped him, alack!
I believe half the legends of mythology, half the exploits of history, half the discoveries of science, originate in the universal search.
To find it, sages have ransacked their libraries, adepts exhausted their alembics, misers hoarded up their gold.
It is not twined with the poet’s bay-leaves, nor is it concealed in the madman’s hellebore.
People have been for it to the Great Desert, the Blue Mountains, the Chinese capital, the interior of Africa, and returned empty-handed as they went.
It abhors courts, camps, and cities; it strikes no root in palace nor in castle; and if more [Pg 143] likely to turn up in a cottage-garden, who has yet discovered the humble plot of ground on which it grows?
Nevertheless, undeterred by warning, example, and the experience of repeated failures, human nature relaxes nothing of its persevering quest.
I have seen a dog persist in chasing swallows as they skimmed along the lawn; but then the dog had once caught a wounded bird, and was therefore acting on an assured and tried experience of its own.
Such fiction has a great deal to answer for in the way of disappointment, dissatisfaction, and disgust.
Many natures find themselves completely soured and deteriorated before middle age, and why?
I started in business, we will say, with good connections, sufficient capital, and an ardent desire to make a fortune.
[Pg 147] How many briefless barristers must you multiply to obtain a Lord Chancellor, or even a Chief Baron?
How many curates go to a bishop?
How many village practitioners to a fashionable doctor in a London-built brougham?
Success in every line, while it waits, to a certain extent, on perseverance and capacity, partakes thus much in the nature of a lottery, that for one prize there must be an incalculable number of blanks.
There is an aphorism in everybody’s mouth about the man who goes to look for a straight stick in the wood.
Hollies, elms, oaks, ashes, and alders he inspects, sapling after sapling, in vain.
This one has a twist at the handle, that bends a little towards the point; some are too thick for pliancy, some too thin for strength.
Several would do very well but for the abundant variety that affords a chance of finding something better.
Presently he emerges at the farther fence, having traversed the covert from end to end, but his hands are still empty, and he shakes his head, thinking he may have been over-fastidious in his choice.
A straight stick is no easier to find than would be a four-leaved shamrock.
The man who goes to buy a town house or rent a place in the country experiences the same difficulty.
Up-stairs and down-stairs he travels, inspecting kitchen-ranges, sinks and [Pg 149] sculleries, attics, bedrooms, boudoirs, and housemaids’ closets, till his legs ache, his brain swims, and his temper entirely gives way.
In London, if the situation is perfect, there is sure to be no servants’ hall, or the accommodation below-stairs leaves nothing to be desired, but he cannot undertake to reside so far from his club.
These difficulties overcome, he discovers the butler’s pantry is so dark no servant of that fastidious order will consent to stay with him a week.
Suitable in every other respect, he cannot get the shooting; or if no such drawbacks are to be alleged, there is surely a railway through the park, and no station within five miles.
Plenty of shamrocks grow, you see, of the trefoil order, green, graceful, and perfectly symmetrical.
It is that [Pg 150] fourth leaf he looks for, which creates all his difficulties.
If the former cannot be persuaded to put up with some little drawback of action, beauty, or temper, he will never know that most delightful of all partnerships, the sympathy existing between a good horseman and his steed.
If the latter expects to find a perfection really exist, which he thinks he has discovered while dazzled by the glamour surrounding a man in love, he deserves to be disappointed, and he generally is.
Rare, rare indeed are the four-leaved shamrocks in either sex; thrice happy those whom Fate permits to win and wear them even for a day!
What is it we expect to find?
In this matter of marriage more than in any other our anticipations are so exorbitant that we cannot be surprised if our “come-down” is disheartening in proportion.
(How Sir Walter runs in my head to-night.)
Yes, she must be all this, and possess a thousand other good qualities, many more than are enumerated by Iago, so as never to descend for a moment from the pedestal on which her baron has set her up.
Is this indulgent?
Can he expect any human creature to be always dancing on the tight-rope?
She must not indeed follow his example and relieve her mind by swearing “a good, round, mouth-filling oath,” therefore she has the more excuse for feeling at times a little captious, a little irritable, what she herself calls a little cross.
Well, he often called her one, nay, she looks like it even now in that pretty dress, says my lord, and she smiles through her tears, putting her white arms [Pg 152] round his neck so fondly that he really believes he has found what he wanted till they fall out again next time.
Men are very hard in the way of exaction on those they love.
All “take” seems their motto, and as little “give” as possible.
If they would but remember the golden rule and expect no more than should be expected from themselves, it might be a better world for everybody.
I have sometimes wondered in my own mind whether women do not rather enjoy being coerced and kept down.
I have seen them so false to a kind heart, and so fond of a cruel one.
Are they slaves by nature, do you conceive, or only hypocrites by education?
I suppose no wise man puzzles his head much on that subject.
They are all incomprehensible and all alike!
“How unjust!” exclaims Bones, interrupting me with more vivacity than usual.
Yes, that is the way with every one of you; disappointed in a single [Pg 153] instance, you take refuge from your own want of judgment, your own mismanagement, your own headlong stupidity, in the condemnation of half the world!
You open a dozen oysters, and turn away disgusted because you have not found a pearl.
You fall an easy prey to the first woman who flatters you, and plume yourself on having gained a victory without fighting a battle.
The fortress so easily won is probably but weakly garrisoned, and capitulates ere long to a fresh assailant.
There is a straight stick in the wood if you will be satisfied with it when found; there is a four- [Pg 154] leaved shamrock amongst the herbage if you will only seek for it honestly on your knees.
At worst, better be deceived over and over again than sink into that deepest slough of depravity in which those struggle who, because their own trust has been outraged, declare there is no faith to be kept with others; because their own day has been darkened, deny the existence of light.
“You speak feelingly,” I observe, conscious that such unusual earnestness denotes a conviction he will get the worst of the debate.
But I think women are far more unreasonable than ourselves in this desire for the unattainable, this disappointment when illusion fades into reality.
Not only in their husbands do they expect perfection, and that, too, in defiance of daily experience, of obvious incompetency, but in their servants, their tradespeople, their carriages, their horses, their rooms, their houses, the dinners they eat, and the dresses they wear.
They never seem to understand that every ‘if’ has its ‘but,’ every pro its con.
[Pg 157] What we take here we must give yonder; what we gain in dancing we must lose in turning round!
For the feminine mind nothing is impracticable.
Not a young lady eating bread and butter in the school-room but cherishes her own vision of the prince already riding through enchanted forests in her pursuit.
Relying on her limitless heritage of the possible, she feels she has a prescriptive right to the title, the ten thousand a year, the matrimonial prize, the four-leaved shamrock.
Whatever else turns up, she considers herself an ill-used woman for life, unless all the qualities desirable in man are found united in the person and fortunes of her husband; nay, he must even possess virtues that can scarce possibly co-exist.
He must be handsome and impenetrable, [Pg 158] generous and economical, gay and domestic, manly but never from her side, wise yet deferring to her opinion in all things, quick-sighted, though blind to any drawbacks or shortcomings in herself.
The chances are that the dear departed went to sleep after dinner, hated an open carriage, made night hideous with his snores under the connubial counterpane, and all the rest of it.
Then who so aghast as the pretty, thoughtless fowler, longing and remorseful, with the broken string in her hand?
She thought she had found a four-leaved shamrock, and this is the result!
Men you may convince by force of [Pg 161] argument, if your logic is very clear and your examples or illustrations brought fairly under their noses; but with the other sex, born to be admired and not instructed, you might as well pour water into a sieve.
Here are six lines in the one version and four in the other, required to translate three of the original, perhaps without producing after all so full a meaning or so complete a picture.
Nevertheless, and notwithstanding his poetical predilections for the country, Horace, [Pg 164] like many other people, seems of his two homes to have always preferred the one at which he was not.
An unhappy prejudice little calculated to enhance the comfort and content of daily life.
If you choose to saunter [Pg 165] on a hot June day towards the Ranger’s Lodge or the powder-magazine, I could show you a spot from which I defy you to see houses, spires, gas-towers, or chimneys, anything, indeed, but green grass and blue sky, and towering elms motionless, in black massive shade, or quivering in golden gleams of light.
And here, perhaps, you branch off into some more recent vision, some dream of an elfin queen of your own, who also showed you the path to heaven, and gave you an insight into the ways of purgatory, ere she beckoned you down the road to Fairyland, that leads—ah!
The glittering water is dotted with craft of every rig and, under a certain standard, of almost every size.
On a wind and off a wind, close-hauled and free, rolling, pitching, going about, occasionally missing stays, and only to be extricated from the “doldrums” by a blundering, over-eager water-dog, the mimic fleet, on its mimic ocean, [Pg 167] carries out its illusion so completely that you can almost fancy the air off the water feels damp to your forehead, and tastes salt upon your lips.
An ancient mariner who frequents the beach below the boat-house feels, I am convinced, thoroughly persuaded that his occupation is strictly professional, that he is himself a necessity, not of amusement, but business.
You hazard an opinion, therefore, that the Water Lily is somewhat too delicate and fragile a craft to encounter boisterous weather, even on such an inland sea as this, and find, to your dismay, that so innocent an observation stamps you in his opinion as not only ignorant, but presumptuous.
She’s fifty-two, she is, but I wouldn’t trust her, not [Pg 169] in lumpy water, you know, like the schooner.
Yet, stay, not quite alone, for with me walked the shadow that, when we have learned to prefer solitude to society, accompanies us in all our wanderings, teaching us, I humbly hope, the inevitable lesson, permanent and precious in proportion to the pain with which the poor scholar gets his task by heart.
I am not joking.
There was a strange charm in the marches through those silent forests, across those frozen lakes, all clothed alike in their winter robe of white and diamonds.
There was something of sweet adventurous romance in waking at midnight to see the stars flash like brilliants through the snow-encrusted branches overhead, wondering vaguely where and why and what were all those countless worlds of flame.
Perhaps to turn round again and dream of starry eyes in the settlements, then closed in sleep, or winking drowsily at a night-light, while the pretty watcher pondered, not unmindful of ourselves, pitying us, it may be, couching here in the bush, and thinking in her ignorance how cold we were!
Then when we reached our hunting-ground and came up with our game at last, though, [Pg 173] truth to tell, the sport as sport was poor enough, there was yet a wild delightful triumph in overtaking and slaying a gigantic animal that had never seen the face of man.
The chase was exciting, invigorating, bracing; the idea grand, heroic, Scandinavian.
Kingsley never went moose-hunting in his life.
How could he so vividly describe the gait and bearing of a forest elk stalking warily, doubtfully, yet with a kingly pride through his wintry haunts?
I tell you that I could not have been more completely alone in Robinson Crusoe’s island than I found myself here within a rifle-shot of Kensington Palace, during a twenty minutes’ walk, to and fro, up and down, threading the stems of those tall, metropolitan trees; nor when my solitude was at last disturbed could I find it in me to grudge the intruders their share of my retreat.
More especially as they were themselves thoroughly unconscious of everything but their own companionship, sauntering on, side by side, with murmured words, and loving looks, and steps that dwelt and lingered on the path, because impossible roses seemed springing into bloom beneath their very feet, and that for them Kensington Gardens were indeed as the gardens of Paradise.
[Pg 175] I knew right well for me the mist was gathering round, ghostly and damp and chill.
It struck through my garments, it crept about my heart, but for these, thank God!
They were basking in the warmth and light of those gleams that come once or twice in a lifetime to remind us of what we might be, to reproach us, perhaps, gently for what we are.
They did not speak much, they laughed not at all.
Their conversation seemed a little dull, trite, and commonplace, yet I doubt if either of them has forgotten a word of it yet.
But the reflections of a man on foot are to those of a man on horseback as the tortoise to the hare, the mouse to the lion, tobacco to opium, chalk to cheese, prose to poetry.
“As moonshine is to sunshine, and as water is to wine.” Get into the saddle, leap on a thorough-bred horse, if you have got one.
Never mind his [Pg 176] spoiling you for every other animal of meaner race, and come for a “spin” up the Ride from Hyde Park Corner to Kensington Gate, careful only to steady him sufficiently for the safety of Her Majesty’s subjects, and the inquisition, not very rigorous, of the policemen on duty.
For seven months in the year, at least, this is perhaps the only mile and a half in England over which you may gallop without remorse for battering legs and feet to pieces on the hard ground.
Sit well down, just feel him on the curb, let him shake his pretty head and play with his bridle, sailing away with his hind-legs under your stirrup-irons, free, yet collected, so that you could let him out at speed, or have him [Pg 177] back in a canter within half-a-dozen strides; pat him lovingly just where the hair turns on his glossy neck like a knot in polished woodwork, and while he bends to meet the caress, and bounds to acknowledge it, tell me that dancing is the poetry of motion if you dare!
But your horse has got his blood up, and you yourself feel that rising within, which reminds you of the merry youthful days, when everything in life was done, so to speak, at a gallop.
You long to have a lark—you cannot settle down without a jump or two at least.
You look wistfully at the single iron rail that guards the footway, but refrain: and herein you are wise.
All this is child’s-play, no doubt—the merest child’s-play, compared with the real thing.
Mounted, with a good start, in a grass country, after a pack of foxhounds, there is no discord in the melody, no bitter in the cup—your keenest anxiety the soundness of the level water-meadow, your worst misgiving the strength of the farther rail, the width of the second ditch.
The goddess of your worship [Pg 180] bids your pulses leap and your blood thrill, but never makes your heart ache, and the thorns that hedge the roses of Diana can only pierce skin-deep.
Yourself, sheltered and unseen, what keen excitement to mark his stealing, easy action, gliding across the middle of the fields, nose, back, and brush carried in what geometricians call a “right” line, to lead you over what many people would call a “serious” one!
They have settled to it now.
You may set to and ride without compunction or remorse.
A dozen fields, as many fences, a friendly gate, and they have thrown their heads up in a lane.
Half-a-score of sportsmen, one plastered with mud, and the huntsman now come up; you feel conscious, though you know you are innocent, that he thinks you have been driving them!
You remark, also, that there is more red than common in the men’s faces and the horses’ nostrils; both seem to be much excited and a little blown.
The check, however, is not of long duration.
Fortunately, the hounds have taken the matter in hand for themselves, ere the only person qualified to do so has had time to interfere.
You scramble out of the lane, post-haste, narrowly escaping a fall.
Your horse has caught his [Pg 182] wind with that timely pull.
He is going as bold as a lion, as easy as a bird, as steady as a rock.
You seem to have grown together, and move like one creature to that long swinging stride, untiring and regular as clock-work.
A line of grass is before you, a light east wind in your face, two years’ condition and the best blood of Newmarket in his veins render you confident of your steed’s enduring powers, while every field as he swoops over it, every fence as he throws it lightly behind him, convinces you more and more of his speed, mettle, and activity.
What will you have?
The pleasures of imagination, at least, are unlimited.
Shall it be two-and-twenty minutes up wind and to ground as hard as they can go?
Shall it be thirty-five without another check, crossing the best of the Vale, and indulging the good horse with never a pull till you land in the field where old Rhapsody, with flashing eyes and bristles all on end, runs into her quarry, rolling him over and [Pg 183] herself with him, to be buried in the rush of her eager worrying followers?
You may take your choice.
—he has taken refuge in his cupboard.
Not even such a skeleton as mine can sustain the exorcism of so powerful a spell as fox-hunting!
So be it.
Gone to ground?
I think we will leave him there for the present.
It is better not to dig him out!
The phantoms used to be as various, too, as the figures in a pantomime.
Strains of unaccountable music sometimes floated in the air.
In one instance I remember a posting-house frequented by the spirit of an ostler with a wooden leg; but perhaps the most blood-chilling tale of all is that which treats of an empty chamber having its floor sprinkled with flour to detect the traces of its mysterious visitant, and the dismay with which certain horror-stricken watchers saw footsteps printing themselves off, one by one, on the level spotless surface—footsteps plain and palpable, but of the Fearful Presence nothing more!
As with houses in those, so is it with men in these days.
These haunted head-pieces, too, get more and more dilapidated every day; but how to exorcise them, that is the difficulty!
What spells shall have power to banish the evil spirit from its tenement, and lay it in the Red Sea?
Haunted men are, of all their kind, the most unhappy; and you shall not walk along a London street without meeting them by the dozen.
The dwelling exclusively on one idea, if not in itself an incipient symptom, tends to produce, ere long, confirmed insanity.
Yet how many people have we seen going about [Pg 187] with the germs of so fearful a calamity developing into maturity!
Each cherishes his ghost with exceeding care and tenderness, giving it up, as it were, room after room in the house, till by degrees it pervades the whole tenement, and there is no place left for a more remunerative lodger, healthy, substantial, and real.
I have seen people so completely under the dominion of expectation, that in their morbid anticipation of the Future, they could no more enjoy the pleasures afforded by the Present than the dead.
It is rarer to find humanity suffering from the tortures of [Pg 188] remorse, a sensation seldom unaccompanied, indeed, by misgivings of detection and future punishment; still, when it does fasten on a victim, this Nemesis is of all others the most cruel and vindictive.
Regret, however, has taken possession of an attic, in most of our houses, and refuses obstinately to be dislodged.
Discontent, perhaps, should hardly be dignified with the title of a ghost.
He resembles rather those Brownies and Lubbers of northern superstition, who, unsightly and even ludicrous in appearance, were not yet without their use in performing the meaner offices of a household.
If properly treated and never dragged into undue notice, the Brownie [Pg 189] would sweep up the hearth, bring in the fuel, milk the cows, and take upon him the rough work generally, in an irregular, uncouth, but still tolerably efficient style.
It is the difference between the Brownie and the Fiend.
Of all evil spirits I think this last is the most fatal, the most accursed.
And we, too, his descendants, are always on the look-out for the visitors from heaven.
Do they ever tarry with any of us for more than a night’s lodging?
But oftener the stranger we receive, though coming from another world, is not from above.
His beauty, indeed, seems angelic, and he is clad in garments of light.
For a while we are glad to be deceived, cherishing and prizing our guest, the more perhaps for those very qualities which should warn us of his origin.
[Pg 191] Henceforth the whole house belongs to the ghost.
When we go to dinner, he sits at the head of the table.
Try to shame him away with laughter, and you will soon know the difference between mirth and joy.
Try to drown him with wine.
Don’t try that.
It is too dangerous an experiment, as any doctor who keeps a private mad-house will tell you.
Even if we leave our home and walk abroad, in hope to free ourselves from the tenacious incubus, it is in vain.
The strength of Hercules could not preserve the hero from his ghastly fate.
Friends will advise us to make the best of it, and no doubt their counsel is excellent though gratuitous, wanting indeed nothing but the supplementary information, how we are to make the best of that which is confessedly at its worst.
Work and worship, and a stern resolve to [Pg 194] ignore his presence, will eventually cause this devil to “come out of the man.” Not, be sure, till he has torn and rent him cruelly—not till he has driven him abroad to wander night and day amongst the tombs, seeking rest, poor fevered wretch, and finding none, because of his tormentor—not till, in utter helplessness and sheer despair, stunned, humbled, and broken-hearted, the demoniac has crept feebly to the Master’s feet, will he find himself delivered from his enemy, weary, sore, and wasted, but “clothed, and in his right mind.” Amongst the many ghost stories I have read there is one of which I only remember that it turned upon the inexplicable presence of a window too much in the front of a man’s house.
This individual had lately taken a farm, and with it a weird, long-uninhabited dwelling in which he came to reside.
His first care, naturally enough, was to inspect the building he occupied, and he found, we will say, two rooms on the second floor, each [Pg 195] with two windows.
The rooms were close together, and the walls of not more than average thickness.
It was some days ere he made rather a startling discovery.
The man winked and stared and wondered.
Knowing he was not drunk, he thought he must be dreaming, and counted them over again—still with the same result.
There were the two rooms, and there were the four windows as usual.
Now this is the way to treat the haunted chamber in our own brain.
Fasten its door; if [Pg 196] necessary, brick up its window.
Deprive it of air and light.
Ignore it altogether.
When you walk along the passage never turn your head in its direction, no, not even though the dearest hope of your heart lies dead and cold within; but if duty bids you, do not shrink from entering—walk in boldly!
Confront the ghost, and show it that you have ceased to tremble in its presence.
Mind, I do not promise you another inmate.
While you live the tenement will probably remain bare and uninhabited; but at the worst an empty room is surely better than a bad lodger!
It is difficult, you will say, thus to ignore that of which both head and heart are full.
So it is.
Very difficult, very wearisome, very painful, yet not impossible!
Make free use of the spell.
Work, work, till your brain is so overwrought it cannot think, your body so tired it [Pg 197] must rest or die.
It may take months.
It may take years.
Inch by inch, and step by step, the battle must be fought.
Over and over again you will be worsted and give ground, but do not therefore yield.
Resolve never to be driven back quite so far as you have advanced.
Imperceptibly, the foe becomes weaker, while you are gaining strength.
The time will come at last, when you can look back on the struggle with a half-pitying wonder that he could ever have made so good a fight.
Do not then forget to be grateful for the aid you prayed so earnestly might be granted at your need; and remember also, for your comfort, that the harder won the victory, the less likely it is you [Pg 198] will ever have to wage such cruel battle again.
It would not be wiser.
True wisdom comes by experience.
He who shrinks from contact with his fellow-men—who fears to take his share of their burdens, their sorrows, their sufferings, is but a poor fool at best.
How are you to help others who cannot help yourself?
A man is put into this world to do a certain share of the world’s work; to stop a gap in the world’s fencing; to form a cog, however minute, in the world’s machinery.
By the defalcation even of the humblest individual, some of its movements must be thrown out of gear.
Stick to your post like a Roman soldier during the watches of the night.
It was the parson who killed his thirty brace of partridges, and this, too, with a flint-and- steel gun, over dogs of his own breaking, on the broiling 1st of September.
It was the parson who alone got to the end of that famous five-and-forty minutes from “The Church Spinneys,” when a large field were beat off to a man, and the squire broke his horse’s back.
Concerning one of these racing divines I remember the following anecdote:— Returning from afternoon service on a Sunday, he happened to witness a trial of speed between two of his school-children.
Unequally matched in size, the big boy, as was natural, beat the little one, but only by a couple of yards.
The parson stood still, watched them approvingly, and meditated.
“Come here,” said he to the winner.
“Go into my study, and fetch me my big Bible.” The urchin obeyed, and returned bearing a ponderous quarto volume.
“Now,” continued his reverence, “start fair, and run it over again.” The competitors wished no better fun, and finished this time with a dead heat.
How often have we not seen the universal handicap run out over the course of daily life?
Presently the weight begins to tell; the weight that we have voluntarily accepted, or the weight imposed on us by the wisdom of superior judgment.
And even if we escape the disgrace of having thus to succumb, even if our powers be equal to the tax imposed on them, we are not to expect an easy victory; there is no “winning in a canter” here.
Every effort tells on mettle, nerve, [Pg 204] and spirits; on heart, body, and brain.
We want them all, we summon them, we use them freely, and then, it may be within one stride of victory, comes the cruel and irretrievable breakdown.
Men, like horses, must be content to carry weight.
Like horses, too, though some are far more adapted than others to the purpose, all learn in time to accommodate themselves, so to speak, in pace and action to their inevitable burden.
How they fight under it at first!
How eager, and irritable, and self-willed it renders them; how violent and impetuous, as if in haste to get the whole thing over and done with.
Neither animal, indeed, is ever so brilliant again; but [Pg 205] thus it is that both become steady, plodding, useful creatures, fit to perform honestly and quietly their respective duties in creation.
The Celestials, it would appear, like meaner mortals, are extremely particular, not to say fidgety, about the due transmission of their correspondence.
Over that vast empire extend postal arrangements, conducted, I believe, as in our own country, by some mandarin of high rank, remarkable for their regularity and efficiency.
The letters travel at a uniform rate of more than seven English miles an hour; and as they are conveyed by runners on foot, often through thinly-populated districts in which it is impossible to establish frequent relays, the pedestrian capabilities of these postmen are of the greatest importance.
[Pg 207] What would our old friend Captain Barclay, of peripatetic memory, say to such a system as this?
A man who has his own business to attend to, his domestic affairs to regulate, half-a-dozen hungry children to feed, and a couple of poor relations or so to assist with sympathy, counsel, and occasional aid, finds no time to dwell upon any one difficulty, no especial inconvenience from any one burden, because each has its fellow and its counterpoise elsewhere.
It is not only in pharmacy that the principle of counter-irritation produces beneficial results.
I recollect, long ago, meeting an old comrade hanging about the recruiting taverns in Westminster.
The man was a clean, smart, active, efficient non-commissioned officer enough, with the average courage and endurance of the British dragoon.
A year before I had parted with him, languid, unhappy, and depressed, longing only to return to England but not yet under orders for home.
Now he looked cheerful, contented, almost radiant.
I stopped to inquire after his welfare.
I haven’t a friend or a relation left in the world.
There is a training of the mind, as of the body, to bear and to endure.
There is some shadow of truth in the fallacious story of him who carried a calf every day till it became a cow.
None of us know what we can do till we try; and there are few but would follow the example of the [Pg 210] patient camel, and refuse to rise from the sand, if they knew how heavy a weight is to be imposed on them ere they can reach the longed-for diamond of the desert, gushing and glittering amongst the palms!
It is fortunate for us that the packages are not all piled up at once.
To be sure, the first article of his creed is resignation.
Fatalism lulls him like opium, though, kinder than that pernicious drug, it leaves no torment of reaction to succeed its soothing trance.
Hard work, hard fare, hard bed, hard words, hard lines in general, a tropical sun and the atmosphere of a jungle, it is all in the day’s work with him!
A screw of weak tobacco, folded in a paper cigarette, wraps him in a foretaste of his anticipated paradise; a mouthful of thick, black, bitter coffee stands him in lieu of beer, porter, half-and-half, early purl, blue ruin, and dog’s-nose.
Once a week, or maybe once a month, he goes to the bath for two hours of uninterrupted enjoyment, emerging healthy, happy, refreshed, and clean as a new pin.
Perhaps it is his frugal, temperate life, perhaps it is his calm, acquiescent disposition, that enables him thus to carry weight so complacently.
He never fights under it, not he!
When I protest, however, against making a display and a grievance of the load you have to bear, I am far from maintaining that you are to keep it a profound secret, and hide it away in unsuitable places under your clothes.
A man can carry a hundred-weight on his shoulders with less inconvenience than a few pounds about his heart.
If you doubt this, order cold plum-pudding for luncheon, and you will be convinced!
A secret, too, is always a heavy substance to take abroad with you, and your own seems to incommode you more than another’s, probably because you are less indifferent about letting it fall.
As for attempting to dance lightly along with the jaunty air of an unweighted novice, be assured the effort is not only painful but ridiculous.
No, never be ashamed of your [Pg 214] burden, not even though your own folly should have clapped an additional half-hundred on the top of it.
Get your shoulders well under the heaviest part, walk as upright as you may, but do not try to swagger; and if you have a friend who likes you well enough to give his assistance, let him catch hold at one end, and so between you move on with it the best way you can.
It is well for a man when he has a little of the bovine repose of character, a good deal of the asinine thickness of skin and insensibility to hard usage.
Such a disposition toils on contentedly enough, obedient indeed to the goad so far as moderately to increase the staid solemnity of his gait, taking the flinty path and the weary load as necessary conditions of life, with a serene equanimity for which he has the philosophical example [Pg 216] of the ass!
The ways are rough, you know, and the journey long.
Depend upon it these animals arrive at its termination with less wear and tear, more safety, and even more despatch, than the sensitive, high-spirited, and courageous horse, wincing from the lash, springing to the voice, striving, panting, sweating, straining every muscle to get home.
In the parable of the Ancient Mariner—for is it not indeed the wildest, dreamiest, and most poetical of parables?—you remember the hopelessness of the weight he carried when “Instead of the cross the albatross About his neck was hung.” It was not his misfortune, you see, but his crime that bore him down.
Its consciousness lay far heavier on his spirit than did his after-punishment, when, weary and desolate, he wailed that he was “Alone, alone, all, all alone, Alone on a wide, wide sea, And never a saint took pity on My soul in agony.” The saints, indeed, might not have heard him; how do we know about that?
He looked upon beauty, nature, animate life, the wonders of the deep, the creatures of his Maker, and “blessed them unaware!” Enough.
If they have less “nerve” than ourselves—less of the coolness which springs from constitutional insensibility to danger —they have more of that mettlesome spirit which is sometimes called “pluck,” that [Pg 218] indomitable courage which acknowledges no failure for defeat, which never sleeps upon its post, which can bear up bravely even against the sickness and depression of unremitting pain.
“In the dead unhappy night, and when the rain is on the roof.” Bah!
It is a world of shams.
If a woman is not a hypocrite she must be a stone!
[Pg 219] We should give them greater credit though could we learn more of the weights they have to carry.
But their training is known only to themselves; their trials come off in secret; the saddles they wear are jealously locked up, and they take care to keep the key!
I know not: I only know that the quiet courage, the generous spirit, the untiring endurance with which they perform the journey of life is too generally ignored, unappreciated, and thrown away.
How often have we not seen a thorough-bred horse ridden by a butcher?
In the present instance the maxim, I think, is contradicted by our individual convictions and general experience.
For my own part I protest I am no believer in presentiments.
That is a beautiful fiction of poetry, completely unsubstantiated by the prosaic events of life, which represents the predestined sufferer as one who “Still treads the shadow of his foe,” while the arm of the avenger, uplifted though unseen, intercepts the light of heaven ere yet its blow descends.
Poets, no doubt, lay their foundations on a basis of truth, but, as [Pg 221] befits their profession, do not scruple to raise a superstructure in magnificent disproportion to the limits of their ground-plan.
I will appeal to nine people out of every ten whose lot it has been to sustain severe affliction—and I think it is nearly nine-tenths of the human race—whether they have not found themselves staggered or prostrated by blows as sudden as they were overwhelming; whether the dagger has not always been a more deadly weapon than the sword, the marksman behind the hedge a more fatal enemy than the battery on its eminence, the hidden reef a worse disaster than the adverse gale, and whether their hopes, their happiness, or their fortunes, have not failed them at the very moment when the false waves smiled serenely at the calm skies overhead— “Like ships that on a summer sea Have gone down sailing tranquilly.” No; these forthcoming shadows need not disturb our repose.
They owe their origin [Pg 222] neither to heart nor brain, but proceed from liver, and I should think must be quite unknown to him who “lives on sixpence a day and earns it!” What a life we should lead if we could look an inch before our noses!
Of all curses to humanity the bitterest would be the gift of foresight.
By taking the established and conventional course he avoids collision with his kind and proceeds in comparative safety.
By observing the track of his own boat rippling the surface many a yard astern, he learns to guide his course, just as he would correct his conduct by the lessons of the past.
Now the stream [Pg 223] runs hard against him, and he must work his way foot by foot with honest, unremitting toil.
Many a scene of beauty, many a lovely nook, and sunny lawn, and fairy palace glides by him as he goes—fading, vanishing, shut out by the intervening point, to leave but a memory of their attractions, dispelled in turn by ever-recurring beauties of meadow, wood, and water.
But the shadows which cross our path to our greatest deception and detriment are those for which we so willingly abandon the substances whereof they are but the fading phantoms as the dog in the fable dropped a piece of meat out of his jaws to snatch a like morsel from the other dog he saw reflected in the water.
How many people in the possession of sufficient incomes deprive themselves of common comfort in an attempt to appear richer and more liberal than they really are!
How many forego the society of friends in which they find honest pleasure for that of mere acquaintances with whom they have scarce a thought in common, because the latter, perhaps themselves sacrificed to the same illusion, move in a higher and more [Pg 225] ostentatious class of society!
With one the shadow is a reputation for wealth, with another for taste.
When Michael Scott, in the completion of his education at Padua, had mastered certain intricacies of the black art, his fellow-students observed to their consternation that while they walked in the college gardens with the wise north-countryman, “His form no darkening shadow cast Athwart the sunny wall.” The first step in supernatural learning, the first condition for the attainment of superhuman power, seems to have been the dismissal of so inconvenient and unmeaning an appurtenance as a shadow.
How many people have I known, and these not the least endearing and capable of their [Pg 227] kind, over whose whole life the shadow of a memory, though growing fainter day by day, has yet been dark enough to throw a gloom that the warmest rays of friendship and affection were powerless to dispel!
Sometimes, indeed, that darkness seems dearer to them than the glories of the outer world; sometimes, and this is the hardest fate of all, they cling to it the closer that they feel the illusion has been to them a more reliable possession than the reality.
’twas the shadow that rested—’twas herself that fleeted, you see— And now I am dying—I know it!
Such demons most of us keep of our own, and we take care never to look at them but at the angle which magnifies them out of all reasonable proportions.
When you see mine and I yours, each of us is surprised at the importance attached to his spectral illusion by the other.
Yours seems to me a diminutive and contemptible little devil enough; and doubtless, although you never may have entertained a high opinion of my mental powers or moral force of character, both are fallen fifty per cent.
If we could but change shadows we should both of us get back into the sun.
None of these remedies seem to answer the purpose desired.
Blue-books, bankers’ books, betting-books are unable to break the spell; over the pages of each he throws the all-pervading gloom.
To steep him in wine is often but to increase his dimensions out of all reasonable proportions, and at best only gets rid of him for a night that he may return in the morning refreshed and invigorated to vindicate his sovereignty over the enfeebled rebel he controls.
There are means of dispelling the darkness, no doubt, but I fear they are not to be found in the resources of [Pg 231] study, certainly not in the distractions of dissipation nor the feverish delirium of vice.
It must be a warm, genial, and unusually generous disposition which is not warped and dwarfed by a shadow cast upon it in youth, or indeed at any period of life; but for animate as for inanimate nature there are black frosts as well as white.
It is hard upon youth to see its rosy morning overcast by the shadow; but it has many hours yet to look forward to before noon, and can afford to wait for brighter weather.
People talk a great deal about that physical impossibility which they are pleased to term “a broken heart”; and the sufferer who claims their sympathy under such an abnormal affliction is invariably a young person of the gentler sex.
I have no doubt in my own mind, nevertheless, that a severe blow to the fortunes, the self-esteem, the health or the affections, is far more severely felt after forty than before thirty; and yet who ever heard of an elderly gentleman breaking his heart?
Why, the assumption is ludicrous.
There is another shadow, too, which, apart from all finer feelings of the heart or intellect, has a pernicious effect on our interests and welfare.
It is cast by our own opaque substances when we persist in an inconvenient attitude, commonly called “standing in our own light.” Parents and guardians, those who have the care of young people, generally are well aware of its irritating persistency and disagreeable consequences.
It is provoking to find all your efforts thwarted by the very person on whose behalf they are made.
After much trouble, and the eating of more dirt than you can digest in comfort, you obtain for a lad a high stool in a counting-house, an appointment to the Indian army, or a berth in a Chinese merchantman, fondly hoping that in one way or another he is provided for, and off your hands at last.
But after a while behold him back again, like a consignment of damaged [Pg 234] goods!
He has been too fast for the clerkship, too idle for the army, not sober enough for the sea.
Or perhaps, though this is a rarer case, because women’s perceptions of their own interest are usually very keen, it is your Blanche, or your Rose, or your Violet who thus disappoints the magnificent expectations you have founded on her beauty, her youth, her eyes, her figure, and her general fascinations.
Rose, Blanche, or Violet “stood in her own light,” and must be content for the rest of her career to burn tallow instead of wax.
The shadows, however, which ladies preserve for their own private annoyance cast [Pg 235] surprisingly little gloom over their pretty persons while they are before the world.
A new dress, a coming ball, a race-meeting, or a picnic, are sufficient to dispel them at a moment’s notice; and though doubtless when these palliatives are exhausted, when they put their candles out at night, the darkness gathers all the thicker for its lucid interval of distraction, it is always something to have got rid of it even for an hour.
That women feel very keenly, nobody who knows anything about them can doubt.
That they feel very deeply is a different question altogether.
For both sexes, however, there must in their course through life be shadows deep in [Pg 236] proportion to the brilliancy of the sunshine in which they bask.
“Shall we receive good at the hand of God,” says Job, “and shall we not receive evil?” thereby condensing into one pithy sentence perhaps the profoundest system of philosophy ever yet submitted to mankind.
The evil always seems to us greater than the good, the shadows more universal than the sunshine; but with how little reason we need only reflect for a moment to satisfy ourselves.
Compared even with the productions of his own genius, Guinevere always seems to me like a statue in the midst of oil-paintings.
So lofty is it in conception, so grand in treatment, so fair, so noble, so elevating, and yet so real.
There is no happiness for Lancelot without Guinevere, no sweetness in the breath of evening nor speculation in the stars of night, no gladness in the summer, no glamour in the greenwood, no glory in the day.
Her whisper lurks in the hollow of his helmet when he shouts his war-cry, her image rouses his desire for fame, and points his trusty lance.
How can she bear the clear, guileless faces, the little hands clasped in prayer on her knee, the loving, trustful eyes of those simple believers to whom she, the sinner, is in the place of God?
Many a woman, hesitating and hovering on the very brink of ruin, has been withheld by the tiny clasp of an infant’s hand.
If that last chance should have failed her, such failure has been ever after the heaviest and least endurable of the penalties she has brought on herself.
But she may be childless, she may be spared the bitter pain of estrangement from those who are indeed part and parcel of her being.
What, then, of her husband?
The man whom once she believed she loved, who has cherished her, trusted her, given up for her sake [Pg 242] many of the realities and all the illusions of life, whose care has surrounded her so constantly every day and all day long, that, like the air she breathes, she can only be made sensible of its existence when withdrawn, whose indulgence was perhaps so unvaried as to escape notice, whose affection, expressed by deeds, not words, she has forgotten because it has not been repeated, like that other love, in burning whispers every hour.
So she not only strikes him a deadly blow, such as his bitterest enemy would scarce deal in fair fight, but poisons her weapon besides, and leaves it sticking in the wound to burn and rankle and fester, that every passing hand in careless jest or wanton outrage may inflict on him mortal agony at will.
Once, perhaps, she was proud of that brave, kind face, which she could not imagine blanched by fear nor clouded with shame.
Can she bear to think of it now, quivering at the chance allusion of every idle tongue, warped into agony, like that of a man shot through the lungs, when her own name is spoken, [Pg 243] purposely or otherwise, by some impertinent gossip or some rancorous, ungenerous foe?
His home is broken up; he can make himself another.
This is the worst injury of all.
The strongest, the purest, the noblest of earthly motives to well-doing has failed him, and from henceforth the man is but a lamp without a light, a watch without a mainspring, a body without a soul.
In self-sacrifice and self-devotion he shall find the talisman to set him free, not at once, but, like other permanent results, gradually and in the lapse of time; so, mounting step by step and gaining strength as he ascends, he shall look down from the unassailable heights of forgiveness on the lesser souls that can never reach to wound him now—forgiveness, free, complete, and unconditional as that which he himself pleads for from his God.
And here it is that the character of Arthur, as drawn by Tennyson, exemplifies the noblest type of Christianity, chivalry, and manhood with which we are acquainted in the whole range of fiction.
Poetry has yet to disclose to us a more godlike, more elevating sentiment than the king’s pardon to his guilty and repentant wife.
It breathes the very essence of all those qualities which humanity, at best “a little lower than the angels,” is ever striving unsuccessfully to attain.
Above all, there is that grand trust in a better world and an immortal identity, without which man, despite his strength of will and pride of intellect, were little superior to the beasts of the field.
For think not, though thou wouldst not love thy lord, Thy lord has wholly lost his love for thee.
I am not made of such slight elements.
It has been said of them, prettily enough, that “They learn in suffering what they teach in song.” God forbid!
If it were so, their lot would indeed be unenviable; and what an eternity of torture would such a genius as Byron, or Shelley, or Tennyson himself have condensed into a single life!
No, theirs must be rather the intuitive knowledge that springs from sympathy with all things, animate and inanimate, in summer and winter, in light and darkness, in sorrow and in joy—a sympathy receiving freely as it gives, and thus cozening them out of nine-tenths of their own private sorrows, which such finer [Pg 247] temperaments as theirs would otherwise be too sensitive to endure.
The wide scope of this sympathy, the facility with which genius can handle extreme contrasts of the same passion with equal skill, is, I think, finely exemplified in the two poems of “Maud” and “Guinevere.” I have already compared the latter to an exquisite piece of sculpture.
She is coming—my life, my fate!
The red rose cries, She is near—she is near!
As in “clear-faced Arthur” is rendered the ideal dignity of love, so in Maud’s hapless suitor we find exemplified its mad enthusiasm and passion.
With both, self is unhesitatingly sacrificed to the welfare of another.
Even now—perhaps now more than ever—in grief, danger, and privation, his first thought flies to the idol for whom he has built his life into a throne, that she may reign there unrivalled and supreme.
May his be the shame, the sorrow, and the suffering!—such is his wild, pathetic prayer—and let the treasure of his [Pg 249] heart go free.
If there be danger, let it lower round his unprotected head.
If there be punishment, let him bear it for both!
What of that?
She is still his queen—his goddess—his love—the aim of his existence, the darling of his care.
And of this remnant will I leave a part— True men who love me still, for whom I live— To guard thee in the wild hour coming on; Lest but a hair of this low head be harmed.
Could she but have known then where to seek her happiness and find it!
We mortals must have our dreams; doubtless it is for a good purpose that they are so fair and sweet, that their duration is so short, the [Pg 253] waking from them so bitter and forlorn.
Mocking phantoms all about her, now gibing, now pitying, now goading her to the recklessness of despair.
As it invariably does in moments of extreme feeling, the master-passion takes possession of her once more, and “my Lancelot” comes back in all his manly beauty and his devoted tenderness, so touching and so prized, that for him, too, it must make the sorrow of a lifetime.
Standing on the brink of an uncertainty more ghastly than death, for something tells him that he is now to lead his hosts in his last battle, and that the unearthly powers to whom he owes birth, fame, and kingdom, are about to reclaim him for their own, he stretches the hands of free forgiveness, as it were, from the other world.
How short, in the face of doom so imminent, so inevitable, appears that span of life, in which so much has been accomplished!
Where, he sees not, cares not.
With her own hand she has put away her own happiness; and what happiness it might have been she feels too surely, now that no power on earth can ever make it hers again!
It is never to be.
Never, never more!
She rushes indeed to the casement, but Arthur is already mounted and bending from the saddle, to give directions for her safety and her comfort.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!)
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement.
If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession.
“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.
It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.
There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.
Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States.
If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed.
Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work.
You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.
The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work.
Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change.
If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges.
Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that: • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.
The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.
Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns.
Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.” • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark.
Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from.
If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund.
If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.
If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come.
In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.
Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.
To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States.
U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.
I was eighteen, and my youth had been the great obstacle to my getting an engagement; now here was some delightful advertiser who considered it an advantage.
I wrote to the address given, enclosing my photograph and the list of my qualifications.
I looked out on to the platform.
There were very few people on it, and there was no one who appeared at all like the gentleman I had pictured to myself as my future employer.
There were two or three red-faced men who gave one the impression of being farmers, and at one end there were two young men engaged in securing a large mastiff, which was bounding about in great excitement at sight of the train.
I got out and spoke to the station-master.
One of them was now looking about, as if in search of somebody; and I walked timidly towards him.
He seemed puzzled as his eyes fell upon me; then suddenly he raised his hat.
“Miss Christie?” he said interrogatively, growing very red.
“Yes,” said I, bowing and blushing too.
I followed him and pointed out my boxes.
“The dog-cart is waiting outside,” said he; “let me carry your bag.” I followed him through the station.
Three or four big dogs began jumping up upon him and upon me as we came out.
He helped me into the dog-cart, carefully wrapped me up with a rug, and then, instead of getting in himself, patted the neck of the brown mare, who turned her head and put her nose into her master’s hand.
I was trying to get over my bewilderment.
He was big and broad, and rather massive, had dark hair and mustache, gray eyes, and a kind simplicity of expression, which perhaps, I thought, with his habit of blushing, made him look younger than he was.
He left the mare and stood by me again.
I can’t think how you will stand it.
“I dare say you were great at cricket, or rowing, or—or—fighting,” I hazarded, feeling that some rejoinder was expected.
I remember giving a boy a black eye once for calling me a dunce.
He was quite right, you know.
“I hope your daughter does not share her father’s dislike of school routine,” I broke out anxiously.
He came up, raising his hat, and shook hands with me.
Miss Christie, forgive my gray hairs.
You will find me a great deal more trustworthy than any of these gay deceiving Norfolk lads.
The scenery was not particularly pretty; but I had never lived in the country, and everything was new and interesting to me.
“How beautifully green everything is!” I remarked presently.
“What a lovely place!” I cried enthusiastically.
My companion remained silent.
“I wouldn’t have that stagnant water near my house for my children to play about for something!” said he, in an energetic growl which surprised me.
I said no more until we drove slowly down the sloping carriage-drive through the trees which led to the house; then again my admiration broke out.
That ivy hasn’t been cut for the last five years; and it ought to be torn down altogether to make the place fit to live in.
And the two men exchanged looks which showed that at the bottom of their hearts they were not friends.
We drove slowly down to the hall door, which was open, and a gaunt untidy-looking servant came out and carried in my boxes.
I was sorry he was gone.
I wanted to ask what he meant by his strange warning, and to thank him for his kindness.
A distressing sense of loneliness came over me.
Instead of following her, I stood watching the dog-cart and its owner out of sight, until a harsh woman’s voice startled me.
I sat down on one of these, the only friendly things I had about me, and began to cry.
Somebody might at least have come to the door to meet me!
Was she an invalid?
If not, why had she left the correspondence about her child’s governess entirely to her husband?
My tears dried slowly as I went on puzzling myself uselessly about this mystery which must be so very soon solved; and I was scarcely ready when the servant returned to tell me that tea was waiting for me.
But my curiosity was only to be sharpened.
So great were my anxiety and curiosity that I forgot how hungry I was, and in a few minutes I had finished my tea, and was standing by the window looking out into the garden.
It was not yet seven o’clock and a bright summer evening.
A light breeze had sprung up and was swaying the tops of the trees that grew thickly round the house.
On the side of the dining-room a mossy lawn stretched from the roots of the trees right up to the French windows.
I opened one of these and went out.
I had never been in such a beautiful garden before.
The house was built on the very border of the marsh, at the bottom of a hill which sloped down, covered with trees, towards the dining-room side of the house.
I made my way round to the front and the moss-grown portico—from here one caught glimpses of the marsh through the thick trees.
I followed a grass-path cut through them, facing the front of the house, until I came to the pond which had excited my admiration from the dog-cart.
Here the vegetation grew unchecked.
The water was half covered with smooth green duckweed and water-lilies, and the reeds and rushes, which grew tall and thick round the margin, had encroached much upon the little sheet of water.
Looking about, I saw sitting among the reeds, at the very edge of the water—so close to it that her little shoes kept slipping in the moist yielding earth—a tiny elfish-looking child, about two years old, in a dirty white frock and pinafore, with a small pale wrinkled face and thin straight red hair, who rocked herself to and fro and went on with her monotonous chant without seeming at all disturbed by the appearance of a stranger.
She only stared at me, without altering her position, when I told her that she must not sit so near the water, or she would fall in and be drowned; but, when I stooped to lift her up, she proved her humanity by screaming loudly and reproaching me in baby language too indistinct for me to understand.
I supposed her to be the child of the gardener or of some neighboring cottager, and, not quite knowing what to do with her, I carried her, still screaming, to the house, where I met the servant whom I had already seen.
“I found this child sitting with her feet nearly in the pond!” I said tragically.
She’s there pretty nearly all day by herself.
Come now, Mona, it’s time for you to go to bed.
As there was nothing to invite me to stay indoors, I went out again, this time to explore the side of the house which faced the marsh.
Here the grass grew untrimmed and rank up to the very walls; and, as I made my way through it, my feet sank from time to time into little unseen pools and swamps, which wetted them up to the ankles after a few steps.
However, I went on as carefully as I could, past a tangle of shrubs, yew-trees, and straggling briers, until, pushing aside the low-hanging branches of a barberry-tree, I found myself within a few feet of a window so heavily shaded by gnarled and knotted ivy that for a few moments I did not notice a woman’s face staring at me intently through the glass.
I retreated in as leisurely a manner as I could, trying to look as if I had not seen her; for there was something in the eager, hopeless stare of her eyes as mine met them which made me feel like a spy.
I crept back into the house and up to my room, unpacked my boxes, and sat down to write to my mother an account of my journey and arrival.
I did not tell her quite all that I had seen, or all the strange impressions this first evening had made upon me.
I had to finish this by candle-light, and, when I had ended, I rose and went to the window to give one more look at the scene under a new aspect.
A low cry of admiration burst from me as I looked out.
Over all the wide expanse of marsh, which seemed to stretch for miles on either hand, lay a white mist, rising only a few feet from the ground, but so thick as to look like a silver lake in the moonlight; a range of hills two or three miles off seemed to mark the opposite shore.
The mist was dense under my window, too, on the very grass that I had waded through a couple of hours before.
As I looked out and tried to imagine little fairy boats in the elders which rose here and there out of the mist-hidden marsh, a shiver passed over me; and I drew in my head with a sudden change of thought.
I was thankful to see that there was no trace in her eyes now of the steadfast eager gaze which had disconcerted me on the night before, nothing but the limpest indifference to me in the way in which she held out her hand when her husband introduced me.
“She must have been pretty ten years ago,” I thought, as I looked at her thin face, with the fair faded complexion and dull gray eyes.
There was a gentleness about her which would have been grace still, if she had taken any pains to set off by a little womanly coquetry her slim girl-like figure, small thin hands, and the masses of long brown hair which were carelessly and unbecomingly dragged away from her forehead and twisted up on her head.
He saw it and laughed at her.
“It is a most extraordinary thing, Miss Christie,” said he; “but that child hates me.” I thought he spoke in fun; but, before I had been long at the Alders, I found that it was true that this most unpleasant baby’s strongest feeling was dislike of her father, though there seemed to be no reason for it, since he never did anything harsher than laugh at her.
She would not even take sweets from his hand.
If we were to suggest late dinner, we should have to prepare our own food, like excommunicated persons.
It is hard as it is to keep our modest staff of three servants.
They say the place is damp, which, being interpreted, means that it is too far for their ‘young men’ in the town to come and see them.
She wouldn’t talk, and my wife wants a cheerful companion; and she said she was dying of rheumatism, and threatened to prosecute me for decoying her to such a damp place.
“And so we remain,” he went on.
“Not quite that,” said she gently, but with no more warmth than before.
“Practically I am,” he persisted.
He was always kind and attentive to his wife; but, whether he was in a bright mood, and tried to make her smile, or silent, and needing to be roused out of his gravity, she was always the same, limp, nerveless, apathetic, speaking when necessary in a low soft voice, slowly, with many pauses.
She had a habit of letting the last words of a sentence die away upon her lips, and then, after a few moments, as if by an effort, she would say them aloud.
I soon grew quite afraid of her, started if I met her unexpectedly, and felt more restrained in her presence than if she had been one of those brilliant satirical women who take the color out of the rest of their sex.
Anxious to shake off this strange diffidence, which was beginning to cast a shadow over my life, I offered to read to her when my short hours of study with my pupil were over.
She accepted my offer, and I went into the drawing-room that very afternoon and read her some chapters of Adam Bede, while she sat in a rocking-chair, with a piece of embroidery making slow progress in the thin white fingers.
I stopped at the end of each chapter, waiting for the comment which never came, and rather hoping for some little compliment upon my reading, an accomplishment I took pride in.
But she only said “Thank you” very gently, and, when I asked her if I should go on, “Yes, if it will not tire you.” Presently I found out that she was not listening, except for a few minutes at a time, but that she was sitting with her hands in her lap listlessly playing with her embroidery, while her eyes were fixed on the garden outside, with a deep sadness in them which contrasted strangely with her usual apathetic indifference to all things.
Still I read on, pretending not to notice her mood, until such a heavy despairing sigh broke from her pale lips that my heart beat fast for pity, and I involuntarily stopped short in my reading, and raised my eyes, with tears in them, to hers.
She started, and, turning towards me, seemed to hold my eyes for a moment fixed on hers by the fascination of a gaze which seemed anxious to penetrate to the deepest recesses of my thoughts.
A little color came to her cheeks; I could see her breast heaving through the muslin gown she wore; she half stretched out one hand towards me, and in another moment I believe she would have called me to her side, when a voice from behind her chair startled us both.
I timidly offered to read her to sleep, but she declined at once, almost abruptly for her, and, with some conventional thanks for my trouble, took the arm her husband held out, thanked him as he carefully wrapped round her a little shawl that she generally wore, and left the room with him.
After that, her reserve towards me was greater than ever; she seemed reluctant to accept the smallest service of common courtesy at my hands, and refused my offers to read to her again, under the plea that it was wasting my time, as she was hardly well enough to listen with full attention.
I was hurt as well as puzzled by this; and, being too young and timid to make any further advances, the distance between me and the silent sad lady grew greater than ever.
“The child is very like her mother in face; don’t you think so?” said he.
I see you cannot help looking surprised, Miss Christie.
My wife does not give herself the airs of a clever woman.
If I were to tell you the nom de plume under which she wrote, you would be afraid of her, for it became at once a sort of proverb for daring of thought and expression.
The two children had been left in the country—in the best of care, mind—while my wife and I spent the season in town; it was a duty she owed to society then, as one of its brightest ornaments.
We heard that the boy was not well; but we had no idea that his illness was serious.
Well—I can scarcely speak of it even now—the child died, after only two days’ illness, away from us.
It was on her return from a ball that my wife heard of it.
She sank down into a chair, dumb and shivering, without a word or a tear.
When at last we succeeded in rousing her from this state, she took off her beautiful jewels—you have heard she was an heiress—and flung them from her with a shudder of disgust.
I have told you before that by an arrangement on our marriage our settled home was in the country; after her boy’s death, my wife would never even visit town again.
When Mona was born, just before we came to this place, a change came, but not the change I had expected.
I had hoped she would reawaken to interest in life, and perhaps, if the child had been a boy to replace the one she had lost, it would have been so.
I have been looking for an opportunity to tell you this, Miss Christie, as I was afraid you might have been puzzled, and perhaps offended, by her strange manner the other day when you were reading to her.
At such times only I, with the power of my long-tried affection, can calm her instantly.
Do not imagine that she would ever be violent, but she might be incoherent enough to frighten you.
I still hope that in time she may recover her old health and spirits, consent to see people, and even move away from this place for a little change, which I am sure would do her good.
I have begged her to do so over and over again, always unsuccessfully.
I cannot bear to be harsh to her; but there is an iron strength of resistance in that woman of strong intellect and weak frame which, I confess, even I have not yet been able to overcome.
One of my reasons for wishing for a young governess was that I might provide her in an unobtrusive manner with cheerful society and let her get accustomed to seeing a bright young face about her; but I am afraid her obstinate reserve has so far defeated my object.
However, I don’t despair.
Now that you know something of her history, you are more likely to sympathize with her and to make some allowance for her seeming coldness.
Believe me, underneath all she has a warm heart still.
He seemed touched by it, for, as if by a sudden impulse, he stooped and let his lips lightly touch my hand; then, pressing it once more in his, with a look of almost grateful kindliness, he left the room.
But he was an impulsive man, the very opposite in all things to his cold statuesque wife, and the union between them seemed sometimes like a bond between the dead and the living.
I had never seen a more attentive, long-suffering husband, nor a more coldly irritating wife.
To such a man the sort of exile his wife’s obstinate reserve and dislike to society condemned him to must have been specially hard to bear with patience.
The first Sunday after my arrival was so wet that we could not go to church, so that I had been there a fortnight before I saw a general gathering of the inhabitants.
But on the very day previous to this event I had an encounter with two of the ladies of the neighborhood which left a most unpleasant impression upon my mind.
Then a young girl of about fourteen or fifteen, to whom the dog belonged, came up to the hedge, and said that she was sorry he had frightened the child, but that he would not hurt her.
We were only a few steps away when I heard the voice of another girl addressing her rather sharply.
“Who was that you were talking to, Alice?” The answer was given in a lower voice.
There was a square family-pew just in front of ours, which was empty when we took our seats; but, when I rose from my knees, I found fixed upon me, with a straightforward and not very friendly stare, the round gray eyes of a girl two or three years older than myself, whom I recognized as the owner of the voice which had said of me, “Don’t you know she comes from the house on the marsh?” By her side, therefore also facing me, was the younger sister, with whom I had talked; she avoided meeting my eyes, and looked rather uncomfortable.
As for me, I felt that I hated them both, and was glad when the gentleman who was evidently their father changed his position so that he almost hid them from my sight.
Next to him sat a stout lady, who wore a black silk mantle covered with lace and beads and a white bonnet trimmed with yellow bows and unlikely clusters of roses.
My heart sank curiously when I caught sight of the third person in the row, at the farther end of the pew.
Having found myself in an uncongenial household, I had unconsciously looked forward to seeing again, at some time or other, the only person I had met since I came to Norfolk to whom no associations of mystery or melancholy were attached.
And now to meet him with those horrid girls!
I rejoiced at this, and so missed the text, which was given out during the struggle.
And then I missed a great deal of the sermon, for I was growing unhappy in my new home, and, as the preaching of one clergyman, especially if you are not listening particularly, sounds much like the preaching of another, it was easy to shut my eyes and fancy myself sitting with my mother in church at home in London.
He asked her to give him a kiss, and she refused—and I was very glad.
He was trying to persuade them to start a penny bank, and was pointing out to them the encouragement it would give to habits of thrift, and offering to take most of the trouble of starting it into his own hands.
It was curious to note now how they all listened coldly at first, with an aversion to the proposal, strengthened by their dislike to the man who proposed it, and how, overcome by an irresistible charm in his manner of arguing as much as by the arguments themselves, they one by one from listless became interested, and not only agreed to the scheme being started, but to taking each some small share in setting it on foot.
He was very severe indeed upon rustic wits and rustic governors during dinner, calling them sheep and donkeys and other things.
Know then, Miss Christie, that it is not one of the conditions of residence under this moist but hospitable roof that you should trudge backwards and forwards to church all Sunday, with intervals of pious meditation.
We never go ourselves more than once.
I passed the gates of a park, among the trees of which I saw a big square white house surrounded by a flower-garden; and a little farther on I saw an American chair on the grass under the park trees, and a young man in a light suit, with his cravat hanging loose and his hat off, lying at full length in it.
He had a cigar in his mouth and a gaudy-covered book in his hand, and on a rustic table beside him was a half-empty glass containing some liquid; and I could see that there was ice in it.
He saw me, I think, for he started up and coughed; but I was looking the other way, and I thought it best not to hear him.
A few heavy drops fell as I stepped out of the church door, and my heart sank at the thought of the ruin a good shower would work upon my best gown, a light gray merino.
It was nearly half an hour’s walk to the Alders; my way lay along lanes and across fields where there was little or no shelter, and my umbrella was a small one.
However, there was nothing to be done but to start, hoping that the storm might not break with any violence before I got home.
I had left all chance of shelter well behind me, when the rain came pouring down like sheets of water, with a sharp hissing sound which made my heart sink within me.
He opened a gate to the right that led into a field with a rough cart-track alongside the hedge.
“There is a shed for carts here where we shall get shelter,” said he.
A few days before I might have found something to enjoy in this curious encounter with my friend of the dog-cart; but the rudeness and suspicion of his sisters had made me shy with him.
I could see—as one sees so many things, without looking—the rain-drops falling one by one from the low roof on to his hat; but I would not tell him of it.
“Oh, no, thank you—I am not nervous!” I replied contemptuously, when a loud peal of thunder startled me so much that I nearly fell off my seat.
He said nothing, did not even smile at my crestfallen look; but he took up his stand in front of me, giving me a fine view of his profile against the dark sky.
“I wish it would leave off,” I remarked stupidly, at length.
Why, you have on little toy town-boots, not fit to walk down a country-lane in!
“Oh, no, no—they are much thicker than they look!” said I.
“So do most ladies, I believe.” “One can’t help liking a person who talks and laughs, and is bright and kind, better than one who never speaks, and glides about like a ghost, and looks coldly at you if you speak to her,” I burst out, apologetically at first, but warming into vehemence towards the close of my speech.
“Perhaps she means to be kind,” said he gently.
She can’t think it is kind to fix her eyes upon me as if I were something not human, if I laugh; to give me her hand so coldly and unresponsively that it seems like a dead hand in mine, and at other times to take no more notice of me than if I were not there.
I am not at all.
She had a boy who died some years ago, and she has never got over it.
It seems difficult to believe, doesn’t it, that a brilliant woman who wrote books and was much admired should fade like that into a kind of shadow?
Didn’t he, Miss Christie?
I could feel the blood rushing to my cheeks; but I was indignant at having to submit to this catechism.
The young man drew back, muttered “I beg your pardon,” and, turning to watch the rain, began to hum something without any tune to cover his discomfiture.
I was sorry directly; but my dignity forbade my calling him back to retract the snub.
To my relief, in a few minutes he came back to me of his own accord.
I really have no proof that he is anything but what he wishes every one to think him—a light-hearted accomplished man, of idle life and pleasant temper.
He caught sight of me first as he came under the roof of the dark shed.
It was a happy thought of mine to look for you here.
Ah, this explains the mystery!
You have been playing knight-errant, I see, and I am too late in the field; but I shall carry off the lady, after all.
Handsome too, and good-natured.
Father—self-important, narrow-minded old simpleton; mother—ill-dressed vegetable, kept alive by a sense of her own dignity as the penniless daughter of an earl; sisters—plain stuck-up nonentities; younger brother—dunce at Eton.
But they haven’t been able to spoil Laurence.
You don’t understand the rustic mind yet, Miss Christie.
Poor child, you had better not acknowledge the taste as long as you remain in this benighted spot; they class it with the black art.
I believe I am popularly supposed to have bewitched the Alders with my playing.
The idea of those great weird eyes being upon me, watching me, just as they had been on the evening of my arrival, made me uncomfortable.
He left me in the hall, and went straight into his study, while I, before going upstairs to take off my bonnet, went into our little schoolroom to put my church-service away.
The French window had not been closed, and I walked up to it to see whether the rain had come in.
The sky was still heavy with rain-clouds, so that it was quite dark indoors, and, while I could plainly see the woman I had noticed among the trees forcing her way through the wet branches, stepping over the flower-beds on to the lawn, and making her way to the front of the house, she could not see me.
I stood, without acknowledging it to myself, rather in awe of this woman; she was so tall and so thin, and had such big eager eyes and such a curiously constrained manner.
She did not turn or cry out, but only stopped short with a sort of gasp.
By forcing your way through the trees and walking over the beds you do damage to the flowers—and to yourself.
Now go in and get tea ready.
The whole scene had puzzled me a little.
What did Sarah the housemaid want to stand like a spy in the shrubbery for?
Was there any deeper meaning under the words that had passed between them?
I waited behind the curtain by the window until long after he had gone back towards the study, feeling guiltily that his sharp eyes must find me out, innocently as I had played the spy.
But no one molested me.
When I crept away from the window and went softly upstairs to my room, there was no one about, and no sound to be heard in the house save a faint clatter of tea-things in the servants’ hall.
This sort of diffidence at inventing excuses is a strong barrier to action in young people.
And, if I had overcome this diffidence sufficiently to offer a plausible motive for leaving the Alders, where was I to go?
My uncle would, I know, give me a home while I looked out for another situation; but I understood now how few people seemed to want the services of “a young lady, aged eighteen, who preferred children under twelve.” And what a bad recommendation it would be to have left my first situation within a month!
And what could I say I did it for?
If I said, Because the house was damp, people would think I was too particular.
And, if I said I was afraid my pupil’s mother was mad, they would want some better reason than the fact that she talked very little and moved very softly for believing me.
And, if I said I had been told the place was dangerous, and so thought I had better go, they would think I was mad myself.
And, besides these objections to my leaving, was there not, to a young mind, an unacknowledged attraction in the faint air of mystery that hung about the place, which would have made the ordinary British middle-class household seem rather uninteresting after it?
So I decided to pay no attention to vague warnings, but to stay where I was certainly, on the whole, well off.
The next morning, as I put on a dainty china-blue cotton frock that I had never worn before, I could not help noticing how much better I was looking than when I lived in London.
Instead of being pale, I had now a pink color in my cheeks, and my eyes seemed to look larger and brighter than they used to do.
After a minute’s pleased contemplation of my altered appearance, I turned from the glass in shame.
What would my mother say if she could see how vain her daughter was growing?
Without another look even to see whether I had put in my brooch straight, I went downstairs.
He put down his newspaper and smiled at me.
“Come into the garden for a few minutes until the rest of the family assembles,” said he; and I followed him through the French window on to the lawn.
The morning sun left this side of the house in shade.
The birds were twittering in the ivy and stirring the heavy leaves as they flew out frightened at the noise of the opening window; the dew was sparkling on the grass, and the scent of the flowers was deliciously sweet.
It looks and smells like Paradise!
But he only laughed very pleasantly.
I was smelling a rose while I tried to recover the staid demeanor I cultivated as most suitable to my profession.
When I raised my eyes, he was looking at me and still laughing.
“Now, if you were Beauty, what would you ask papa to bring you?” I laughed shyly.
“A prince?” I blushed and shook my head.
“No, not yet,” I said, smiling rather mischievously.
I can’t get it to grow here.
What a pity we are not in a fairy tale, Miss Christie, and then the soil wouldn’t matter!
She continued to look at us, and especially at me, as if fascinated, until we were close to the window, when she turned with a start; and when we entered the room the intent expression had faded from her lustreless eyes, and she was her usual lifeless self again.
This change brought one strange symptom: she had grown nervous.
Instead of wearing always an unruffled stolidity, she started at any unexpected sound, and a faint tinge of color would mount to her white face at the opening of a distant door or at a step in the passage.
This change must certainly, I thought, be due to her husband’s departure; but it was hard to tell whether his absence made her glad or sorry, or whether any such vivid feeling as gladness or grief caused the alteration in her manner.
I know she is an invalid.
It is only that two of the village boys want to open an account with the penny bank.
“I must have lost the other,” he said gravely.
He had forgotten the names of the boys, and it was some time before he remembered them.
“It seems a great deal of fuss to make about twopence, doesn’t it?” I asked innocently.
He talked a little about Sunday, and hoped I had not caught cold; and then he went away.
Nothing happened after that until Saturday, which was the day on which I generally wrote to my mother.
After tea, I took my desk upstairs to my own room; it was pleasanter there than in the schoolroom; I liked the view of the marsh between the trees, and the sighing of the wind among the poplars.
I had not written many lines before another sound overpowered the rustle of the leaves—the faint tones of a violin.
I had not thought, when he said he played the violin, that he could play like that.
I must hear better.
The music had begun again.
“Lucky Beauty!” he said, laughing, as he opened the door for me.
“There is no beast for you to sacrifice yourself to in return for the roses.” I laughed back and left the room, and, putting my desk under my flowers, went towards the staircase.
Sarah was standing near the foot of it, wearing a very forbidding expression.
“So you’re bewitched too!” she said, with a short laugh, and turned sharply towards the servants’ hall.
Instead of putting his elbows on his knees through the prayers as he had done on the Sunday before, he would turn right round and kneel in front of his seat, facing me—which was a little disconcerting, for, as he knelt with his chin on his hands and his head back, he seemed to be saying all the responses to me, and I could not raise my eyes for a minute from my book without having my attention distracted in spite of myself.
He was always particularly bright on Sunday at dinner, the contact with duller wits in the morning seeming to give edge to his own.
On that afternoon I was scarcely outside the gate on my way to church when he joined me.
“No, no, Miss Christie; we are not going to trust you to go to church by yourself again.” I blushed, feeling a little annoyed, though I scarcely knew why.
But he did not come.
The heat and this absurd little trifle, and my penitence for it, so distracted my attention that I scarcely heard a word of the sermon.
But then it was the curate who preached on that afternoon, and his discourses were never of the exciting kind.
It was a heavily-built little Norman church, very old and dark, and he was sitting in a corner in such an attentive attitude that I thought at first I must be mistaken; but I looked at him twice, and then I was quite sure.
He overtook me in a few minutes; but, when he said the sermon was good of its kind, I had to turn away my head that he might not see me smiling.
I may have meant it was good as a lullaby.
One must be on one’s guard with you demure people.
I have never yet been to afternoon service without going to sleep, and I have never before been discovered.
Now the spell is broken, and I shall feel that the eyes of the whole congregation are upon me.
A religious little girl like you not listening!
“I’m not really religious,” I said hurriedly.
But I do respect religion and religious people very much, and I hope some day I shall be able to enter into their feelings better than I can now.
“It will come, child, it will come,” he said gravely and quite paternally.
“Go on quietly doing your duty as you do, and the blessing will come in due time.” He said it so simply, without any attempt at preaching, that I felt I looked up to him more naturally than even to a clergyman, being quite sure now that he acquitted me of any intention to be hypocritical.
To-morrow night I shall prove whether you are so accomplished a reader of secular music.
But I shrank back slightly, and so evaded him, trying at the same time to make my movement seem unconscious; and, with a smiling “Good-night,” I left the room.
As soon as I had done so, my heart sank within me.
What had I done?
But then he was not my father, and not nearly old enough to be so, however paternal and kind his manner might be; if he had been forty or fifty, I should have submitted without a moment’s hesitation.
So I comforted myself as well as I could with the thought that, after all, I had done only what was right and prudent; and, if he was offended, well, there was no help for it.
The next morning, to my great relief, his manner was just the same as usual; of course what had caused so much thought and anxiety to the girl of eighteen had seemed but a trifle to the man of three-and-thirty.
I wondered whether I should be summoned to the drawing-room to accompany him on the violin, as he had spoken on the previous night of wishing me to do.
I hope I am not very inquisitive; but, in a quiet country-house to which, rightly or wrongly, some suspicion of mystery is attached, one cannot help noticing even trifles connected with unaccustomed events, and wondering whether there is some meaning in them.
I was very anxious to improve myself, so that by and by I might be an accomplished woman and able to take an engagement as finishing governess, which at that time seemed to me quite a lofty ambition.
When the translation was finished, I had still to read a chapter of Guizot’s French History; but that was pleasant, easy work, and might be enjoyed in the garden.
I had seen the stranger as I was crossing the hall after tea.
I had forgotten all about him long before I made my way, with a heavy volume of history in my arms, to the pond, near the prettiest, reediest corner of which I had made myself a nice little nest.
There was here a willow-tree which had been forced by an aggressive oak to grow in a slanting position, and one of its lowest branches hung parallel to the ground.
This made my seat, and a piece of cord fastened from branch to branch a foot and a half above made a rest for my back; so, with a couple of old bricks to raise my feet out of the damp grass, I could injudiciously sit there and enjoy the summer evening till quite late.
I read my Guizot, conscientiously hunting out in the dictionary all the words I did not know, until the light began to fade, and I was thinking it was time to go in, when I heard voices that seemed to be coming towards me from the house.
The speakers, a man and a woman, as I could already make out, seemed to be coming along the path.
Whoever they might be, I would wait until they had gone by before I went in.
I could not see them, nor could they see me, I knew.
When they came a little nearer, I recognized Sarah’s voice; the other was that of a man of a class much higher than her own.
Could it be the stranger?
He was talking familiarly and seriously with her; I could tell that before I heard any words.
Sarah was speaking in a tone of bitter complaint, and the first words I heard were hers.
Sarah, it was well known in the house, had an admirer, a man some years younger than herself, who lived a long way off—in London, I think I had heard it said—and who paid her visits at irregular intervals.
So Sarah was giving vent to her jealousy in an earnest and intimate conversation with her master’s guest.
It seemed a very strange proceeding.
I knew that men in the position of gentlemen do treat women of a lower class with more consideration than is necessary when they are young and pretty; but Sarah’s face, which looked as if it was worn and lined before its time with hard work and strong passions, was more repellent than attractive, and I was glad I could not see it as I heard her fierce words more plainly, and knew how her great black eyes must be flashing and her mouth twitching, as they did whenever she was annoyed.
“Look what I’ve done for him; think how I’ve worked for him!” she said.
Does he think he can make use of her?
But she interrupted him in a tone of half-suppressed savagery that made me shudder, out of her sight though I was.
Only amusing himself!
If I thought that, if I really believed that, he’d find me more than his match for once.
The man spoke again, this time very gravely.
I had to listen with all my attention to hear him, for they had now passed the place where I sat.
“Sally, don’t do anything foolish,” said he.
I waited till their voices had died away, and then dashed from my perch, through the plantation and the hall, up to my room, as fast as I could, locked the door, and sat down appalled.
What a terrible tragedy in the servants’ hall we were likely to have if things went on like this!
There was nothing for it but to hope that little Jane would be wise and leave off provoking Sarah, and that Providence would bring Sarah herself to a better mind.
But what a dreadful woman to have in the house!
I soon remembered what it was, and tried to shake off the recollection of the talk in the plantation and of Sarah’s vindictive tones.
But perhaps, when he first made love to her, she was young and comparatively fair; and, if so, he ought not to desert her just because she had grown thin and hard-looking in doing the wicked things he made her do.
What were those wicked things?
That very day I had an opportunity of comparing my impression of Tom, when I thought him a harmless and inoffensive person, with my impression of him now that I knew him to be a rogue of the most determined kind.
One held a jug, the other a glass, and they seemed united in the desire to please him by ministering to his wants, and by a rough kind of humor to which he was not slow in replying.
They were talking about kisses, and I think they were going to illustrate the subject, when Tom suddenly became aware of our presence, and, taking his arm from round Jane’s waist, pulled his cap off apologetically and remained standing until we had gone by.
What a strange contradiction this scene seemed to give to what I had overheard on the night before!
That evening, after tea, when, my translation finished, the time came for Guizot, I remembered, with a pang of conscience, that I had left that nicely-bound book out in the damp all night, forgotten in my hasty flight.
If I had been conscience-stricken before, when my guilt was known only to myself, what did I feel now that it was discovered?
I had not the courage to face him, but turned, and was sneaking back towards the house, when he called me— “Miss Christie!” I might have known I should not escape his sharp eyes and ears.
It was only a trifle, after all, but it was a most vexatious one.
He was turning over the leaves with his eyes bent on the book as I came up; but I have since thought that he took a mischievous pleasure in my discomfiture.
But what makes you spoil your young eyes by plodding through such heavy stuff as this?
And I don’t read only dry things.
And then the pretty story about Maid Marian!
Jack Sheppard had a sweetheart too, hadn’t he?
“It won’t do, Miss Christie; I must destroy your edifice of argument at a blow,” said he, shaking his head mournfully.
So that he is something like a thief.
But it is too bad of you to make fun of my logic.
I can’t put it properly; but what I mean is this.
“Ah, you must know some before you decide too hastily that you don’t like them!” said he.
He nodded gravely; and then I saw that he was amusing himself with my horror-struck expression.
“You are quite mistaken in me indeed,” I said, trying to keep down my annoyance.
I knew a person against whom I had heard nothing who always seemed to me to look good-natured and simple.
The last words gave a shock to me.
I had never heard them applied to me before, and for a moment I was without an answer.
He had been sitting on my seat, and I had been standing with my back against a young oak-tree, a few feet from him and nearer to the pond.
He got up and came towards me, when a shrill little cry as from out of the ground caused him to start.
Mona was an excuse.
Sarah must have forgotten you.
Come—I must take you in now.
So she let me take her in my arms without much opposition, and gave only one more yell when her father, while wishing me good-night, shook hands with me and accidentally touched her dirty little shoe.
I took her into the house and gave her to Sarah in the hall; then I went into the schoolroom to replace the dissipated volume of Guizot that had been out all night among its more sober brethren, and then, moved by some spring of vanity, took my candle to the mantelpiece and looked at myself in the glass above it.
I suppose no girl can hear herself called a beautiful woman for the first time, no matter by whom, without a slight thrill of gratification.
To be called pretty falls, I suppose, at some time or other, to the lot of most girls; but the other term implies a higher measure of attractiveness, and I certainly was not insensible to the pleasure of hearing it applied to me.
Suddenly I was startled, as I well deserved to be, by a harsh ironical voice breaking in upon the silence of the room.
“Yes, it’s a pretty face enough now, and you do right to set store by it, for it won’t last pretty long —not long; in a few years it will be all lines and wrinkles, and not worth looking at; and you’ll turn away in disgust from the glass, thinking of how you used to look, and how the men used to look at you—the fools!” I had turned, and was looking at Sarah’s hard, cruel face as she stood, with Mona still in her arms, her eyes flashing scornfully on me as she hissed out the spiteful words.
“Handsome is that handsome does,” she said less viciously; and, with a toss of her head, she left the room.
The country air, which had brought unwonted roses to my cheeks while the weather was fine and dry, affected me very differently when, in the first days of September, the rain fell daily in a steady, continuous downpour that soon swelled the river and turned part of the marsh from a swamp into a stagnant unwholesome lake.
I often wondered why they slept there.
I knew by the doors and windows that the ground-floor of that wing contained two rooms, a large and a small one.
My own was in the same wing, but on the story above; and over mine was a turret that looked out high above the trees, but which was not used, so far as I knew.
Even I, who slept in the upper story, soon began to lose my color and my appetite, and to feel at first languid, and then really ill.
Now I took her up in my arms and rested her flaxen head on my breast, and she said her lessons there that day.
And after that, without any more explanation or comment, the sympathy between the child and me was perfect.
But as, on the one hand, the little one’s friendship was a great solace to me, so, on the other, it brought me fresh trouble.
But what was there to prevent her, except the shroud of reserve she seemed to have wrapped round herself?
The weather had been so bad that for two Sundays we had not been able to go to church at all, for which I was very sorry, more sorry than I can tell; one misses church dreadfully in the country.
So we knew nothing of what was going on in the parish for two whole weeks.
We did not have to wait until the church-porch gathering on the following Sunday, though; for on the second day after the weather had at last grown fine again, when we were all in the drawing-room reading the morning papers over our coffee, as we always did after our early dinner, we heard the sound of a horse’s hoofs coming down the drive.
Come in, come in; the ladies will make even more of you than usual.
I’ve only come with a note from Mrs.
But my only half- acknowledged fancy was disappointed.
She was not a bit afraid of him, but ran into the house for some sugar, and then, flattening out her small hand with a piece on it, fed him, and talked to him in a language which he seemed to understand, though I could not.
“Would you like to give him a piece, Miss Christie?” she asked.
I did not even look round until he called out, “Good-afternoon, Miss Christie;” and then I just turned my head over my shoulder and said stiffly, “Good afternoon,” and went on with my task.
He had half pulled up his horse.
I dare say he thought I wanted to talk to him.
I was not going to let him make such an absurd mistake as that.
So he rode on to the gate, and then he stopped, and presently I heard him utter impatient ejaculations, and I looked and saw that he was fumbling with his whip at the fastening of the gate.
“How stupid he is not to get off and open it with his fingers!” I thought contemptuously.
It seemed to me that he deliberately missed all the best opportunities, and I was frowning with impatience, when he suddenly looked up and his eyes met mine.
There was nothing for it then but in common civility to go and open the gate for him myself; so I walked up the drive very reluctantly and opened it wide without a smile.
I wouldn’t have given you so much trouble for worlds.
And he raised his hat and rode off at a walking pace, while I shut the gate and turned to go down the drive again.
“I dare say he wouldn’t have let me open the gate for him if I hadn’t been only a governess,” I thought, as a lump came into my throat.
He had opened it without any difficulty this time.
Politeness obliged me to help him.
He fastened his horse’s rein round the gate-post and showed me the ring, and I saw the hole where there was a stone missing.
Suddenly it flashed through my mind that, while we stood under the shed on that Sunday in the rain, I had noticed the very same hole in the very same ring, and I was just going to tell him that it was of no use for him to look, for he had lost the stone much longer than he fancied, when another thought, which brought the color swiftly to my face and made my lips quiver and my heart beat faster, flashed into my mind and stopped me.
Then he looked up, red with stooping, and caught me smiling, and he had to bite his lip in order not to smile himself as he walked up to me.
“Don’t you find yourself that your health is affected by it?” I hesitated.
“But that is what you advised me to do,” said I, looking up, surprised.
Then I suppose our sympathies must be as far apart as the poles.
I could not let him abuse a person whom I liked, and who had been consistently kind to me, without protest.
“You surely cannot judge him so well as I, a member of his household,” said I coolly.
You are giving way to the most cruel prejudice against a man whose only fault is that he cannot contentedly lead the dull life his neighbors do.
I have never played for him, and I have not found either talks or walks with him particularly delightful.
I tried to answer, but my voice would not come.
I turned away sharply, and left him, with an agony of anger and pain at my heart which would have made him remorseful indeed if he could have guessed what his words had inflicted.
As it was, he followed me a few steps down the drive, with apologies to which I was too angry and too much hurt to listen.
“Don’t speak to me now,” I said—“I can’t bear it;” and, turning off rapidly into a side-path, I left him, and fled away through the alleys into the house.
Luckily I managed to keep back tears, so that I could return to the drawing-room with the flowers I had gathered before they began to wonder why I had been so long.
Manners within the next few days to settle what should be her share of the work.
That evening I debated with myself whether it was not too damp and swampy still for me to go and peep at my nest and see if the water had subsided and left the top of the bricks dry.
I never doubted those roses were for me; I only wondered who had put them there.
I looked searchingly around me in all directions before I took up the rose which carried the note and carefully slipped it off.
I think, if I had been quite sure that no one could have seen me, I should have raised the note to my lips, I was so happy.
I put them in water as soon as I had sneaked upstairs to my room with them.
The supernatural agency could not follow me there, so I slept that night with the note under my pillow.
Now how to give it you without letting you go away—for we can’t spare you even for a week!
You will think me a magician if I procure you change of air without leaving this house, won’t you, Miss Christie?
Yet I think I can manage it.
That spirit pervaded the house for two days.
On the fourth day, when I went to my room to dress for tea, I found it all dismantled, the bed and most of the furniture gone, and little Jane pulling down my books from their shelf and enjoying my discomfiture with delighted giggles, not at all disconcerted at being caught taking an unheard-of liberty.
I was turning to the door to wander forth, I did not know exactly whither, to try to find an explanation of this most extraordinary state of things, when Sarah came in, her dark frowning face offering a strong contrast to that of the laughing Jane.
“Sarah, can you tell me what this means?” said I.
“Perhaps you will be kind enough to manage down here till after tea, as it’s his orders that you shouldn’t be shown up till the room is quite ready.” I answered that I could manage very well, and they left the room.
I said nothing at tea about my adventure, reflecting that perhaps some surprise for me was intended, which would be sprung upon me at a fitting time.
And so it proved.
It was an octagonal room, the four sides which overlooked the marsh containing each a window, while in one of the other sides was a small fireplace with a bright fire burning.
The carpet was new, the wall-paper was new; there were two easy-chairs, one on each side of the fire, a writing-table and a Japanese screen, besides the furniture of my old room.
No, of course I was not afraid; I never had minded sleeping away from everybody else; and, if burglars were to break into the Alders, they certainly would not expect to find anything worth stealing in the turret.
I was not so strong-minded as to be proof against fear even at second-hand, and ever since the sensation caused by that great jewel-robbery in Derbyshire I had been very careful to hide away my watch, my one bracelet, and my two brooches under my pillow at night.
But I was too happy in my new abode to trouble myself long with idle fears.
For I knew that Sarah disliked me, and even the fact that she had brought me up some coals to replenish my fire, which was getting low, did not reconcile me to her presence; I could not help thinking of the cold, grudging manner in which before tea she had announced to me my change of residence.
“It will be rather lonely on a stormy night; the wind will howl so up here,” I said, my spirits beginning to sink under her sharp speeches.
“Oh, you won’t want for company, I dare say!” she said, with a harsh grating laugh.
“Why, all the company I am likely to get up here is burglars,” I answered lugubriously, with my chin between my hands.
The start she gave startled me in my turn.
It was promotion for me to be soothing Sarah.
“Why, I have more courage than you!” I said, laughing lightly.
If they came, they would soon go down again when they found there was nothing to take.
Then, as if satisfied with the result of her scrutiny, she relapsed into her usual hard, cold manner, and, answering my good-night shortly, left me alone.
And after that I went to bed and dreamt, not of a burglar, but of quite a different person.
And when we came out of church, and he and his sisters and the two girls trooped out together, the breaking up of the group left him to pair off again with the pretty one.
It was a horrid day.
“I noticed that he paid her a great deal of attention at church, and afterwards they paired off together quite naturally,” said he.
And that afternoon the heat and the midges and the dust were worse than ever.
Luckily for me, within those two days my spirits improved a little.
“He must be at dinner,” said I resignedly.
“In that case we shall have to wait.” For I knew Mr. Bowles.
“Convenient place these village-shops are,” said he, not thinking of what he was saying, I was sure.
“Yes, if you don’t care what you get, nor how stale it is,” said I, sharply.
He laughed; but I did not intend to be funny at all.
But he stopped me.
“Old Bowles can’t be much longer over his bacon, I’m sure,” said he, rather pleadingly.
And I am quite well.
It was very, very kind of him to think about it.
I got up from the one chair and turned to my pupil, who was deep in an old story-book that she had found.
That is one of the servants, isn’t it?
A gaunt, shrewd-looking person?
She goes out when she likes, I think.
She doesn’t like me.
“Surely it is a compliment to a woman that a young man should be prejudiced in her favor?” said he, preferring that the talk should become abstract.
“He must have finished by this time!” I cried; and a vigorous thump on the counter did at last bring in Mr. Bowles, who declared it was the first sound he had heard.
“What did you do with them?” I remembered the fair-haired girl and my resolve to be discreet.
“I put them in water, and when they were dead I threw them away.” “Threw them away?” “Yes, of course; one doesn’t keep dead flowers,” said I calmly; but it hurt me to say it, for the words seemed to hurt him.
It is very hard to be discreet.
He said no more, but took his parcel and left the shop, saluting me very coldly.
“How stupid of him!” I exclaimed.
Whether he was engaged or not, I could not be ungracious about those lovely flowers.
I often heard his voice and step about the house until quite late; he was always one of the first in the dining-room to our eight-o’clock breakfast, and even on the wettest mornings he never looked as if he had been out in the rain.
It often seems to me that, when I have been puzzling myself fruitlessly for a long time over any matter, I find out quite simply by accident what I want to know.
I’ll tell you about one I had two nights ago, if you’ll bend your head and let me whisper.
She put her little hand up to my cheek, and, drawing down my face to hers, breathed into my ear, in the very faintest, softest whisper I have ever heard— “You know that day when we took you up to your new room in the turret?” “Yes, dear,” said I.
And then I dreamt that I heard mamma screaming and crying, and papa speaking—oh, so differently from the way he generally does; it made me frightened in my dream!
I didn’t tell anybody; and the next night I wondered if I should have the dream again, and I didn’t want Jane to go away; and, when I said it was because I’d had a dream, she said dreams were stuff and nonsense, and she wanted to go and dream at having supper.
And then she went away, and I went to sleep.
And then I woke up because mamma was crying, and I thought at first it was my dream again; but I knocked my head against the rail of my bed, and then I knew I must be awake.
And I got out of bed, and I went quite softly to the door and looked through the keyhole, for there was a light in her room.
When she has a light, I can see in quite plainly through the keyhole, and I can see the bed and her lying in it.
But she wasn’t alone like she generally is—I could see papa’s hand holding the candle, and he was talking to her in such a low voice; but she was crying and talking quite wildly and strangely, so that she frightened me.
When she talks like that, I feel afraid—it doesn’t seem as if she were mamma.
And presently I called ‘Mamma, mamma!’ but she didn’t answer; and I was so frightened, I thought she was dead.
It always is, you know.
But I would have given the world to know what the child had seen in that mysterious room.
And then a suggestion occurred to me which would at least explain Sarah’s important position in the household.
I already knew that the relations between mistress and servant were not very amicable.
Though she treated her with all outward signs of respect, it was not difficult to see that Sarah despised her mistress, while I had sometimes surprised in the wide gray eyes of the other a side-glance of dislike and fear which made me wonder how she could tolerate in her household a woman from whom she had so strong an aversion.
This idea was absurd.
The other supposition, dreadful as it was, was far more probable.
But my strongest feeling was not for the half-witted wife nor for the unfortunate husband, but for the child herself, the unsuspected witness of her mother’s outbreaks of incoherent words and cries.
It was strange that these attacks should occur only at night, I thought at first; but then I remembered that day when I had read Adam Bede aloud to her in the drawing-room, the tearful excitement into which, apparently without any cause, she had fallen, which her husband’s entrance had as suddenly subdued—at least for the time; for how could I tell what had followed when he had led her away into that bedroom of hers which was beginning to have for me the fascination of a haunted chamber?
The immediate result of the child’s confidences to me was a great increase of my love for and interest in herself.
We became almost inseparable in and out of school-hours; I encouraged her to talk; and she soon fell into the habit of telling me, whether I was listening or not, those long rambling stories which have no beginning, no sequence, and no end, which are the solace of children who have no companions of their own age.
When my attention was wandering from these incoherent tales, I sometimes had it abruptly brought back by some flight of her childish fancy, which set me wondering if it had been suggested by some half-forgotten experience.
Where did you get them?
I know where you got them.
But you mustn’t cry, you know.
I won’t have a Princess that cries.
If you don’t cry, I’ll let you have some jam too as well as butter, and you shall have a ride on the butcher’s horse up and down the back-yard.
And sometimes she would say, “Let us sing, Miss Christie;” and I would sing some ballad, while she would coo an irregular but not inharmonious accompaniment.
I believe you’re afraid.
But it would indeed be a charitable action if you would come and let us bore you by our fiddling and our dull chat sometimes, instead of slipping up to your turret-chamber, to be no more seen for the remainder of the evening.
What do you do there, if I may ask?
Do you take observations of the moon and stars?
I should think you must be too close to them up there to get a comprehensive view.
Then he almost gasped.
I should never have believed it.
And after that his astonishment evidently outweighed the pleasure he took in our performance.
“This will never do,” he exclaimed, with as much affectionate concern as if a friend’s well-being had been threatened.
“I might as well keep it in the garden as in this den,” he went on, quite irritably for him—music always wrought him to a high pitch of excitement.
“Here, Sarah,” he added, turning towards the table where she had just placed the candles.
“Take this to my room—mind, very carefully.” So his room could not be damp, I thought, or he would not allow his precious violin to be taken there.
I had said good-night, and was in the hall, just in time to see Sarah, carrying the violin, disappear down the passage, on the right-hand side of the staircase, which led to the study.
I could not let my curiosity lead me to follow her, much as I should have liked to solve this little mystery.
I knew all the rooms on the upper story, and, except the nursery where Mona and Jane slept, the cook’s room, Sarah’s, and the one I had left, they all bore distinctly the impress of having been long unused.
So I was obliged reluctantly to go upstairs.
When I got to the foot of my turret staircase, however, which was only a few steps from the head of the back-staircase that the servants used, I heard Sarah’s quick tread in the passage below, and, putting down my candle on the ground, I went softly to the top of the stairs—there was a door here also, but it was generally open and fastened back—and looked down.
I saw Sarah, much to my amusement, give a vicious shake to the violin-case, as if it were a thing she hated; and then I saw her take a key from her pocket and unlock a door near the foot of the stairs.
But, as the door went back on its hinges and Sarah took out the key, went through, and locked it behind her, I saw that it led, not into a room at all, but into the garden.
The little notice she got was neither consistent nor kind.
Sarah or Jane would snatch her up, regardless of her shrieks, to shut her up in an empty bedroom, if she showed her grimy little face and tattered pinafore anywhere near the house in the afternoon, when callers might come.
But, if they did not see her, they forgot her, and left her to talk and croon to herself, and to collect piles of snails, and to such other simple occupations in her favorite haunts until tea-time, when she generally grew hungry of her own accord, and, returning to the house, made an entrance where she could.
I jumped up and called to her; but she took no notice; so I ran to fetch my umbrella and set off in pursuit.
After a little search, I saw her steadily toddling up a side-path among the trees which led to the stables; and I followed softly without calling her again, as, if irritated by pursuit, she might, I knew, plunge among the trees and surrender only when we were both wet through.
The stables were built much higher up than the house, close to the road, but surrounded by trees.
I had never been near them before; but now I followed Mona close underneath the walls, where she began dancing about by herself, making hideous grimaces at two windows on the upper story, and throwing up at them little stones and bits of stick that she picked up, all wet and muddy, from the moist earth.
I seized and caught her up in my arms so suddenly that for the first few moments she was too much surprised to howl; but I had scarcely turned to take her back to the house when she recovered her powers completely, and made the plantation ring with a most elfish yell.
It doesn’t seem to hurt her.
For the child was not old enough to know that it was wrong to dislike her father, while he was quite old enough to know that it was wrong not to be fonder of his child.
“But you will get your own feet wet, my dear child,” said he, in quite a different tone.
You have never seen my studio.
But I won’t come in, thank you.
He was leaning a long way out of window in the rain, and I had work to do indoors; so, without saying anything more, I returned to the house with my prize.
It was to his studio then that Sarah had taken his violin.
No; for in that case he would hardly have asked me to come up and look at his painting.
And I should not like to think that he had made for himself a snug warm little home here while his family slept in the damp vapors of the marsh at the bottom of the hill.
But I heard nothing, though I was awake until long after the rest of the household must have gone to bed.
And I felt almost as much relieved as if it had been my own father proved innocent of a mean action imputed to him.
On the following night there was a high wind, which shook and swayed the trees and whistled round my turret, and made the door which stood always fastened back at the top of the kitchen-stairs rattle and creak on its hinges.
I had been sitting up late over a book, and I knew that the household must be asleep, so I slipped downstairs as softly as I could.
I had got to the top of the back-staircase, and had my hand on the door, when I saw a faint glimmer of light coming along the passage below.
I heard no sound.
I drew back quickly, so quickly that my candle went out; and then I waited, with my heart beating fast, not so much to see who it was, as because I did not dare to move.
The faint light came along swiftly, and, when close to the foot of the stairs below me, I could see that it was a shaded lantern, and could just distinguish the form of a man carrying it.
Was he coming upstairs?
He did not see me; he put the key in the lock, turned it, took the key out, went through and locked it after him so quickly and so entirely without noise that a moment afterwards I could almost have thought that I had imagined the dim scene.
It had been so utterly without sound that, if my eyes had been closed, I should have known nothing about it.
He proposed to paint me, and I gave him a sitting that very afternoon in the dining-room, which had a north light, though there was not much of it; and he said that he must finish it next day in his studio, and, when I objected to neglect my lessons again, he said the whole family should emigrate thither for the morning, and then perhaps I should be satisfied.
Those black figures are just what the hot, rather glaring Spanish scenes want, to relieve the monotony of bright colors and sunshine.
They remind me of the Inquisition.
It is the daring, clever brain of the Jesuit that weaves the plot; it is on him that the chief responsibility lies; and that his part of the work has its dangers is proved by the persecutions and martyrdom that many of his order have suffered.
“Most women begin like that,” said he dryly.
He held in his hand an old and shabby little case.
“The poor painter has not forgotten his promise, if he dares to call it a promise,” said he, with mock humility.
“Now see what you have earned by sitting still.” He drew me to the window and opened the case, keeping his eyes fixed upon my face as he did so.
The case was lined with old and worn red velvet, and had evidently not been made for the ornament it contained.
This was a large pendant in the form of a heart, which was a blaze of what seemed to me the most magnificent diamonds I had ever seen.
The sight of them inspired me not with pleasure, but terror.
I drew a long breath of surprise and admiration.
“It is the most beautiful thing I have ever seen,” said I at last, not quite able to take in yet the fact that it was meant for me, and hoping against hope that it was not.
“You like diamonds?” said he, in a low voice.
“They are lovely—the most beautiful of all jewels, I think,” said I, with a break in my voice.
“Would you like to have your hair and neck and arms covered with diamonds, like a duchess at Court?” asked he, still very quietly, but so that I did not know whether he was speaking seriously or in jest.
I looked up and laughed with rather an effort.
I shouldn’t care for diamonds for myself; I should look absurd in them.
“I think most of them don’t,” said I, in the same manner.
“And so you can accept this pretty little thing as the reward of your services to a grateful painter and a souvenir of our pleasant morning all together in the studio.” “Oh, no—oh, no—I can’t indeed!” said I earnestly, pushing from me gently the case he was trying to put into my hand.
It wasn’t even worth having a case made for it; see, I have had to put it into an old case which once contained a brooch.
No, no, my dear child, you need not be alarmed at the mere money-value of the thing, which is very little.
It has a value in my eyes, but for a different reason.
That this belonged to my grandmother makes its only value.
But I have plenty of relics of her; my wife has jewels enough at the bank which she never wears; so you are robbing nobody and pleasing one old friend—I may call myself an old friend already, may I not?— very much by accepting this.
So I took it with most ungracious feelings, which I tried to hide, and thanked him as well as I could.
And there is a great deal of difference between fifteen shillings and twopence-halfpenny.
Altogether the beautiful ornament that I had admired so much, but certainly not coveted, had brought me more annoyance than pleasure.
It procured me one more little trial that very evening.
It certainly was very splendid, and I thought, as I looked at it and made it flash in the setting sun, that, if this were paste and worth only fifteen shillings, it was great waste of money to buy real diamonds, which cost so much more and looked no better.
She had come up to bring me some water, and I had plenty in the jug.
Her ironical tone and the hard little sneering laugh with which she finished her speech were too much for my temper.
It was true that her manners were not very pleasant or amiable to anybody; but there was a malignity in the way she looked at me, and a spiteful coldness in her tone if she only asked me if I would have any more coals, as if she thought it was a great deal more than I deserved to have a fire at all.
It seemed a very silly feeling in a woman so old and sensible as Sarah was supposed to be, and who was certainly very well off for a servant, to show such a mean jealousy of a governess, who is always supposed to be a lady, even in those cases when everybody knows that she is not one.
That is only fair, as her work is generally so much harder and so much more unpleasant than that of a servant.
“She is only a crumpled rose-leaf, after all,” I thought to myself.
So I decided to lock up my pretty sparkling heart in my desk, and to be content with the less showy pendant I already wore.
I had seen, by the eager way in which she fixed her great black eyes upon it, that she was dying to know what it contained, and I was mischievously glad that she could not.
“Not really,” I answered.
Oh, no, I wasn’t!
I see quite enough of them.
They’re coming again, too, to the school-treat.
Don’t see why they can’t be contented with their own tea-fights.
No; I was thinking of somebody quite different.
This was to be a busy week in the parish.
The school-treat, which had been put off this year, first on account of sickness in the village and then because of the wet weather, was now fixed to take place on Saturday; and the following day was to be the harvest festival.
This was not a very great occasion with us, being signalized only by a special sermon, the harvest thanksgiving hymns— which would be rather inappropriate this year, as the farmers were grumbling more than usual at the damage done by the late heavy rains—and bunches of corn, which those same “thankful people” rather grudged us, in the church-windows and round the pulpit.
He said he had a message for you.
And, when I said you was out and offered to give it you, he said he had better write it, as it was important.
This was not a story, because I knew the letter could not be at all the sort of communication he implied, but would contain, probably, some formal message from Mrs. Maitland.
I opened it at once to show that I did not think it of any consequence.
Would you be so very kind as to undertake part?
If you would not mind, I will ride over with the work to-morrow after luncheon, about a quarter-past two.
Dinner was long that day; when it was over, I went into the schoolroom and drew out my letter again.
But I think I could have sung through the lessons like the heroine of an opera that afternoon.
I had got through one stupid letter—they were not at all important—when there was a knock at the door, and Jane came in, giggling and excited.
“Oh, miss, I’ve brought you a parcel, and I have made Sarah so wild!”—and she laughed delightedly.
And I saw you wasn’t in there, nor yet in the schoolroom.
“Thank you, Jane,” I said quietly.
But in the middle was another note, and a box wrapped up in paper, both directed to “Miss Christie;” and at sight of these little Jane’s delight grew irrepressible again.
“I knew it!” she began, but stopped herself and said, “I beg your pardon, miss,” and left the room very demurely.
But I heard another burst of merriment as she ran downstairs.
I hope they won’t smell of cigars; I could not find a better box.
I will call to fetch the text, if you will let me know when I can see you.
I was nothing loath; I could have played till midnight.
“ ‘You who know what love is.’ ” I drew my music-stool a little back, and listened while he sang it softly through.
I had never known a love-song touch me like that before.
I could almost have cried out in answer, as I sat with my head turned away, listening, almost holding my breath lest I should lose a sound.
When he had finished, he turned round; I did not move or speak, and he jumped up, walked to the shutters, unbarred them, and threw open the window.
“Come here, little woman.” I rose and obeyed.
As I spoke, smiling at him and speaking as gently as I could, though I felt terribly frightened at my own boldness, his eyes seemed to grow darker, and his whole face lighted up in an extraordinary way.
I saw my words had made an impression, so I went on eagerly, pressing nervously the hand with which he was holding mine, for I was still afraid lest my audacity should offend him.
I have so often wondered why you didn’t take her away.
As I spoke, from passionately eager, he looked surprised, puzzled, and then his face clouded over with a cold frown that chilled me with fear and shame.
I drew my hand out of his quickly, and stepped back into the room.
He followed and took my hand again, and, when I looked up, murmuring clumsy and incoherent apologies, his face was as composed and kind as usual; but I thought he looked rather sad.
But you don’t know, you cannot guess—how should a child like you guess?—how many or how deep a man’s cares may be while he is obliged to bear a brave front to the world.
He bent down over me and looked into my eyes for a few moments.
Then he raised his head, and laughed lightly.
Great gray eyes ought to be passionate, and yours are as cold as a lake on a still day.
“Never mind; I will do that,” said he, in his usual tone.
So I shook hands as hastily as I could, took my candle, and ran upstairs.
I was very angry with myself for having been cold and unsympathetic—I had not meant to be so at all.
“It wasn’t because I am not sorry for him, for he must have seen that I am,” thought I.
It was quite a calm night, and I walked in very slowly, yet, as I entered, my candle went out suddenly, as if blown by a gust of wind; and I fancied I heard a slight sound as of a human breath blowing it.
I stepped forward quickly, a little startled, and tried to peer into the darkness.
But it was impossible to see, for my fire had gone out, the blinds were down and the curtains drawn, and not a ray of moonlight could get in.
I stood for a few moments, still frightened, in the middle of the room, and then cautiously made my way in the direction of the mantelpiece, where I kept my match-box.
I made a slight noise as I passed my fingers over the different articles there, and, just at the moment that I knocked over a china ornament which fell into the fireplace, above the noise it made as it broke to pieces in the grate I heard a sound behind the screen which stood between the bed and the door, and, turning quickly, I was in time to see a figure come swiftly round it and disappear through the still open door.
I could distinguish nothing; nevertheless, suppressing my inclination to scream, I rushed to the door and caught in the air at the figure I could no longer see; but I felt nothing.
Then I crept back into my room, shaking from head to foot, and hardly daring to move in this direction or that, for fear of encountering another dim figure.
I closed the door behind me, sick with fear lest I should be shutting myself in with more unwelcome visitors; and, starting at the slight creaking that a board made here and there under my own feet, I again searched the mantelpiece for the match-box.
My hands trembled so that it was a long time before I could be sure that it was not there; and then I turned and felt my way to the table; and, after moving most of the things on it, I at last satisfied myself that it was not there either.
Then I groped my way to one of the windows—I had not thought of that before—drew the curtains and pulled up the blind.
The moon gave only a fitful light, being obscured every other minute by thin driving clouds, and it only served to make shadows in the room which were more fearful to me, in my nervous state, than darkness itself.
I had one more search for the matches, but could not find them even now.
It was out of the question to undress by such weird moonlight, fancying dim shapes in every corner and noises behind me whichever way I turned; so I determined to conquer my fears and go downstairs with my candle and get a light below.
There were sure to be some matches in the kitchen, and I reflected that enough moonlight would come in over or through the shutters to let me see my way without making a noise.
So I groped my way down the back-staircase, which I had never used before, got safely to the bottom, turned to my left, and felt for a door.
The first opened into a big black cupboard where I felt brooms, which I shut again quickly; the second was locked, but the key was in the door, and I softly turned it.
However, I got back safely to the bottom of the staircase without seeing or hearing anything, and I was creeping along the passage when I caught the first faint sound of voices.
I discovered by the thin thread of light it let out upon the passage that this door was ajar, at the same moment that I recognized Sarah’s voice.
“That’s—that’s all I have to say,” said Sarah, with a choking sound in her voice.
The woman was evidently unhappy; I almost pitied her.
Do you know what you’re saying?
You wished me to choose between the services of an underpaid governess and those of an overpaid servant.
My services overpaid!
Now that you let yourself be swayed beyond all bounds of prudence by trifling feelings of jealousy and spite, like a foolish girl, your value runs down to that level.
You are no longer a girl, Sarah, and your position is changed in many ways since then, in most for the better.
“I’ll—” “Not so fast, not so fast,” said he slowly.
Then his voice changed suddenly to a genial, almost caressing tone.
“Now do you think you will be able to get on without me as well as I can without you?” There was a pause.
Then I heard Sarah burst into sobs and low passionate cries for pity, for forgiveness.
How can you have the heart to talk like that about my services, as if I was too old for anything but money-bargains?
Trembling and panting, I found my way to the hall table, took out of the box there half a dozen matches, and crept guiltily, miserably upstairs.
I had listened, as if chained to the spot, to their talk, and it was only now that I had fled for fear of discovery that I reflected on what a dishonorable thing I had done.
If he had come to the door, thrown it open, and seen me cowering with parted lips against the wall within a few feet of it, how Sarah would have triumphed in the justice of her hatred of a girl who could be guilty of such meanness!
He would have seen how wrong he was in considering the eavesdropping governess the superior of the devoted servant.
I did not feel a bit frightened now; I forgot even to turn the key in the lock; this last adventure had swept away all remembrance of the previous one.
I did not wonder now so much as I had before at the depth of her jealousy of me.
And I got up from the chair I had sat down on, trying to forgive her, yet hoping she would go away all the same.
As I rose, I caught sight of my desk, which I suddenly saw had been moved.
But it was locked, and the keys were always in my pocket.
There it was in its case, looking just as usual.
And the last one, the one that had come with the cigar-box on that day, was not there!
A suspicion flashed through my mind which made my breath come fast—Sarah had taken it!
It was Sarah then whom I had surprised in my room that evening!
I was annoyed and disgusted beyond measure; I could have forgiven her anything, even her meanness in playing spy while I looked at the note which I wore round my neck, but stealing my precious letter.
I shed some more tears at the loss of it, wondering whether she would ever take the trouble to restore it, polluted as it would be by having been read by her unkind eyes.
Then I went to bed, very tired and very unhappy; and at last I fell asleep, with my hands clasping the note that Sarah could not get at, which I wore in the case round my neck.
Perhaps the excitement and agitation of the evening had caused my sleep to be lighter than usual.
At any rate, I was awakened by a very slight noise indeed, so slight that I thought it must have been the work of my nervous fancy; and my sleepy eyes were closing again, when I suddenly became conscious that there was a light in the room not that of the rising sun.
Fully awake now, and cold all over with this new fright, I saw by the flickering on the ceiling that the light must come from a candle behind the screen; I saw that it was being carried forward into the room, and then I closed my eyes and pretended to be asleep.
My fingers were still clinging to the little case; but they were wet and clammy with horror.
Was it Sarah?
What was she going to do now?
To put back my letter?
I did not dare to look.
I lay there listening so intently that I could hear, or fancy I heard, each soft step taken by the intruder.
Then they stopped; and from the effect of the flickering light through my closed eyelids I guessed that the candle was being raised to throw its light on my face.
Still I had self-command enough to lie quite still and to imitate the long-drawn breathing of a sleeping person.
But then my heart seemed to stand still, for I felt the light coming nearer, and I heard the faint sound of a moving figure growing plainer, until the light was flashed within a foot of my face.
I could not have moved then.
I was half paralyzed.
Then I noticed a faint sickly smell that I did not know, and a hand was laid very softly upon the bed-clothes.
Still I did not move.
I had formed a sort of plan in those deadly two minutes, which seemed like two hours, when the light was coming nearer and nearer to my face.
It tried to disengage them; but my clasp of my treasure was like grim death.
I heard the drawing of a cork, I smelt the faint smell more strongly, and a handkerchief wet with some sickening, suffocating stuff was thrown lightly over my face.
Then I started up with a shriek as loud and piercing as my lungs could give, tore the handkerchief from my face, and confronted Sarah, who drew back, her dark face livid with anger, but without uttering a sound.
In her hand she held a little bottle.
I tried with a spring to dash it from her grasp; but she was too quick for me, and, with a step back against the screen, she held it out of my reach.
Then the screen fell down with a loud crash.
But then there was a sound outside which had as many terrors for her as her own hard voice had for me.
I sprang from the bed, locked the door, and fell down against it in the dark and cold in a passion of hysterical sobs that I could not restrain.
Then they died away, and I felt my limbs grow numb and stiff; but I had not power to move, and I thought I must be dying.
Then I heard a fall at the bottom of the stairs and a woman’s cry, and immediately after a voice outside roused me.
I did not answer or move.
Are you conscious?
Are you hurt?
I feel that, if I opened the door, she might get in.
“Oh, please keep her away!” I was getting hysterical again.
You are quite safe.
The thought of being locked in did not reassure me much; but I thanked him and wished him good-night, with a last piteous appeal to him to keep Sarah away.
Then I rose from the floor, stumbled to the table, struck a match and lighted my candle, and put it by my bedside.
For the first time I was afraid of the dark.
And I lay awake listening, and starting at the tiny cracks the wood made, until at last, worn out, I fell asleep.
He waited for me, looking up anxiously, and seemed shocked at my appearance.
I had noticed myself, as I was dressing, how white and haggard I looked, and how dull and heavy my eyes were, with black rings round them.
Come to breakfast; a cup of hot coffee will do you good.
And, after that, you shall come into the study, and we will talk.
I held the arms of my chair, and kept my eyes on the ground and my lips tightly closed that I might give no sign when I saw Sarah’s face again; but, when they came in, I knew without looking up that she was not there.
And Jane waited at table.
Had Sarah gone already?
My heart leapt at the thought.
Both mistress and pupil are looking very seedy, and I think a day’s rest from lessons will do both good.
My motives are not wholly unselfish, I am sorry to say, for I have the penny-bank accounts to do, and I want you to help me with them, Miss Christie, if you will be so kind as to spare me a couple of hours.
I caught her looking at me shyly, as if I had gone up in interest in her eyes.
She must have heard something of the night’s adventure—I wanted to know what.
She prepared to leave the room when I entered.
You have nearly finished, I see.
“Well?” said I, smiling, to encourage her to talk.
“You know Sarah’s going away, miss.” “Is she?” said I, unable to keep my face from brightening at the welcome words.
Oh, there has been a rumpus, and no mistake!
You just should have heard her go on!
And suddenly, as I watched the girl in wonder, the whole awful truth flashed upon me of the complexion that Sarah had given to the story.
It still smelt faintly of the stuff it had been soaked in.
Little Jane’s face brightened with wonder and downright honest pleasure.
“I’m that glad, miss, I could dance,” said she.
So Sarah, after doing me another wrong worse than all the rest in circulating lies to injure my reputation, was going.
But she would probably not go at once, and I felt that I could not sleep another night in the same house with her.
So I turned out all my things and packed my boxes, as I had determined to do while I lay awake during the past night.
I looked into my desk, and found that my note had been replaced!
Now I was the only obstacle to her remaining, and it was really better that the one of us who could best be replaced should go; and my well-founded fears that she might, after all, be retained in any case helped to strengthen my resolution to go.
I had had no salary yet, as I had not been two months at the Alders, but my uncle had given me a sovereign to be put by, in case of emergency, and now the emergency was come.
He left the room, and I cautiously made friends with his big dog, who shared the hearthrug with me.
He was very gracious, and I had progressed so far as to slide down from my seat to caress him better, when I looked up and saw Sarah.
I sprang to my feet, with a scream that I could not repress, and darted to the bell.
“Don’t!” said she sharply.
I’ll stay here—so.
I didn’t mean to hurt you last night; and I didn’t want to steal your letter either.
What should I want to steal a bit of paper for?
You see I know what it is.
I only wanted to read it.
The stuff on that handkerchief wouldn’t have hurt you, only made you sleep a little sounder, so as I could take the letter.
I’d have put it back.
I’m sorry I frightened you.
“No, no; I can’t forgive you—at least not yet,” I said incoherently.
I was silent for a minute.
Sarah began again in a different tone.
There now—I’ve made a clean breast of it!
Then she gave a disagreeable laugh.
“You won’t go,” said she.
“You can go upstairs and look at my boxes,” I said indignantly.
“That is quite right and natural, as you have been here so long and are so much older too.” She did not like my saying that, I saw, by the tightening of her thin lips; but I certainly had not meant to offend her.
“Gentlefolks like you don’t break their word, I know,” she went on quickly.
“So, if you’ll only say ‘I promise,’ I shall know I can trust you, and that you bear no malice.” She must indeed be anxious to obtain what she asked when she could stoop so far as to class me with “gentlefolk.” “I promise,” said I.
She might have shown a little gratitude for what she had been so eager to get, I thought; but, as soon as the words had left my lips, she drew herself up from her imploring attitude triumphantly, and, with a simple, cold “Thank you, miss,” left the room.
Then I felt as if the study had suddenly grown lighter.
I said nothing about Sarah’s visit, and nothing about my own departure, until after I had done the very little there was to do in settling the accounts of the penny-bank.
I began to feel nervous about my announcement.
“Have you quite got over your cruel fright now, little woman?” said he kindly.
“As much as one can get over a thing like that,” I said, in a low voice, my fingers shaking.
But there are some experiences which one can never forget except away from the scenes where they happened.
And then I thought the stuff on the handkerchief was poison.
She says it is only something to make you sleep.
“Quite true,” said he; but I saw him frown.
No, that wouldn’t have hurt you, child; I don’t suppose for a moment she meant to hurt you.
But it was a cruel trick, all the same.
But I have forgiven her, and promised I would ask you to let her stay.
“There is no reason why it should,” said I.
Think what people would say of us if it got rumored about that our child’s governess was so cruelly treated under our roof that she went away without a day’s warning; for every one counts upon you at the school-treat, and I believe our young friend Laurence—don’t blush, child—would go off his head, and accuse us of murdering you outright, if he were to hear you were gone.
And you would find it difficult, believe me, child, to get another situation, if you left your first so quickly, no matter for what reason.
Then, bound by my promise, I had even to ask again that Sarah should stay, and he agreed that she should at once; and then I, not at all elated at the success of my intercession, begged him to let Jane do as much as possible for me just at first.
And I was reluctantly obliged to admit that she was.
And, as I looked at her face, which could never seem to me again to look anything but evil, a sudden horror seized me at the thought that I had pledged myself to stay for five whole weeks more in the same house with this woman.
And the next day, which was Thursday, I finished it, and rolled it up in paper ready for sending away; but still he did not come to fetch it.
I found Mona sitting among the reeds close to the pond, not far from my “nest,” crooning to herself and playing with some sticks and bits of paper.
At sight of me she slid along the bank and let herself down into the mud below, as if to hide from me.
When the child suddenly disappeared from my sight like that, I felt frightened lest she should fall into the water, or sink into the soft slime at the edge which she had chosen to retire into, and not be able to climb the slippery bank again.
So I walked daintily through the reedy swamp which was her favorite haunt, and looked over the bank.
She was busily burying in the mud, with the help of two little sticks, the bits of paper she had been playing with; and, when I bent down to speak to her, she threw herself upon her back, with her head almost in the water, and began to scream and kick.
This uncalled-for demonstration made me think that she knew she was in mischief; and, leaving her for a moment to enjoy herself in her own way, I stooped and picked up one or two of the pieces of paper which formed her toys.
Down I jumped in a moment, caring no more now for the mud, into which I sank to my ankles, than Mona herself.
I dug up the bits she had buried, and took from her very gently those she was still clutching, though my fingers tingled to slap her.
I hope it was not revenge that made me carry her indoors to be washed.
Then I searched the ground where I had found her, and discovered more little bits, and under the seat of my “nest” a torn envelope directed to “Miss Christie.” I ran in, and up to my room, with my mangled treasure, carefully cleaned the fragments, and, after much labor, at last fitted them into a pretty coherent whole.
Oh, if I had only come out here last night and found the letter!
I would go past the park to-morrow; but perhaps it would be too late, and he would not expect me then—he would think I was too ill to come out.
The next evening I had to go to tea at Mrs. Manners’, to take part in a final discussion of the arrangements for the school-treat on the following day.
Then they talked about village matters to Mrs.
Manners, ignoring me altogether, until two little middle-aged ladies came in, who had dressed in an antiquated fashion a number of dolls for the sale, and who, on hearing who I was, seemed rather afraid of me.
I afterwards found that she was the daughter of an attorney, and could not expect to be so fortunate as to meet the ladies from the Hall, except at the Vicar’s, which was neutral ground.
I did not think it was at all a pleasant party.
But when Mr.
Manners came in there was a little stir among them, and they all smiled at him and left off their chatter, and seemed to look to him to suggest a new topic; and he said the weather looked promising for next day, and they all flew upon this new topic and worried it to death.
Then, when he had said a few words to each of them, he came up to me and asked me kindly why I was sitting all alone in a corner, and sat down by me, and told me who the people in the albums were, and showed me some pictures of Swiss scenery, and talked about the places they represented.
I almost wished he would not, for the other ladies did not seem pleased.
Then we had tea, and Mr.
Manners made me sit by him.
He went out as soon as it was over, and we all went back into the drawing-room and wrote numbers on tickets; I forget what they were for, but I remember that there was great confusion because several of the ladies made mistakes, so that, while some numbers were missed out altogether, there were a great many tickets bearing the same number.
Manners asked me if I should like to come upstairs and see the things for sale, all the rest of the ladies having seen them many times already.
I only answered— “Yes, Mrs. Manners”—very gently.
Nobody ever seemed to think of going to mamma for counsel; we always kept things from her that were likely to disturb her, because she had delicate nerves, and used to go into hysterics if anything went wrong.
Manners, because writing to mamma about it would only make her cry.
Manners and I take a great interest in you, knowing how young and inexperienced you are to have to go out into the world alone.
And he thinks I have neglected you a little.
But I want you to feel sure, my dear Miss Christie, that, if you should want a friend’s advice at any time, you need not fear to confide in me; and Mr.
Then we went downstairs and finished up the evening with music.
The two little middle-aged ladies sang, in thin cracked voices, some duets in Italian—passionate love-songs, the words of which they did not seem to understand.
Manners said she should have liked if the words had not been so silly.
Then I was asked to play, and I chose Schumann’s “Arabesque,” and they seemed astonished and a little scandalized because I played it by heart.
When I had finished, everybody looked at us as he shook hands with me in a rather distant manner; but he managed to press my hand before he let it go; so I did not mind.
Still, when Lady Mills offered a marquee, and to come herself and help to sell, and to bring her friends, we were obliged to make a difference.
“Ah, that’s my father’s fault!” the young man put in, laughing.
“He’s a wicked old fellow, wanting to corrupt the rustic simplicity of the parish in his old age.” His elder sister said “Laurence!” reprovingly.
Manners went on.
Manners, in a superior tone.
The sellers shall not be teased by any impertinent and trifling young men.
I started and blushed, and Mrs.
Manners stopped in her talk and looked at me very searchingly.
“I am afraid so,” I stammered.
She put her arm around me and drew me to the French window.
That’s the way they always come from the Hall.
It is a little deception, I am afraid; but there—go, child, go!
The path curved just at the end, and I heard the gate swing to; but I could not stop myself.
Pray don’t apologize.
“But that is not the way.” A pause—then very softly—“Were you coming to meet me?” “N-o,” said I, half crying, and disengaging myself.
I had hoped you were.
But, if I happen not to mind the trouble, may I see you home now I am here?
He stepped aside to let me pass, and raised his hat very stiffly; then his manner changed all at once.
But, as I held up my face to say it, he kissed me, and, after that, of course it did not matter, for I knew that he loved me and that I was safe with him.
I remember every word that he said to me as we walked towards the Alders that night; but, if I were to write it down, it would read just like the same thing over and over again, and not at all as it sounded to me.
We did not go straight back, but a longer way round, for fear the grass should make my feet wet; and we passed the front gate and went on to the side gate that led past the stables.
And there Laurence left me, for I did not want that spiteful Sarah to see him with me.
I went through into the shrubbery, so happy that I could scarcely keep from singing softly to myself.
Then I thought I should dream of him.
But I was disappointed.
I was frightened, for they made no noise, and I thought they walked like thieves; so I crept in among the trees and watched them.
I did not feel much afraid of their seeing me, for I knew I was well concealed; but I was eager to get out and alarm the house, and I dared not move while they were in sight.
The moon, which had now risen high, fell full upon his face as he passed, and I had a better opportunity than before of observing him.
He was rather short, of slim neat build, fair, clean-shaven, with gray eyes and an imperturbable expression of face.
He had an overcoat and a big comforter over his arm, and was, as he had been before, very carefully dressed.
When they were just opposite to me, they turned back, and, just as they got to the harness-room door again, Sarah came quickly from the house with a key, let them in, and followed herself.
I waited a few moments in wonder at this strange scene; it seemed to me that I was always seeing curious things at the Alders.
But I had something pleasanter to think about than mysterious night-visitors, and I ran quickly and lightly down the path to the house, where Jane, very sleepy, and surprised at my being so late, let me in.
I did indeed dream of Laurence; but I dreamt that I was carried away from him by burglars.
The next morning I put on a white frock that I had been busily making during all my spare time for the last fortnight, and a broad sash of the palest lemon and pink that I had been saving up for some great occasion.
Then I slipped into the garden before breakfast—for there was no knowing how soon after he might come—to gather a flower to wear at my throat.
I purposely chose rather a faded little rose, in the hope that Laurence might notice it and get me one himself to wear instead.
Well, since you had resolved to burden your conscience with a crime, you might have made it worth your while.
But I am not going to permit you to spoil the effect of your pretty frock and destroy the reputation of my garden by wearing such a misshapen thing as that!
Laurence would never dare to suggest that this was not pretty enough to wear.
I wondered whether Laurence had forgotten all about me, and could have burst into tears at the thought that he would soon be helping to arrange the stalls with pretty Miss Kate Finch.
But presently, when disappointment had given place to despair, I came to what I suppose was a better mood, and reflected that it was all a just punishment for the careless and neglectful manner in which I was certainly performing my duties this morning.
And I went in to dinner with all my bright spirits of the morning very properly chastened out of me.
I saw Laurence standing outside the larger but less showy one of the two; he looked very grave and gloomy, and did not come forward towards us immediately, as I had expected.
Was he offended because I had not come earlier?
Surely he must have known how much I wanted to do so!
His elder sister, much to my surprise, came out to meet me.
I followed her into the marquee, which was arranged with one long stall down each side.
At one, cheap toys, sweets, and very innocent refreshments were to be sold; the Sunday-school girls stood behind it, presided over by the housekeeper from the Hall.
Down the other side was a stall loaded with the usual display of mats, dolls, crochet-shawls, and tatting antimacassars, with here and there a gypsy-table or cushion mounted with wool-work, and a host of useful trifles, which were expected to fetch far more than their intrinsic value.
I had not expected him to say “Violet” before everybody, as he had done when we walked home on the previous night; but he need not have used my prim surname at all.
You must make some excuse to get away, and I’ll watch you and meet you.
Just then there was a stir and excitement outside, caused by the arrival of Lady Mills and some of her party.
The ladies with her were beautifully dressed too, and I saw at once that they were indeed, as Mrs.
They made us all, sellers and buyers, look very dowdy and old-fashioned, and they talked and laughed a little louder than we dared do, and moved about as if they were used to being looked at and did not mind it.
There were only two gentlemen with the six or eight ladies, and I heard Lady Mills say to Mrs.
Manners that the rest of the men were coming on the drag, and that she had given them strict orders that after a certain time they were to buy up all that was left on the stalls.
Manners seemed rather distressed at that, and said she did not want the gentlemen to purchase things which would be of no use to them; they had some smoking-caps and embroidered cigar-cases.
But Lady Mills laughed, and said Mrs.
Manners was too merciful; and then she left our marquee and went to superintend the finishing touches put to the arrangement of her own.
Presently we heard that the drag had arrived, and there was a little flutter among the ladies at our stall.
As for me, I knew that these gentlemen, who seemed to be thought of so much consequence, would not want any of the things I had to sell; so I went on quite quietly serving the village-women, with whom I was doing very good business.
However, when the gentlemen did lounge in, one of them, who was tall and had a long fair mustache, looked for a long time at the things at my end of the stall and asked the price of a tea-kettle.
I thought he was amusing himself; but he bought it and carried it off; and presently two more gentlemen came into the marquee and straight up to my corner, and bought, the one a gridiron and the other a soap-dish.
Then the first one came back and asked the price of so many things that he took too much of my attention from my village customers; and at last I told him he would find some ties and cigar-cases and gentlemen’s things farther up the stall.
But he said, “That is an extravagant way of going to work,” and took the penny one.
When he had gone away, Laurence came up again, and I told him, laughing, about the funny purchases they had made.
But he was not at all amused; he said it was tomfoolery.
They came again, though, and some more of them too; and at last the first one of all returned a third time and said he had been entrusted with a sovereign to lay out to the best advantage for a young couple who were setting up housekeeping.
Presently he came in again with Lady Mills, who asked Mrs.
Manners if she could spare her another helper; and, looking down the stall, and seeing me with only a few aprons and children’s clothes left to sell, she asked if the little lady in white at the end could come; and Mrs.
Manners, looking at me rather gravely and anxiously, as if she was sending me into a lion’s den, asked me to go.
But the other ladies at our stall did not like it at all.
The other marquee looked like fairy-land.
The two stalls had so many beautiful bright things on them, besides a quantity of flowers, and the ladies behind them, in their light dresses, looked so pretty.
The village-people did not buy much here, but came in shyly in twos and threes, and talked in whispers.
And there was a great deal of laughing and talking going on; and this marquee was altogether a much more amusing place than the other.
Lady Mills, who I thought had sweeter manners than any lady I had ever seen, thrust a big basket of flowers into my hands and told me to walk up and down and ask people to buy them.
“Ask the gentlemen,” she whispered, with a pretty smile.
But I did not like to do that; so I stood with my basket in a corner until the tall fair man who had bought so many things of me came up and gave me half-a-crown for one little bud; and I thought how silly it had been of him to make such a fuss over the toasting-forks when he was ready to give so much for a flower.
And then Laurence found me out, and he walked up and down with me, holding my big basket; and I sold my flowers quickly, and was very happy indeed, for Laurence talked and whispered to me, and looked at me all the time as we moved among the crowd, and never once left my side while we were in that tent.
He told me everybody said I was the prettiest girl there, which of course was nonsense; but it was very nice to hear him say so.
When I had sold all the flowers, he whispered— “Now let us slip out, and we can talk.” So we tucked my basket under one of the stalls, and went out of the tent and away into a lane near the field; and Laurence’s face grew very anxious and unhappy as I asked him what was the matter.
“I shall have to go away, Violet,” said he, looking at me very intently.
I had not expected anything so dreadful as that.
I don’t know what may happen while I am away.
What person, Laurence?
Then he must have gone on there from the Vicarage, and he must have come straight from the Hall when he passed me to go to his room, as I crouched in the shrubbery.
And the dear old dad said you had a good sweet face, and he should like to have such a daughter; but what would the mater say?
It seems she has set her heart on going to the Riviera, and insists on your going with her.
Now supposing I stock a farm for you while you are away, you can step into it directly you come back—I suppose she won’t want to be gone more than a couple of months—and you can try your hand at farming for a year or two, and keep it warm for Jack, who wants to take to it, he says.
When you are living away from us, you will be more your own master, and your mother will have to submit to your marrying whom you like.
Haven’t you noticed how he has been steadily getting round my mother for the last few weeks, till he rules her as surely as she rules my father?
I’ve watched him, and tried to put her on her guard; but I am no match for him.
Ah, I know all about that, but—I must not tell you.
Doesn’t he show he cares for you more than for her?
What have I done that you should think so ill of me as to think I would let a man who is married make love to me?
How could you tell me you loved me, thinking that?
Tea was being given to the children, and I went to help; but the enjoyment of the day was gone.
At another time this invitation would have made me half mad with delight, but now it seemed only to overwhelm me with terror at the thought of going among so many strangers.
However, they sent me home to prepare what things I wanted, and told me to make haste.
That would look quite dazzling peeping out of the muslin and lace round my throat.
So I packed that and a piece of black velvet to wear it on; and I was scarcely ready before Jane came up to say that Lady Mills’s carriage was at the gate waiting for me.
It was an ungrateful thing to do; but I must do what Laurence wished, even if he did not know it.
And so with a very heavy heart I ran up the path to the carriage, and started on a visit which was to be strangely eventful to me.
We drove back first to the High Field, that Lady Mills might tell the rest of the party to make haste, or they would be late for dinner.
There was a dog-cart waiting, with a gentleman in it smoking; and standing by the horse’s head, also with a cigar in his mouth, was the tall fair gentleman whose face I now seemed to know the best of all.
As soon as we drove up, he came to the side of the carriage.
“Proper place for a husband, Mrs. Cunningham,” said the fair gentleman.
“Well, will you come, Miss Christie?” “No, Tom; Miss Christie is better where she is.” “She couldn’t be better off than with me,” said he, in a gravely innocent tone.
Don’t all jump upon me at once when I want to make an impression.
“Not with Charlie behind,” said she; and everybody laughed more than ever.
I was glad Lady Mills would not let me go, though, for I did not care much about the gentleman they called “Tom,” and Laurence did not like him either.
The drive seemed to me beautiful, though the country was flat; the rains had kept everything very green, and the sinking sun warmed the landscape with a golden tint.
I looked about me and listened to the ladies’ talk, but did not say much.
Some of them said things which would have sounded quite wicked if they had said them seriously; but they were all in fun, and they seemed to laugh at everything.
And everybody laughed very much.
I was shown up into a room that looked out upon greenhouses and cucumber-frames, and from which I had a view of the river, just at a point where it widened out into a broad expanse like a lake.
Just then I had not much time to grieve about my quarrel with Laurence and his cruel conduct about the rose; but I did shed a few tears, and wondered whether he would write and ask me to make it up, and thought that I should not be able to enjoy myself at all in this pretty place without him.
In the hall I met a maid who showed me into the drawing-room, which was empty; so I walked to one of the windows which led into a conservatory, and peeped in.
The flowers were so beautiful, the scents so intoxicating, that I crept in step by step with my hands clasped, as if drawn by enchantment; and I had my face close to a large plant covered with white blossoms like lilies, when I saw peeping through the big fan-shaped leaves of a plant behind it the fair mustache and eye-glass of the gentleman they called “Tom.” He was looking intently, not at me, but at the ornament sparkling at my throat.
He looked up when I did, and came round to me.
Look at these.
Even the gardener, a much more important person, wouldn’t say anything to me.
“How do you know it was a man?” I asked, blushing.
I am a magician, and I am not going to give you lessons in the black art for nothing.
But look here!
“They are not real diamonds,” said I, laughing, and rather pleased for the moment at his mistake.
“They are only paste.” He raised his eyebrows.
Presently he gave a slight start.
“Am I taking too great a liberty in asking if there are initials on the other side of that?” “Yes, there are,” said I, surprised.
“And will you tell me what they are?” I hesitated.
Will you forgive my curiosity?
“What do you think the real one was worth?” “About fifteen hundred pounds, I believe.” “And you thought I had on an ornament worth fifteen hundred pounds!” said I, laughing heartily.
“Oh, if the person who gave it me could know, how he would laugh!” He caught at my words.
“He would laugh, would he?” I was annoyed with myself, for I had not meant to let out even the sex of the giver of my pendant.
He continued— “He would be pleased, I should think, to have his paste taken for diamonds.” I did not answer, but only laughed again.
“Have any of the ladies seen it yet, Miss Christie?” “No; and, for fear they should make the same mistake that you have made, I shall not let them,” said I.
And I had raised my hands to take it off when Mrs. Cunningham and another lady came into the conservatory.
The elder lady’s eyes fell upon the unlucky trinket at once.
Don’t take off your pretty pendant for him.
“Here, put them on again and snap your fingers at Tom.” I raised the velvet obediently, and the gentleman called Tom came softly behind me and took the ends from my trembling fingers, and fastened them himself round my throat again.
He first pretended that he had not got them straight, though, and held the velvet a little way from me to try to look at the back of the pendant.
But I was prepared for that; and I put my hand round it, as if fearing it might fall, and would not let him see the initials.
After this first experience of the sensation caused by my one ornament, I watched rather curiously its effect upon the rest of the party, as some of them strolled into the conservatory, and when I met the others in the drawing-room and in the general gathering at dinner.
Every one looked at me, the one stranger, a good deal, of course; but I noticed that, while my pendant attracted the attention of the ladies, the gentlemen looked more at me myself, and were not scandalized by my unlucky ornament.
Sir Jonas, who was a kind, gray-haired gentleman, and looked nearly old enough to be Lady Mills’s father, took me in to dinner; and, although he did not talk much, he encouraged me to chatter to him, and to tell him all about the school-treat, and tried to make me drink a great deal more wine than I wanted.
“Yes, it is; she is blushing,” said another.
But I was not blushing at all; there was nothing to blush about.
The village-people think he is, because he plays the violin and goes to races.
“You think I like him only just because he is kind to me,” said I boldly.
Presently Mrs. Cunningham took me to the other end of the room to look at a portrait of Lady Mills.
“It is no business of mine who gave you that pendant, my dear; but have you any more ornaments of the kind, and, if so, where do you keep them?” she said gravely.
“Believe me, when you travel about on a series of visits, as I am doing now, and are obliged to entrust your dressing-case to a careless maid, it is no unnecessary precaution.” “But I shouldn’t take so much trouble with my paste pendant,” said I.
She shook her head at me, with a laugh, and said dryly— “I should with such paste as yours.” And then the gentlemen came in.
One of them had brought from town that day a parcel of new waltzes, but the ladies all declined to play them until they had tried them over privately; and the gentlemen seemed so much disappointed that, having turned over the pages and seen that they were perfectly easy, I timidly offered my services.
When I had got to the end of the first, I received an ovation.
The owner of the music was in ecstasies, and those who had begun to dance stopped and joined the rest in a chorus of admiration that made me quite ashamed of myself.
“Didn’t you know that I am a governess?” said I to one gentleman, laughing and blushing.
And I played the rest of the waltzes, and thought how much nicer it was to play for these people than for those I had met at Mrs. Manners’s tea-party.
“How beautifully you play!” said he, leaning over my chair and looking at me.
If you don’t yet feel equal to saying ‘Tom,’ let the matter remain in abeyance for the present.
I suppose you have to know a lot to teach.
They are all a great, great deal cleverer than I am.
He had to give it up at last; I believe however that he thought it was obstinacy that prevented my telling him.
She won’t be up for half an hour yet, nor my man either.
And the person he was talking to, and with whom he proceeded to exchange a kiss, was Lady Mills’s maid!
It was a strange thing, but one about which I could no longer have a doubt.
I was very sleepy and very much preoccupied with this curious discovery when I got to my room; but, before I went to bed, I put, as I thought, my beautiful but unfortunate pendant safely inside my desk, resolved not to wear it again.
He was evidently disconcerted, and tried by turning to the door of the hot-house to avoid me.
But I accosted him at once.
And he said, “Thank you, miss,” and touched his hat again, and went off with his eggs.
I was very much amused by this encounter and the important secret I had to keep.
As if my mentioning that I had seen Tom at the Alders would necessarily entail the awful discovery that he was a Londoner!
By this time I thought I had better go in and see if any of the other people had come down to breakfast; and I was sauntering along, when, as I got near the house, I heard two men’s voices.
“Bella is getting jealous, Tom.” A grunt in the other voice.
“I say, ain’t it rough on the little one?” Then I heard Lady Mills’s voice, and when I got to the door there were eight or ten people already assembled.
Who was “Bella”?
And who was “the little one”?
And what did “rough on” mean?
“Do try to make up a respectable number,” said Lady Mills.
We scandalize the neighborhood quite enough, as it is, by not going to bed at ten o’clock, and other wicked practices.
Yes, of course you are.
But I was very angry all the time, and when we came out I would not speak to him.
He came however and walked by my side while I talked to somebody else, and at last he said meekly— “Have I offended you?” “Yes,” I said; “I think you are very irreverent.” “I didn’t mean to be irreverent,” he said, in a still meeker tone.
“Quite true,” said he.
Most of the people spent Sunday afternoon just as if it had not been Sunday at all, except that nobody rode or drove.
But some went on the river, and some played lawn-tennis, and some lounged about and read novels; and others, of whom I was one, sat under the trees on the lawn and drank iced champagne, which is quite the nicest thing I ever tasted.
What a silly fellow Tom was with his little mystery!
So at last he began reading it aloud to me, and then I got up and ran away with Mr. Cole to the fruit-garden, where he gathered plums for me; and we looked at the chickens, and watched the fish in the pond, and threw crumbs to them, which they would not take any notice of, until dinner-time.
Mr. Cole had cut me some beautiful flowers to wear in the front of my frock, for I had resolved not to wear my pendant again; but my muslin gown did not look nearly so well without it, and I thought I would just take it out and see the effect of it at my throat close to the flowers, and then put it away again.
Nothing else had been disturbed; the sovereign my uncle had given me lay untouched in its little leather bag close by; the notes I had had from Laurence, tied up with pink ribbon, were just as I had left them.
I searched my desk, my pockets, every corner of the room, though I knew it would be of no use.
For I remembered quite well, sleepy as I had been the night before, that I had shut it up in the case carefully, turning it about for a few moments in my hand to watch it flashing in the candle-light.
It had been stolen—by whom I could not guess.
I sat down after my fruitless search, trembling and too much frightened to cry.
For there is something alarming in a mysterious loss like that, an uncomfortable sense of being at the mercy of some unknown power, apart from the certainty that one of the people about you is a thief.
It was just as likely that my pendant had been taken by one of them; and everybody would be indignant at the idea of his or her servant being suspected of the theft.
So I resolved to say nothing about it, but to bear my loss, which I felt more than I should have thought possible, in silence.
I began to think it had already had an unwholesome effect upon me, by my secret wish to wear it again.
It was a fine night, not cold, though there was a light breeze; and after dinner some of us went into the garden, and I among them, for I was afraid they would make me play the waltzes again, although it was Sunday.
“Now run, Miss Christie.” I was not a bit cold, and I told him so; but he said, “Never mind—won’t do to run risks,” and put his arm in mine, and made me run as fast as I could until we were round the corner of a wall, out of Sir Jonas’s sight.
“And now,” said he, “we’ll run another way.” And he took me down a long path between apple and pear trees until we got to a side-gate that I had not seen before.
“I am going to take you for a walk,” said he.
And nobody goes to bed here till they are sleepy, which is a very good plan.
As for your dress, I think it very becoming—very becoming—quite Oriental.
No other objection occurred to me.
Give me your hand.
And, as there was not much steering required, I fell to thinking of Laurence.
I had had to talk a great deal during the last two days; but whenever I was not talking my thoughts flew back at once to him, as they did now.
I started, blushed, and pulled the wrong line at once.
“Why is it,” he asked suddenly, “that a woman never cares for the man who loves her best?” The question, which was quite new to me, startled me.
“Doesn’t she—ever?” I asked anxiously.
“I—I am afraid not,” said he, in a very low voice, bending his face to mine with a sad look in his eyes that troubled me.
“But how is she to tell?” I asked tremulously.
“I think she can tell best by the look in his eyes when they are bent on her,” he whispered, with a long steady gaze which disconcerted me.
I turned away my head.
“If,” he went on, still in the same soft voice quite close to my ear, “she raises her lips to his and then tries to read in his eyes the emotion he feels for her—” “But I did,” said I quickly, turning to him with my heart beating fast at the remembrance of Laurence’s first kiss.
“You have not lived all your life in the country, Miss Christie, I think,” said he dryly.
And I saw in a moment, by the change in his look and voice, what I had done.
He had been making love to me, while I was thinking of nothing but Laurence.
When we landed at the boat-house, the church clock was just chiming the half-hour past one.
The lateness of the hour shocked me.
“Never mind,” said he.
Don’t trouble your head about that.
She won’t say a word to you, and you need not say a word to her.
And I wasn’t alone; I was with you—so I was all right.
I dare say Lady Mills has not gone to bed yet.
But Lady Mills’s face was lightening as she looked at me.
I was so much astonished that he was gone before I could even thank him; and then, turning it over in my hands, I found that the little shield on which the initials were engraved had been wrenched off.
Was Gordon himself the thief, and had he repented?
Or had the person who took it been ashamed to restore it in person?
Or had I really dropped it, and only dreamt that I put it away?
All the questions which had puzzled me about this household came into my mind again with new force after my short absence, which seemed, with its fresh experiences, to have lasted so long, together with others which had arisen while I listened to the talk of my new friends.
If so, how was it that no suspicion of the fact had reached that gossip-loving company I had just left, who had tales to tell of almost every family in the neighborhood?
And why, if they thought him “dreadfully wicked,” did they all say they would give the world to know him?
What had become of the wild jealousy of Jane which she had expressed to the stranger in the plantation?
And why did she hate me so?
Had she stifled her hatred once and for all, or would she—Oh, what would she not do, if her wicked, senseless dislike of me should get the better of her again?
My pupil was not well, and had not got up that day; but Sarah would ask if I could go and see her.
So I went upstairs, having asked, in as careless a manner as I could, if there were any letters for me, and having been told that there were not.
Laurence might have sent me just a little note; I had been so longing for one.
He had not been nearly so nice since I told him I loved him, I thought to myself mournfully; and I sat with my head on my arms and cried.
And, as I was still rather pensive and my voice a little tremulous, he asked me only a few questions about my visit and then left me to myself, for which I was very grateful.
It was a cold day, and the room itself and the long corridor which led to it struck me as feeling damp and chilly.
It was the first time I had been in the left wing.
She jumped up in bed and clasped her hot little hands round my neck as soon as I came in, and then drew my head down on to the pillow beside her and told me to tell her everything I had done from the first moment I went away.
“And now will you listen at the other door—mamma’s door?” This was locked; but I put my head against it, listened, and assured her there was no one there.
Then she beckoned me back to her and put up her head to whisper.
I heard her through the door.
Mamma’s frightened of Sarah—and so am I. Hush!
I comforted her, told her Sarah would not hurt her or “mamma” either—though I felt by no means so sure of her good-will as I pretended to be—and stayed with her until she went to sleep.
Then I wrapped myself up in a shawl and went into the plantation to look at my “nest.” And there, leaning with his back against the tree which formed my seat, was Laurence.
I gave a cry of delight and ran forward; but he only raised his hat and said— “Good-evening, Miss Christie.” I stopped short, overwhelmed with dismay.
I couldn’t help it, everybody was so kind.
Ah, I don’t wonder you start!
And it was Mr.
He’s another beauty!
You choose your friends well, Miss Christie.
I feel I am not worthy to be admitted among the number.
“I don’t know what you mean by calling them ‘beauties;’ but none of the gentlemen you sneer at would have thought of insulting me and trying to make me unhappy, just because I sometimes talked to other people.” “No, you tried to be impartial, I see,” he sneered again.
He was so angry that he began to speak again two or three times, but only stammered and broke off.
I must not let out things concerning the people I was living with which they did not wish to have known.
And there is no need of a spy to watch my actions, for I don’t do anything to be ashamed of.
No, of course he would not mind.
Nobody ran away from him, and all the ladies seemed fond of him, and rather jealous because he talked to me.
And he didn’t say wicked things—not half so wicked as the things they said.
Oh, Laurence, don’t be harsh to me!
“Oh!” said I, half turning instinctively towards the house.
“What is it?” asked Laurence, suddenly stiffening again.
I was too utterly miserable to cry; I sank upon my seat, with a confused sense that all joy and brightness and hope had gone out of my life, since Laurence had left me angry and unforgiving; but I could not think.
But the spirit was not in me on this night, and I played the notes loudly or softly as was marked, without a spark of the fire which is the soul of music.
I did not mean to make a martyr of you.
It would hurt me more than you.
What would he think of a governess who went away on a short visit, did things that shocked people, and came back and cried, and could not play, and made herself a burden to everybody?
He came back with Nap at his heels, and a glass and decanter in his hand; then, sitting down by me, he poured me out some wine and told me to drink it.
No, my child, you were going to say something far more civil, but not half so true.
We may be worthy, but we are prosy; and why should we not own it?
If you were to remain always boxed up in this dreary old vault, you would soon take to spectacles and a crutch.
Take all the amusement that comes in your way, little woman, and, after the first natural reaction, you will work all the better for it.
“I heard, for one thing, that you wore the pendant I gave you.” He seemed pleased at this, I thought.
But now you see it wasn’t so silly of me not to know the difference when you first showed them to me, when those people who have worn diamonds and beautiful jewels all their lives were taken in by them.
Stones of that size would be very valuable.
“That was very sharp of you,” he said.
But this is the strangest part.
And the little shield with the initials was broken off and lost.
If they had been diamonds, I should say it was very strange that he gave it back again.
You careless little puss, you don’t deserve to have any finery at all!
I broke off to comfort him.
Oh, I know—about Mrs. Cunningham’s jewels.
“Oh, that she keeps always concealed about her person!” said I.
“Do you mean it?” he asked, much interested.
She told me so.
And nobody in the house, not even her maid, knows where they are.
“Well, I don’t think even the responsibility of diamonds under your pillow would keep you awake to-night, for you must be tired out.” He was fidgeting about the room, as if he were anxious to get to bed too.
But he did not look sleepy; his eyes were quite bright and restless.
He gave me my candle.
“Yes, it is lucky you told it to me,” he answered, laughing back.
I was very tired; and the next morning I overslept myself, and did not come downstairs until breakfast was more than half over.
This was Tuesday.
There was plenty of room for me on the little seat in front of them in the brougham; but I had great difficulty in dissuading him from sitting outside by the coachman in order to give us more room.
When we got to the station, we found that we were there a great deal too soon.
I don’t know whether I shall stay there; but if you send it there it will reach me.
“What shall I bring you this time?” said he, just before the train came up.
I shall bring you some garnets.
But the train had come up.
Why did she shut herself up and persist in being miserable, instead of returning her husband’s love and changing the melancholy Alders into the cheerful, bright place it might be?
“I think she is going to die, miss—I do indeed,” said kind little Jane, sobbing.
I knew that the servants, one and all, looked upon their mistress as a poor-spirited thing, while they had some admiration and a great deal of respect for their master.
The few orders she gave they fulfilled in a spirit of condescension or neglected altogether, while a word from him acted like a spell upon any one of them.
So that Jane felt like a heroine after having ventured on the other side of that door; and, when we came to it, she stood looking first at it and then at me, as if to touch it again were more than she dared.
My teeth chattered as I went through this passage, it was so cold; and what was my surprise to find, when I got to the end, that the window had been left open on this chilly and wet October evening!
I took the liberty of shutting it, and, returning to the dressing-room door, I tapped softly at it.
I went in softly, and with a shriek the mother started up from her knees; she had been on the floor beside the bed.
I sat on the bed and tried to make her lie down and keep the clothes over her, for the room was as cold as the corridor.
I felt just a little tremor of fear.
Had I trusted myself alone with a sick child and a madwoman on the verge of an outbreak of fury?
Are you not snug and warm upstairs in your turret?
Why must you come and exult over me?
You were welcome to my husband.
Then you took my child.
I came down just to see if I could be of any use.
Why don’t you take her into your own room?
It is so cold in here.
And wouldn’t it be better to send in for Doctor Maitland?
Oh, I forgot!
He is away.
“Will you dare?” she asked fearfully.
“Certainly, with your permission.” “You know very well that my permission is nothing,” sobbed she.
“And I don’t wonder, you poor spiritless thing!” I thought to myself.
But I was very sorry for her; and I asked if she would like to have my room for the night, to be near her child.
But she was frightened at the idea; so I wrapped the child up well in a blanket, thinking I would put her in my own bed until her little one could be taken upstairs.
I was rather frightened myself at the thought of giving such an order to the awful Sarah, and, just as I was debating with myself whether she would be likely to obey it, she entered the room.
I attacked her at once.
This is too cold for her.
She decided for the former.
“Heaven bless you, Miss Christie!” she murmured; and, turning away, she sank down upon the empty space where the bed had been, and burst into a flood of tears.
She would not listen to the few incoherent words I said to comfort her; and I was obliged to leave the room with tears in my eyes, and carry my little patient upstairs.
I could not go very fast, for the burden was rather heavy for a small woman like me; and by the time I got upstairs the bed was ready and Sarah had disappeared.
And now how to get a doctor?
For I was seriously alarmed about the child.
To expect any more help from Sarah was out of the question.
I went down to the nursery, called Jane, who was just going to bed, and asked her where Sam slept.
“In the village,” said she.
Jane was too young to be sent all that way alone at night, the cook too old.
There was only one thing to be done; I must go myself.
The moon was at the second quarter, but did not give much light, for it was a cloudy night, raining now and then.
I was not sorry for this, as I was the less likely to be recognized, and it was not the sort of weather to encourage late loiterers.
It slackened to come up the hill, and I, to keep up my character, bent over my umbrella, and walked more slowly.
But this subterfuge had an undesired effect.
In a moment I felt like a different woman; my blood seemed dancing for joy, my pulses beat more quickly, and the spirit of mischief came into me so that I wanted to laugh aloud.
Oh, how happy I felt to be again by his side!
But it was rather hard not to be able to take the hand that was nearest to me, and nestle up to his shoulder, and tell him how miserable I had been since last night, when he had rushed away with the dreadful threat of not seeing me again.
Well, now he should see me again; he could not help himself.
I felt rather nervous as to what he would say when I did discover myself.
Was he still angry?
Would he insist upon my getting down and going the rest of the way on foot?
Or would he say more unkind things to me?
Or would he be pleased to see me, and forgive me?
He was not in a very conversational mood.
Was he thinking of me, I wondered, or was it only that in my disguise I did not promise to prove an entertaining companion?
I began to get impatient for him to know me.
I looked at him furtively; he was evidently not at all curious or interested about his companion.
I remembered them quite well; we had had a struggle to get them over his wrists, as I had made them a convenient size, too large for a woman and too small for a man.
It seemed to me that he handled them lovingly.
Upon this encouragement I spoke.
“Aren’t you going to talk?” said I, in my natural voice.
We had passed the hill, and were going along at a good pace; but he gave the reins such a jerk that the horse stopped.
“You won’t be cross with me again, will you?” said I, anxious to pledge him to good temper while he was in the first flush of his joy at meeting me; for it was joy.
He slipped the reins into his right hand and put his other arm around me and kissed me, Shetland veil and all.
And so we made it up without a word of explanation.
I told him my errand, and he told me his.
His father had gone up to town that day to arrange for the disposal of some shares in order to purchase a farm for Laurence a few miles off, which was to be stocked, according to his promise, while his son was away.
“We will call at Doctor Lowe’s first, and then you shall go on with me to the station and see my father,” said he.
I protested a little that I ought to go back with the Doctor; but of course he carried his point.
“What do you want a farm for, Laurence?” I asked, as we waited outside the station.
But he stood by my side holding my hand under my cloak while we talked in a low voice.
Why, to have a home for you and something to live on, of course!
“You didn’t suppose I was really never going to see you again, now did you?” “I shouldn’t have cared,” said I.
I was coming to see you to-morrow evening.
As Laurence finished speaking, he turned his head, and suddenly became aware that the train had come in while we were talking.
When he returned with his father, who greeted me very kindly, he looked pale and anxious.
“Do you know who that man was I ran against?” he whispered.
What was he doing, skulking about in that get-up?
He came down by this train.
He must have overheard what we were saying.
When we got to the gate of the Alders, he jumped out, carefully lifted me down, and, telling his father to drive on home, as he should walk the rest of the way, he came inside the gate with me.
“Look here, Violet!” said he suddenly, as if struck by a happy thought.
I said, “Very well, Laurence;” but he was not satisfied.
He went on trying to justify himself—not to me—he wanted no justification in my eyes—but to himself.
But it was wrong, I know.
Our engagement ought to have been open from the first; and his weakness in not daring to face my mother was no worse than mine in giving way to him.
Then they would be quite safe.
And you don’t mind her knowing, do you?
He caught at the suggestion eagerly.
I’ll go to her before breakfast to-morrow morning and ask her to look after you as much as she can while I am away.
I don’t think she is very fond of my sisters—I wish they were nicer for your sake, my darling, especially Maud.
Alice, the little one, isn’t half so bad; it is only being with Maud that spoils her.
You have no idea what the tyranny of those two women is like; my father dreads and I avoid them.
My mother thinks she holds my destiny in her hand; but she is mistaken; and within the next six weeks she must find it out; for, if she wishes to stay abroad longer, she will have to stay alone.
Why, it is a century off!
I shall be gray-headed if we wait another week.
I am not sure where we shall stay; but to-morrow night I will bring you an address that you can always write to.
It is that of a friend of mine—I forget the number of the street, but you shall have it; and I shall be sure to get your letters.
“Mind, she mustn’t be moved yet,” said he.
The Doctor was an old bachelor, famed for his rudeness as much as for his skill.
Now I began to repent having done so.
Laurence came forward.
“But it is a secret.” “Oh, ah, of course!”—knowingly.
“So this is the Miss Christie I’ve heard so much about!” And he deliberately put on his spectacles and stared at me in the faint moonlight.
“Well, she wouldn’t have turned the heads of the men when I was young.” We both laughed at the old man’s rudeness.
“I have no doubt heads were harder to turn then, Doctor Lowe,” said Laurence dryly.
This last hit struck poor Laurence as an evil omen; and, when I told him that I must go in now, and that I should see him again on the morrow, he flung his arms around me in such distress that I did not know what to say to comfort him.
Don’t trust him, don’t trust anybody while I am away, and don’t believe what anybody may tell you about me.
I shall be alive and single all the next six weeks, and at the end of that time I shall come back and marry you; and, if you want me, I shall come back before, my own darling!
But, just as I was going to leave the shelter of the trees and cross the gravel-space to the portico, I stopped, for I saw in the gloom a figure making its way across the lawn towards the back of the house.
It was coming from the path among the trees which led to the stables.
I strained my eyes, but there was a cloud passing before the moon, and I could only see that it was a man, and that he was carrying what looked like a small trunk; and it seemed heavy.
Who could it be at this time of night?
For it was between eleven and twelve o’clock.
Or was it a burglar?
But then a burglar, I argued to myself, would hardly be likely to carry things to the house he was going to rob, but rather to take things away; and the trunk he was carrying seemed to be heavy already.
He had disappeared behind the back of the house by this time, and, as I was curious to know what would happen next, I waited, trembling, creeping in among the trees, and in a few minutes had the satisfaction of seeing him reappear, followed by Sarah.
The impression which Sarah’s talk with the stranger in the plantation had given me of Tom’s desperate wickedness had faded a good deal from my mind by this time; but this strange sight revived it.
What if Tom—placid, stolid-looking, honest-faced Tom, as I had once thought him—were in reality a thief?
And what if Sarah, in her master’s absence, had been persuaded by him to take care of stolen property?
The all-powerful Sarah might even dare that, relying upon her power of making herself unpleasant for the rest of the household to keep her secret.
They disappeared up the stable path, and I took the opportunity to dart across the gravel-space to the front door and ring as gently as I could.
Jane came down in a few minutes, very sleepy, and let me in.
I told her to go to bed as fast as she could; and, when I had followed her upstairs and seen her into the nursery, I went softly to the head of the kitchen stairs, and, as I heard no sound and saw no light, I slipped down with my candle.
I did not dare to go all the way down to inspect it closely, as I own I should have liked to do; but in the view I got of it, as I held my candle over my head and peered at it curiously, it struck me that I had seen it before somewhere.
Then I turned and fled guiltily upstairs to my room.
Jane had built up the fire carefully, so that it might keep in all night, and placed the drink the Doctor had ordered on a little table beside the child.
I was very tired, and the moment I laid my head on my pillow I fell soundly asleep, and did not wake until the morning.
“How did you sleep, darling?” said I, sitting on the bed and kissing her.
It is so nice and warm up here.
I wish mamma was up here; I should like to be up here always.
“You shall stay up here till you are quite well again, darling,” said I, inwardly resolving to beg that she might sleep in my room permanently.
I dreamt it was while I was looking at the fire that the door there opened quite gently and softly, just as if it moved quite of itself, and then I saw papa’s face, and he had in his hand something red and sparkling; and, just when the door came quite wide open, I thought I sat up in bed, and he looked at me.
Papa is away in London.
And to dream of nice things is just as good as if they really happened.
Her misery had seemed so real, and, on the other hand, I had never seen her so utterly broken down and helpless.
Mad or sane, I should never be afraid of her again.
I only felt utterly sorry for her, and anxious to let her know how much I longed in some way to cheer her dull life.
Why was she so reticent to her husband?
The thought made my heart beat faster, and I longed to begin my delicate work at once.
But I was disappointed.
When we had finished tea, I still sat upstairs by my pupil’s bedside, and my high spirits at the thought of Laurence’s expected visit infected her, and she laughed and chattered to me in a fashion very unusual with her.
But no one came upstairs to fetch me, and, after a few minutes’ breathless waiting, I ran downstairs, unable to bear the suspense any longer.
I met Sarah in the hall.
“Who was that, Sarah?” asked I, too much excited to think of a decent subterfuge.
I could not go upstairs again.
It was half-past six; and at half-past seven I was to be at my “nest,” if Laurence had not come before.
I thought that hour would never end.
It seemed to me to be getting very dark too.
When the hands of the schoolroom clock pointed to twenty minutes past, I put on my shawl, and had opened the window to go out, when Sarah came in.
But the task really did not seem to take long.
In what appeared to be about a quarter of an hour I was free, and I dashed into the garden, through the plantation, towards my “nest.” I had not looked at the clock again, but surely it was very dark for half-past seven!
Yet Laurence was not there!
And, as I stood wondering whether something was wrong, I heard the church-clock strike eight.
What awful mistake had I made?
Was he gone?
Should I really not see him again?
A bit of paper half hidden in the grass, not on my seat, but under it, caught my eye.
It was a leaf torn from a pocket-book.
Remember what I prophesied last night, and, if no other warning will serve you, take this one.
I come here to-night, and you are not here.
I know it is a trick, and I know who is at the bottom of it.
When I left you last night, there were two men in a cart outside the stable-gate of the Alders.
If anything happens, write.
Good-by, my darling!
Take care of yourself for the next six weeks, and you shall never need to take care of yourself again.
Sarah was just turning away from the mantelpiece; and by the clock it was just four minutes past eight.
How the time had flown between my leaving the schoolroom with Sarah and my going into the garden!
I did not want to cry, though a few tears trickled down between my fingers at the thought that I should not see Laurence again before he went away; but I wanted to put the events of the evening together and find out what they meant.
There was only one conclusion to come to: Sarah had deliberately prevented my meeting him.
The ring I had heard had been Laurence’s; and, after sending him away by means of a falsehood, she had had another ready for me when I asked who it was.
I had thought it strange at the time that the carpenter’s son should come to the front door, and now I felt sure that he had not been there at all.
I looked again at Laurence’s note.
He had called at the house at seven, he said.
Now I distinctly remembered that, after I had heard the bell and met Sarah, I came into the schoolroom and found that by the clock it was half-past six.
And I had noticed how very dark it was getting; then, just as I was opening the window to go out, Sarah had come in and asked me to help her with the store-list, and I had been free in a very short time; yet on my arrival at my “nest,” the church clock had struck eight.
Sarah must have put the schoolroom clock back.
I had found her just now turning from the mantelpiece, and I could not doubt that, her object being gained, she had been putting the clock right again.
This malicious persecution frightened me.
Was I safe in the same house with a woman who would take so much trouble merely to prevent my having a last interview with my lover?
There had been a matter-of-fact deliberateness in the way she had answered me about the bell and asked me to do the list which had the effect of alarming me still more than the savage manner in which she used to look at and speak to me when she was jealous of some new proof of the consideration with which I was treated at the Alders.
What new proof of animosity would she manage to give me in those three days?
That she would not let this opportunity of showing her rooted dislike to me go by I felt sure.
I remembered how earnestly she had begged to stay, and wondered whether the wish for a chance of playing me some unkind trick had had anything to do with it; for Sarah was not likely to have forgiven me for having been the cause of her threatened dismissal.
What meaning could the incident have to him?
The mention of this cart revived my curiosity regarding the past night’s adventure.
I could make nothing of it myself; but I thought I would write to Laurence and tell him what I had seen; and, if he knew anything more, my information might lead him to an explanation of the whole occurrence.
I was still staring at the note when Sarah came in again, this time to bring me my candle, an office she seldom undertook.
I saw a look of disappointment and alarm come over her face as her quick eyes fell on my note, and when I got upstairs I took the precaution to learn the address I was to write to by heart before enclosing this farewell note with Laurence’s first, which I still wore round my neck.
The letter, which had been written at four o’clock on Wednesday, said further that he was going that evening to the Criterion Theatre, where he hoped to be better entertained.
She said, “Very well, miss;” and I wondered what work it was.
I could let her see that I had not forgotten her, though; and, seized by a happy thought, I went in search of an old knife and a basket, and went into the garden to gather her some flowers.
It was about four o’clock in the afternoon; the leaves and grass were still wet, for it had been raining hard all the morning, and the mist was rising already from the marsh.
There were scarcely any flowers left now, but by wandering into remote nooks of the garden, and by stepping in among the plants and spying out every blossom hidden under the leaves, I managed at last to collect enough for a very fair October bouquet.
So I ran in there, with my frock still tucked up, the gardening-knife in one dirty hand and my basket of flowers on my arm.
I had my hand still on the handle of the door, when I saw there was a gentleman in there, standing at the window, looking out into the garden.
I slipped back hastily, hoping to escape before he could catch sight of me; but he turned, crossed the room quickly, and stopped me.
“They told me you were out.” Sarah’s work, thought I.
“No; I was only in the garden.” There was no help for my appearance now, so I quietly took the pin out of my frock and let it down while he went on talking.
You are looking very well.
As if I cared how little you missed ‘the people there’!
“But you have known me so much better than the others,” said he deprecatingly.
Don’t you think me handsome?
“You say so only because it amuses you to see how much you can make me believe of the things you tell me.” “Do you judge all the people you know as severely as you do me, Miss Christie?” “Yes, quite,” said I gravely.
“Oh—er—the gentleman who gave you the red rose, for instance?” He said this in a mock-bashful tone, looking at the carpet, as if ashamed to meet my eyes.
I could not help getting red, and I think he knew it without looking up.
“It is not the best I can do by any means; but I shall be very glad to show you—” “You need not take that trouble, thank you; I will take your word for it,” said I, laughing again.
“You are too quick of fence for me,” said he, shaking his head.
But there has not been time for much to happen.
I went on mechanically twisting a chrysanthemum in my fingers after he had finished telling me this startling story, but I did not know what I was doing.
“Last night, did you say?” said I at last, in a frightened whisper.
Why, child, your very lips are white!
Tell me all about it quickly, please.
When did you find it out?
Have they caught the thieves?
The thieves have not been caught yet, and we don’t know who they are.
Who discovered it?
This morning a ladder was found lying underneath Lady Mills’s dressing-room window, which had been opened by smashing one of the panes from the outside.
It was Lady Mills’s maid who first gave the alarm by a cry at sight of the open window when she went into the dressing room this morning, after calling her mistress.
Lady Mills ran in; they looked out together, and saw the ladder lying underneath.
The dressing-room has two doors; the one which does not lead into the bedroom had been unlocked and left open by the thief, to pass into the house by.
But, at first sight, nothing seemed to have been disturbed.
The dressing-case was locked and in its place; a strong tin case in which Lady Mills kept the greater part of her jewels was still in the locked-up wardrobe.
But, on moving it, they found that the lock had been burst open, and it was entirely empty.
Jewels, cases and all, had disappeared.
He keeps the key of the tool-house.
And they had found the door forced in, and a file and one of the ladders gone.
Of course the alarm spread quickly all over the house; and then the other losses were discovered one by one.
There is the mysterious part of it.
Everything had been done so methodically and so neatly, even to locked doors being found still locked, that it was not until after careful examination that the stolen things were missed.
The butler and Sir Jonas himself examined the plate-chest together.
That was locked too, and, on first opening it, they congratulated themselves on its having escaped.
But, on removing that part of it which is in constant use, they found that the gold plate, which is used only now and then, and some solid silver cups and candlesticks had been taken.
But the loss which has caused the greatest sensation is Mrs. Cunningham’s.
She came into the breakfast-room quite white and scarcely able to speak, with some pebbles and a piece of cotton-wool in her hands.
She declares that she carried about on her person, sewn up in wash-leather and cotton-wool, a very valuable set of diamonds and cat’s-eyes; that it was not until long after she discovered her other losses that she cut open the leather, just to make sure that her greatest treasure was safe; that she found the jewels gone and the pebbles she produced in their place.
The poor woman was so hysterical that it was a long time before she could tell us all about it.
“He scolded me for telling him, and said such confidences should never be repeated, no matter to whom.” “That’s all right,” said he, much relieved.
“And is no one suspected?” I asked, with trembling lips.
The robbery had been so well arranged, and was carried out with such discrimination—for nothing but the best of everything was taken—that at first the servants were suspected of complicity.
But my man Gordon, who has no end of sense, suggested that it was only fair to them all to have their boxes examined at once.
This was done, but no trace of anything was found.
Of course that does not prove that they may not have given information to the thieves, whoever they were.
There has been a gang of navvies at work on the railway close by for the past fortnight, and a hat belonging to one of them was found in the garden, and has been identified already; but it seems that the friends of the man it belongs to can prove that he passed the night drunk in the village.
So at present we know absolutely nothing.
He believes that it is the work of a regular jewel-robber, and that very likely he got a discharged servant to supply him with information.
I pointed out to him that no servant who had long left could have given him such precise details as he seems to have had concerning the jewels of the ladies who were only visiting there, for instance.
But I could not convince him.
I was trying to put together what I had just heard and what I had already known.
I did not want to disturb her, knowing that she has the reputation of being an invalid.
All the doors at the Alders opened noiselessly, and they had overheard me.
And, as I looked at Sarah’s face, my heart beat faster with fear and with suspicion become certainty, for I knew that I was on the right track.
Nothing but physical suffering could have explained the impassive stolidity with which she listened, her great gray eyes staring straight in front of her, to the account of the robbery.
All this time Sarah stood by her, smelling-bottle in hand, as if prepared for her mistress to faint.
To give vent to my excitement over the important secret I fancied myself on the track of, I wrote to Laurence.
With Sarah about, a letter was a thing requiring caution, as the event proved.
The postman called for the letter-bag at six every evening; so I waited at the schoolroom window until I saw him come up to the house and heard Sarah give him the bag; then I ran out into the hall, as if I had only just finished my letter, and put it into the bag which he held.
Sarah could not even see the direction as I put it in, and I congratulated myself upon my artful strategy; but I might have known that she was not to be baffled so.
I had stood at the door and watched him turn into the drive, and returned to the schoolroom in a flutter of excitement at my own audacity, when from the window I saw Sarah flit after him.
I dashed out on to the lawn, and got into the drive just in time to see the postman fasten up the bag and go on again, while Sarah, saying something about “a misdirection,” put a letter into her pocket; and I knew that it was mine.
With my heart beating fast, I walked up boldly to her.
“What did you take my letter out of the bag for, Sarah?” said I, half choking with anger.
“It’s a letter to my sister that I’ve forgotten to put the number of the street on.” I knew quite well that this was a falsehood, but I could not prove it; for I had indeed been too far off to recognize my letter when she put it into her pocket, and my moral certainty counted for nothing.
She knew this, and stalked off defiantly to the house with my letter, while I crept back to the schoolroom, and sobbed bitterly at the tyranny I was suffering from this hateful woman.
Well, it would soon be over now—that was a comfort.
But the next morning, to my great disappointment, I got another letter, saying he should not be back until Monday afternoon.
I had written to him on Wednesday, and he had got my note.
Tell her that it is only for a time, that she shall go back to her old room as soon as the weather is warmer again; tell her I wish it, tell her anything you think likely to affect her.
I have great trust in your diplomatic powers, little madam, and I anticipate the happiest results from them in this instance.
As I was dining alone, I was just wondering how I could get at her, when the opportunity presented itself, as if at my wish.
That then would be my chance.
But I reflected that I could not be very persuasive at tea-time, subject to the chance of our common tyrant, Sarah, pouncing down upon us.
The trees between were not yet bare enough for me to see through; but, when the steps had gone by, I crept through the branches, peeped out, and saw Sarah getting over the stile into the path which led to the high-road.
I seemed to breathe more freely at once.
I was a little shy about going into the left wing without an invitation; she might be asleep, or she might not wish to be disturbed.
I thought I would reconnoitre first.
So I went into the garden with my knife and basket, as if to cut flowers, gathered a few China asters, and ventured round, past the drawing-room window, through the wet rank grass and the swampy earth, to the left wing.
Again I pushed aside the branches of the now almost leafless barberry-tree and looked for the second time at the gloomy window, overhung by an ivy-bush which now seemed to fall lower than ever.
There was no face looking out this time; a broken gutter-pipe had caused the rain-water to form a sort of slough under the window, so that I could not go close to it; but I went as near as I could, singing, and cutting off little branches of yew, as if not knowing where I had strayed.
My ruse succeeded.
I smiled good-morning to her, and made a show of offering her my flowers.
I wanted her to open the window.
This she seemed reluctant to do.
But I stood my ground until at last she put a hesitating hand upon the fastening.
I saw her off.
She opened the window, which was a little above the level of my head, more confidently; and I saw that it was barred inside.
She was asking to-day why you did not come up and see her, and I told her you were not well enough.
“I could not do her so much good as you have done.” There was a plaintive expression of helplessness in these words which touched me.
“Thank you, Miss Christie.” “I am so glad she is better,” remarked I, venturing impulsively into the slough that I might stretch my hand up to the window-ledge.
But I saw that her breath was beginning to come fast, and the faint pink to tinge her cheek as it did when she was excited.
I thought that the effect on her nervous temperament of making her leave the room against her will would outweigh any physical good the change might do her.
Her terror was so real that it infected me, and for the moment I almost shared the poor lady’s mad belief that there was a conspiracy against her.
But her next words restored me to my senses.
“Are you against me too?” she asked piteously.
There was a pause, during which she stared at me steadily and searchingly.
But I had no cause to fear her poor mad eyes, so I returned her gaze, and she grew gradually calmer.
If I may trust you, give me this proof—get me one day’s respite.
“I will try,” said I softly.
You will catch cold.
I could not see in, for the window-sill was some eight or ten inches above my head.
I turned and splashed my way back, with my teeth chattering, to the house, and changed my wet shoes and stockings, half crying for pity for the poor, helpless, forlorn lady for whom I could do so little.
I thought it better that the lynx-eyed guardian should not discover that I had found a way of communicating privately with her unlucky charge.
“Saturday!” interrupted Sarah sharply.
“Yes,” said I, rather frightened at telling such a story.
“To-morrow,” said she, with a steady look which I took as an acknowledgment; and I turned to Sarah.
“Very well, miss,” said Sarah, to my surprise.
I was so much used to living in fear of Sarah that the warning did not make any particular impression upon me, and I went to bed neither more nor less afraid of her machinations than usual.
I woke up in the night without being conscious of any cause for doing so.
Then, as I raised myself on my elbow, I thought I heard a sound, too faint to be called a noise, outside the door.
So I kept quite still and listened intently.
I heard nothing for some time, then again a muffled noise as of something being shuffled softly from one stair to another, then again no sound.
I got out of bed softly, lighted my candle by putting a match to the dying fire to avoid the noise of striking it, crept to the door, and literally put my ear to the keyhole.
And, after a few moments, I heard the same soft shuffling again.
Whoever or whatever it was seemed to be making its way down by very slow degrees, until it seemed that it must be about six or seven stairs from the top.
I screwed up my courage and resolved to give the intruder, human or otherwise, a fright.
All the locks were kept in good condition at the Alders, and there was not such a thing as a creaking door in the place.
I turned the key without the least noise, then the handle, and flung open the door, stamping my foot and brandishing the candle.
My plan succeeded only too well.
A figure which had been crouching on the stairs sprang up.
It was Sarah.
Before I had time to do more than recognize the savage frightened face, her foot slipped, and, with a piercing cry, she fell backward down the stairs.
The staircase had one turn.
I, trembling at the door, saw her long thin hands clutching and struggling to save herself at the corner; but she failed, and I heard a heavy thud, and then a groan.
She had fallen headlong to the bottom.
For one second I leaned against the wall unable to move; then, trembling so that I could scarcely find the top stair, I stepped forward to go down.
But on the second stair my foot suddenly slipped, and, if I had not been going very slowly because of my agitation, I must have fallen.
With a sudden suspicion, I sat down without advancing farther, and slid my hand along the stair.
It was slippery; so were the others.
The turret staircase was dark even by day; if I had been running downstairs at my usual pace, nothing could have saved me.
It was a trap set by Sarah, if not for getting rid of me altogether, at least for seriously injuring me.
She was greasing the stairs one by one when I had heard her; in her alarm at my sudden appearance she had sprung up, her foot had slipped on the greasy plate below which she had been using, and she had fallen herself a victim to the trap she had laid for me.
And, as the horrible truth broke upon me, I heard another groan and a murmur I could not distinguish.
Sick at heart, and for the moment almost as helpless as she, I crawled down the stairs, wondering and fearing what spectacle would meet my eyes at the bottom.
At the bottom, an almost senseless heap, lay Sarah, with one arm twisted under her and her head in a pool of blood.
The noise of her fall had by this time brought out Jane from the distant nursery; and she ran for the cook, who was an older and more experienced woman, and who indeed proved useful in this emergency.
Then I ran downstairs for some brandy, which we put to her lips from time to time, but in vain tried to make her swallow.
And so we sat shivering not with cold alone, until the front-door bell sounded through the silent house, and Jane, who had not dared to come upstairs again since she went to send off Sam, opened the door, and we heard the Doctor’s heavy tread on the stairs.
It was Doctor Lowe.
He called first for more light.
Jane brought a lamp, and he signed to her to go away.
After asking me whether I was hysterical, and hearing me answer “No,” he told me to hold the lamp while he made his examination.
He said afterwards that I had strong nerves; but nothing but fear of him kept me steady at my post, as, with averted head, I heard the sharp little cries the wounded woman gave two or three times.
The cook had been right; the arm that lay under Sarah was broken; the Doctor could not tell yet whether her spine was not injured too.
He cut off her long black hair and strapped up her head, which had received a gash which might affect the brain, he said; and he set and bandaged the broken arm.
Then we brought a mattress, and very carefully lifted her on to it, carried her to her room, and put her on the bed.
“Who is going to sit up with her?” asked he.
“I will,” said I, but added doubtfully, “if—” “If what?” said the Doctor, turning upon me sharply.
She won’t be able to recognize anybody; but I warn you she will be restless.
How came she to be there at this time of night?
There was a fire already in her room, for she was by no means the ill-used creature she liked to think herself.
I seated myself in a chair beside it, prepared to watch until early morning, when the cook had promised to take my place.
Before long the patient began to grow restless, as the Doctor had predicted; she turned her head from side to side, tried to raise her broken arm, which had been set and bandaged tightly down, muttering and moaning incoherently.
Presently she was quite quiet, and I hoped she had gone to sleep.
I think I must have dozed myself for a few minutes, when I was startled into full wakefulness by a low hoarse cry of “Jim!” She had managed to move her head so that her great black eyes, glittering now with fever, were fixed full upon me; and my heart beat fast, for I thought she must know me.
It’s about the check.
You must be off to-night.
Go to the old place.
I’ll do it, if you want me to; but it’s putting yourself in danger as well as me.
What do you want of a lady for a wife?
Her money’s none so much, and, as for her pretty face, it’s the face of a fool.
I’m twice the woman to look at that she is, and I’m only twenty-five; and I’ve stuck to you through thick and thin.
“Don’t go for that, James,” she said once imploringly.
“Dead men tell no tales, Jim,” said she, in another fearful whisper.
What’s an old man’s life that you’re so shy of touching him?
You’ve done many a riskier thing.
I seemed to see murder in her fierce fiery eyes; and I shuddered even as I moistened her dry lips and touched her burning forehead.
What awful confusion in her mind was there to connect me with her criminal lover of years before?
How was it that he never appeared?
And now she fancied this “Jim” wanted to marry me—and I had never even seen him!
The water’s deep in the cellar; but it won’t hurt the jewels, and the plate’ll clean.
My brain seemed to be getting as much confused as her own.
You risk too much.
But the reaction from the high-pressure tension of my nerves during the last few hours was too much for me.
I fell fainting to the floor.
The next morning I awoke late, with a headache and an unpleasant feeling of having gone through some horrible adventure.
Give her every care.
But she got up and sat by the fire in my room, and I sat with her during a great part of the day.
Seeing her in the full light of my four windows, I was shocked by the change in her since I had first come to the Alders, little more than two months before.
Her cheeks were so wan and hollow, her eyes so sunken in their sockets, and her lips so drawn and livid that I seemed to be looking at the face of a dead woman.
I had to go in search of my breakfast myself this morning.
She had not dared even to visit her child while that harpy was about.
I was sorry Sarah’s illness had been caused by me; but I could not feel much sympathy with her; her wandering speeches of the night before had shown her real cruel, vindictive self too plainly.
At the foot of the turret stairs, where a mat had been put to hide the traces of the horrible stain, I found the elfish Mona, as dirty as usual, playing with a large bunch of keys—Sarah’s housekeeping keys.
I thought they would be safer in my care than in Mona’s; so I took them from her, not without a struggle and many tearless screams and howls on her part.
Oh, how cold it was as the door closed behind me!
I was growing nervous after the adventures I had had lately, and I did not like to hear the muffled thud of that door as it swung to after me.
It was colder than ever in there, a great big bare room, with shelves and cupboards, and old hampers and boxes, and odds and ends of lumber.
I could not help thinking how angry Sarah would be if she knew I was in the room, where no member of the household but herself ever ventured, and which had therefore grown into an importance it did not deserve, for it was a very ordinary apartment, and the cupboard I first opened, in search of candles and moist sugar, was a very ordinary cupboard, with the usual store of jams and pickle-jars and household stores of all kinds, except, of course, I thought angrily, as I shivered again with the cold, the candles and moist sugar of which I was in search.
I opened another cupboard, I searched on the open shelves, but could not find either of the things I wanted.
I took it up; but suddenly my attention was diverted by the fact that in one of the boards of the floor on the spot where it had lain there was a tiny ring.
If I had not had my attention very much on the alert in this unaccustomed place, it would have escaped my notice.
As it was, I put my finger through it, and found that it raised a trap-door.
I raised it only a few inches, and shut it again directly—not that I had no curiosity about it, but that I had also some fear.
An unsuspected trap-door in a house so full of surprises as the Alders had an interest of a rather appalling kind.
The rush of cold air when the trap-door was wide open seemed to take my breath away.
I held my candle over the opening, and saw that some three feet below the ladder was green and slimy, and that a foot below that there was water.
Was it a well?
Suddenly there flashed through my mind Sarah’s words in her delirium of the night before—“The water’s deep in the cellar.” I looked about me for something to try the depth of the water with, for go down I must.
I found a rod that looked like those used for the bottom of window-blinds, and cautiously, candle in hand, ventured on the ladder.
It was quite firm.
As soon as I was on the bottom dry step, the fourth from the top, I saw that I was in a large cellar, on one side of which were empty wine-bins which looked rotten and green.
Above the level of the water the walls were green too.
There was a tiny grating high up, from which down to the water there was a long green streak, as if water continually ran down there.
I heard the drip, drip at intervals while I stayed.
Did she know that she might as well be living over a well?
I tried the depth of the water; it was between three and four feet.
Then I looked through the rungs of the ladder I was standing on, and thought I saw something behind it.
Putting out my rod, I felt something soft which shook at the touch.
I knew it by an old Italian luggage-label, “Torino,” which I had noticed then.
It was within arm’s reach through the rungs of the ladder.
With trembling fingers I opened it—for it was not even fastened—and, to my horror, drew out from a confusion of glittering things with which it was half filled a serpent bracelet I had seen Lady Mills wear.
I put it back, closed the portmanteau with difficulty, and clung to the ladder, overwhelmed by my discovery.
My candle slipped from my fingers, fell with a hiss and a splash into the water below, and I was in darkness.
It was seven o’clock, and only just enough light came through the one little grated window high up in the wall for me to see that there was a window there.
But, once on the store-room floor, I crawled cautiously round the square hole I had come up through until I came to the door, which I shut down with a strong sense of relief.
Then I groped about, stumbling over hampers and boxes now and then, and scarcely able to repress a cry at each fresh obstruction, until I came at last to the door.
I had left it unlocked; and the moment after I touched the handle I was on the other side.
Luckily I had slipped the keys into my pocket at first sight of the black bag; and, after long but impatient fumbling, I managed in the dark to fit in the right one and to turn the lock securely.
Then I groped my way along the passage; and I never in all my life felt such a thrill of heart-felt thankfulness as I did when the great baize-covered door swung to behind me, and I found myself once more in the lighted hall.
I flung myself into a chair, overwrought and exhausted by what I had suffered in the left wing, and it was not for some minutes that I noticed an envelope directed simply, in Mrs. Manners’s handwriting, to “Miss Christie, The Alders,” which lay on the table beside me.
I have had the battle with my mother prematurely, and gained the victory.
I intended, as you know, to break my resolution to her gently; but she herself hurried the dénouement.
We broke the journey at Paris, stopping there last night.
As soon as we got there, I opened my writing-case and wrote a tiny note to my darling, just to tell you how I walked up and down the deck of the steamer and sat in a railway-carriage, thinking of you and the last look I had into your beautiful loving gray eyes in the drive on Tuesday night—such a long time ago it seems!
I left the room for a minute to order something to eat, with my letter closed up and directed to you on the table, ready to be enclosed to Mrs.
When I came back, I found my mother there; she had torn open my letter and was reading it.
Then we had a scene.
I asked for my letter, and she tore it up and flung it into the fireplace, with some words about you that sent my forbearance to the winds, and I told her she was speaking about my future wife.
In such a matter it is always best to get your information at first hand.
Your future daughter-in-law is Miss Violet Christie, the most beautiful girl in Norfolk or out of it.
I only wish, my darling, that my promise to my father had not prevented my telling her this while we were still in England, for I begin to fancy this journey ‘for her health’ was nothing but a trick—a plot, for there were two in it—for getting me away from you.
However, I suppose I must live through the two months now somehow, as I promised her.
She will keep me to that.
I pray Heaven you may have very little to tell.
And now I entreat you to comply with this my earnest, solemn request.
She teaches in the Sunday-school.
Manners to send you up to the Hall on some pretext on Sunday; get Maud alone, and you will find she will do what you ask.
Tell her to remember her last promise to me in the conservatory, and I’ll remember mine.
I feel already such a hunger for a sight of your sweet face—I can’t think of the touch of your little clinging hands about my throat without the tears rising to my eyes.
I think I must jump into the sea if I cannot find some means of getting back to you sooner.
Good-by; Heaven bless you!
Write to me; don’t forget.
I went into the dining-room, took it out again, and began kissing each line in turn, I was so silly with happiness.
I had got to the middle of the second page in this fashion, when the iron bar which fastened the shutters suddenly fell down and swung backwards and forwards almost without noise.
I thrust my letter hastily back into my gown and stared at the shutters, too much startled to think what could be the reason of this, when one of them slid softly back, and a man was in the room before I could get to the door.
With a cry of relief, I sprang towards him.
I thought everybody would be occupied with the two invalids.
She was so reluctant to leave her own room that I took the liberty of telling Sarah I would answer to you for delaying the change this one day.
The dressing-room in the left wing is so very cold.
And then I sent for Doctor Lowe.
Was that right?
But he was in too good a humor to find fault with anything.
Have you any more news?
It is bad enough to come back to a house as full of invalids as a hospital.
He put his hand on mine, which was lying on the table, and looked into my face very kindly indeed.
You can’t think how dull the place is when you are away.
And he kept me a long time chatting to him and listening to his account of what he had seen in London, until at last I grew very sleepy while he finished the story of his adventures; and I said I must really go to bed, or I should never be able to get up in time for breakfast.
As it was, the clock struck eleven before I went upstairs.
The opportunity soon came.
I went into the schoolroom after breakfast, thinking I would employ the hour and a half there was to spare before church-time in just beginning my letter to Laurence.
I put away my letter at once, so I do not know how he guessed to whom I was writing.
“Am I disturbing you?” said he.
But that is not the worst.
If it had been only that, I would not have told you anything about it until she was well enough to defend herself.
And I had still so much that I must tell him!
Poor old Sarah is, I acknowledge, the worst-tempered and most vindictive woman alive.
But the accomplice of thieves!
It is possible that they may both have been cheated by some clever knave into assisting him innocently.
This is how it is.
I went to see her yesterday, and proposed the plan to her, not forgetting to put in a word about our friends at Nice.
She was delighted, and asked your uncle’s consent at once.
I opened it, still utterly bewildered.
He says I am to write to you and persuade you to go; but I do not think you will need much persuasion.
Heaven be praised for sending us such kind friends!
It was just like her to see nothing so very extraordinary in this offer, to take it as a matter of course, and thank Heaven for it in the most simple-minded way, while it troubled me somewhat still.
I read the letter twice through, and then tried deprecatingly to thank him for the outfit he had got her to provide.
When she has anything to tell, she can’t resist telling it.
This letter is just like her.
I don’t know whether Mr.
Manners would approve.
But there—I promised Laurence I would help you—and there is no harm in it—and so I will.
“Jewel-robberies are epidemic, you know, and I dare say we haven’t seen the last of this series yet,” said he.
You remember some years ago, when there were five big robberies within six weeks?
So they must take their chance in the old chest at home.
They might be if they had their equals in wits pitted against them; but they haven’t.
The ordinary detective has the common defect of vulgar minds, want of resource.
The thief, if he is clever enough to be a successful jewel-robber, has the abilities of a general.
The bolder he is, the more certain he is of success.
The detective, in spite of repeated failures, believes himself infallible.
If I were a thief, I should commit robberies as nearly as possible under the detective’s nose.
But to all we said she only replied steadily and coldly that she disliked travelling, did not feel well enough to undertake a journey, and preferred remaining at the Alders.
So I sat down to write my scarcely-begun letter to Laurence.
For Sarah, the only person who wished me harm, is too ill to move, and is in danger, poor woman, of losing, if not her life, at least her reason, the Doctor says.
My mother is very anxious to make your acquaintance, though she does not know of our engagement, for I dare not tell her any secrets.
And you see he does not try to prejudice me against you, as you thought he would.
Manners met me in the hall of the Vicarage, took me into the drawing-room, and gave me a packet of tracts, two or three of which had names lightly pencilled on them, as specially suitable to certain of the parishioners, as, “The Drunkard’s Warning”—Mrs.
“Tell her to notice that I have marked some specially,” said Mrs.
Manners, as she gave them to me; and I rather wondered how the persons they were directed to would take the attention.
I thought that, in spite of her hatred of subterfuge, Mrs.
Manners seemed to enjoy the little mystery which hung over my engagement.
She kissed me very kindly as she sent me off, and told me I was to let her know when Sarah was well enough to be read to, and she would send something to be read which might do her good.
I promised that I would; but I hope it was not impious of me to think, as I could not help thinking, that she was too wicked for any of Mrs. Manners’s good books to have much effect upon her.
I went through the side-gate of the Vicarage garden, where I had run against Laurence on that happy evening which seemed so long ago, although in truth only eight days had passed since then, and my heart beat fast, and I walked slowly, for it seemed to me that Laurence must be coming round the corner again to meet me; but of course he did not; and I quickened my pace as I crossed the park to the Hall.
The mist was growing very thick, although it was only a little past five; and I knew I must make haste back, or I might risk losing my way, short as the distance was between the Hall and the Alders.
There was no one there, for they were all at tea.
This was my first entrance into Laurence’s home; and I was so much agitated between pleasure at being in the house he lived in and shame at feeling that by some of the inhabitants at least, if they knew all, I should be looked upon as an unwelcome intruder, that I sank into a chair and buried my face in my hands.
She was a girl of about sixteen, with a weak but not disagreeable face; and she shook hands with me rather timidly, but not unkindly.
“Thank you; it is very kind of you to take so much trouble,” said she.
“Oh, it is no trouble at all!” I answered.
Oh, do keep him up to it!
I’ll remind him again in my next letter—or when I see him.
I thought she was much too young to be in love, when she was still in short frocks and wore her hair in a pigtail; but I was obliged to help her, in return for the service I wanted her to do me.
“I have brought my letter,” said I mysteriously.
The fog was already so much thicker that I wondered whether the gentleman with our letter would be able to find his way back to London that night, and even whether I could find mine back to the Alders.
I must be sure to keep to the drive in crossing the park.
But, before I got to that, I lost myself among the garden-paths, and walked into a flower-bed; and I began to think I should have to find my way back to the door and ask ignominiously to be led to the gate, when I heard voices on my left; and I made my way recklessly in their direction across grass, flower-beds, and everything.
I could not see the speakers yet, for there was a hedge or something between us; but I could distinguish that they were the voices of a young man and a young woman of the lower class.
“Yes, to such weather-cocks as you,” answered the girl, with rough coquetry.
Presently I heard the sound of a kiss, and he promised to come and see her again on Wednesday; and then they went away; while I, seized by a sudden inspiration, found my way not to the park, but back to the house, which was less difficult.
“Oh, yes; here it is!”—and she drew it from her pocket.
I will give you a pen.
Why, how white you look!
He described to me the beauties of the Mediterranean shore, and said that I should be happier there than I had ever been in my life—which I could easily believe when I thought how near I should be to Laurence.
He asked me if I was not anxious to see the pretty dresses my mother had been commissioned to get for me, and told me I should look like a little princess if I were good and did just what I was told.
“But you must not give me too handsome dresses, or I shall not feel at home in them.” “You will soon get used to them,” said he, with a curiously sharp smile.
He saw the effect his words had upon me, and he jumped up and came towards where I was standing ready to light my candle.
“Only the silly ones,” he returned, in a tone I did not understand.
“Well, I will explain all that to you on our journey to Monaco.” He looked very much excited, as he often did after an evening spent with his violin; and his blue eyes, in which one seemed to see the very soul of music, flashed and sparkled as he held my hand.
You have brought me luck, and you shall share it.
And I went to sleep that night with my hands under my pillow clasping his letter.
“No,” answered I, shaking my head.
“Yesterday?” asked he quickly.
The smile remained on his face, which had however in one second turned ashy white.
He said, “All right, my dear,” in his usual voice, except that I fancied there was a sort of hard ring in it, and left the room.
“Oh, no, my darling!” I answered.
I am the governess.
He followed me in and shut it carefully.
And I don’t want the other servants to know I’m her brother.
It may be pride; but perhaps you’ll excuse it, miss.
“She is ill—very ill.” To my surprise, he looked more incredulous than unhappy.
She fell down a flight of stairs and injured herself severely.
Excuse me, miss, but I’ve been away so long that she is almost like a stranger to me, and I had great difficulty in finding her out.
We’ve always been a family to hold our heads high, and I couldn’t hear anything to please me more about her.
But I expect it’s little use my coming home and wanting her to keep house for me.
She was a good-looking girl, and I’ve no doubt she’s looking forward to marrying on her savings, and then we shall be just as far apart as ever.
The man’s cold curiosity seemed so unlike the warm interest of a brother that I began to wonder whether I was right in giving him the information he wanted.
There had been no ring at the front door.
But the name did not seem new to him, as it did to me.
I thought to myself.
Never mind this lady; she is as much interested in the woman as I am.
This man, then, was not Sarah’s brother at all, but a detective who had been trying to extract information from me by a trick!
The fact excited no suspicion.
The man took the next train to London, travelling second-class.
But south of Colchester he was seized with a fit; he was taken out at the next station, the bag he had with him examined for his address, jewels found in it, and the police at Scotland Yard communicated with.
“She is a rough, harsh woman; but I have always found her honest as the day.” “She may have been instigated,” suggested the detective.
“I am not in a position to state it yet; but we have our suspicions,” said the man cautiously.
I must ask you to let me see the woman and question her.
I will ask the nurse if you can see her now.
Sarah, looking more hideous than ever with the white bandage round her head and against her leather-colored face and black hair, was turning her head from side to side, and moaning and muttering feebly.
The only words one could catch seemed to refer to the pain she was in.
I left the room as quickly as I could—the sight of the ghastly figure of the guilty woman sickened me.
I hope, and indeed believe, that, when she can do so, she will be able to clear herself of anything worse than perhaps the innocent passing of the stolen goods from one rogue to another, without herself having the least idea of the crime she was being made to participate in.
I will do all in my power to assist the course of justice.
The doctor will be here in the morning, and he will tell you when she is likely to be able to give an account of herself.
The cook grumbled a good deal when I gave her the order.
What was the house being turned topsy-turvy for?
Telling her she might stop the night too, if the fog came on, as it was doing, when he might have known she wouldn’t want telling twice when that hulking young Peter Wright was about the farm!
“I am afraid I have entailed a good deal of trouble upon you, cook, by thoughtlessly giving Jane permission to spend the night at the farm if the fog grew thick; so I have just asked Mrs. Saunders to take her upstairs duties till Jane comes back, in return for which you will be kind enough to watch by Sarah during her unavoidable absences.” This silenced the cook at once.
It was a just punishment for her grumbling, for there was no duty she would not rather have undertaken than that of watching by the unconscious Sarah even in her quiet moments.
She said to me afterwards that the nurse was very good; directly Sarah began to talk or grow excited, Mrs. Saunders always managed to hear, and came in to relieve her from the unpleasant task of listening to the sick woman’s ravings.
“This day’s events have upset me more than you can imagine, child,” said he, passing his hand through his hair wearily.
“That vixen Sarah has always seemed honest—and yet I don’t know what to believe.” “And, you know, the portmanteau I found in the cellar,” I whispered timidly.
He took the keys from me; but he was so very excited that he could not find the right one to fit into the door, and I opened it for him.
There lay the black bag on one side of the trap-door, where I had put it down on catching sight of the little ring in the floor.
“No, my child, I see nothing,” said he, as he peered about.
“Thank Heaven, it was your fancy, child!” said he.
He came up and took the candle from me, while I descended.
The water, I knew by the number of steps which were dry above it, was at the same level as before.
I looked through the ladder and round it.
Table and portmanteau had utterly disappeared.
“Let me come up,” said I sharply.
He held out his hand, and, when I, trembling and tottering, reached the top of the ladder, he flung his arm round me to support me.
He brought me some brandy-and- water and made me drink it, and bathed my forehead, and told me gently not to be frightened, for I should soon be out of this dreary place and among beautiful scenes where I should forget the gloom of this sepulchral, dead-alive house, which was turning my poor little brain.
“But indeed I did see the portmanteau the first time!” said I piteously.
But I saw he did not believe me; and the tears began to roll down my cheeks.
I knew he hated the sight of anything ugly or distressing—it was part of an artist’s nature, he said; so I forced back my tears as fast as I could, and tried to smile.
“There is my lovely girl again!” said he, stopping in front of me—he had walked up and down the room while I wept.
“We will never mention Sarah’s name again when once we are away from her, little one,” said he.
He said he was her brother—and of course I did not want to make him doubt his own sister.
He did not answer my question at once.
Then he said very quietly— “Did Mr. Maynard ask you that?” He turned slowly as he said so, until his eyes met mine.
“Then I believe that she is in love with him still, and that he is at the bottom of this dreadful robbery!” cried I, much excited.
I met him coming out of it as I went downstairs to breakfast the next morning.
I spent the hours until dinner-time in my own room, packing and preparing for the journey the next day.
It was curious, I thought, that I had not heard again from my mother, who would naturally be overflowing with excitement about such a great event.
I had written a long letter to her on Monday, and put it into the post-bag, with no misgivings as to its safety now that my enemy Sarah was ill.
It was a very pleasant thing to think that I should soon be with my mother again, and that in a few days I should see Laurence; but there was a less bright view to be taken of the expedition, and from time to time, in the midst of my happy anticipation, it troubled me.
I had noticed faint signs of nervous agitation in her manner lately when the coming journey was alluded to, and I had caught her eyes fixed upon mine sometimes as if she had something to say to me which she could not bring herself to the point of uttering; and the strange perversity of the poor lady, who seemed now mad, now sane, puzzled me more and more.
The Doctor, for whose verdict Mr. Maynard was waiting, did not come that day until just before dinner; and then his report was as gloomy as possible.
He did not think it probable that Sarah would ever recover her reason, and the only change she was likely to get from her sick-room was to the county lunatic asylum.
“You know, of course, that suspicion has fallen upon a gang of navvies who are at work upon the line near there; but, although there have been detectives among them since, not one has been sharp enough to discover anything yet.” The man seemed a little shy at first of interfering in a branch of the work of watching which had been put into other hands.
But he was rather put upon his mettle by the allusion to the fact that his journey had been so far a failure.
He said they should be back early, as the fog was rising already, and, in order to repay Mr. Maynard for detaining him, there was to be dinner at half-past six, instead of the usual tea at half-past five.
I went back into the dining-room, where the cook was clearing away the luncheon; Jane, as she had predicted, not having come back yet.
“Are you unhappy at the thought of losing her so soon?” said I softly, leaving my seat and kneeling by her side, as soon as the cook had left the room.
“It is as much as my wretched life is worth to warn you,” whispered she, taking the hand I had laid on her lap, and clasping and unclasping her own about it nervously.
“You are kind-hearted, and innocent as a child—I see that now,” she continued, her eyes wandering restlessly about the room.
She shook her head.
“I am not hysterical—don’t be afraid of that,” said she, turning her great eyes upon me, as if in reproach.
Do not on any account enter another train without her.
He would not listen.
Try once more.
Yet her voice had never once risen above a whisper that could not have been heard at the other end of the room.
She raised her head again, and read with unexpected penetration the look on my face.
“I am not mad, Miss Christie,” she said quite quietly.
And I remained on my knees beside her, not knowing what to think, whether she was mad or sane, whether I should follow her advice or dismiss her words as—no, I could not think them idle; that she herself had been in terrible earnest as she uttered them I could not doubt.
She wanted to make me distrust her husband.
She had not spoken like a jealous woman; she was too cold, too indifferent for jealousy.
What strange fancy was this of hers about the journey?
Why should a morbid fancy of his poor, sickly, fanciful wife trouble me?
The cook came in to say that a boy from the village wanted to speak to Miss Christie; and I went into the hall and found a little fellow of about ten whom I did not know, who told me that Mrs.
Manners, who was at the school-house, had sent to ask me to come to her at once, as she wished to speak to me about the dole.
This was a yearly distribution of clothing and money among the very poor people of the parish, which took place in November.
It was rather strange that Mrs.
Manners should want to speak to me about it, I thought at first, as I was not a district visitor.
“Don’t go, Miss Christie,” said she at once.
Manners never sends messages but by her own boys.
Manners has been so kind to me.
I ran upstairs and was down again ready for my walk in a few minutes.
The boy was evidently prepared to accompany me; and the fog was so thick that I was glad of it, for he was more used to the turns of the road than I; and even he had to go very slowly and to keep close to the hedge.
He kept urging me to make haste, however, and I followed him as fast as I could, while he turned every other minute to see that I was still behind him.
The school was about half a mile from the Alders, among the first houses of the village.
“But you are going wrong,” I said.
We had groped our way up this lane for what seemed to me a very long time, when the boy stopped and whistled.
“What are you doing that for?” said I sharply.
I stood for a moment trembling with terror.
Smothering a cry, I turned, and ran I knew not whither.
I heard the boy say, “Thank ye,” and then the footsteps of the man coming nearer to me.
He passed me; I could see the vague form as it went by.
But in my joy at the sight I drew a sharp breath; he turned back, groped for me, found, and raised me to my feet, all without a word.
I closed my eyes and shuddered.
For the first moment I felt too exhausted by the excitement of those awful minutes to struggle much.
Look up at me.
It was Laurence, his face so haggard and so dirty as to be scarcely recognizable; but he told me, as he kissed me again and again, that I must not mind that, for he had travelled night and day without a moment’s rest since he got my letter on the morning of the previous day.
“And, thank Heaven, I am in time, in time!” he cried, as he pressed me again in his arms.
“Oh, Violet, are you still so innocent as to think that that man would have brought you to me?” “Why not?” asked I, in a whisper.
Your innocence would not have protected you much longer.
Oh, I was a fool, a blind fool, ever to leave you, for father—mother—anybody in the world!
“Never mind, my own darling; you are safe now,” said he very gently.
Didn’t I tell you that?
When I recovered, I found that he had carried me some distance; and, as soon as I began to sigh, he put me down and gave me some brandy-and-water out of his flask.
“You are the first person who has made me go off quite, though,” I said.
And poor Laurence took it as a reproach, and insisted on our stopping again in the fog for me to forgive him.
That is why I had to send for you on a pretext, and frighten you out of your life.
The boy I sent for you did not know me.
But what is all this mystery about, Laurence?
“Won’t you trust me with your secret?” He did not want to do so; but I was curious, and hurt at his refusal; and, when he saw the tears come into my eyes, he gave way.
He was going to station them himself, under cover of the fog, in places round the Hall, among the shrubs, where they would be well concealed, and yet be near the approaches of the house, especially on that side where the strong-room was.
The fog might work for them or against them; it might throw the thieves—if indeed they came, which was a matter of chance—into the constables’ hands, or it might help them to escape.
That must be left to fortune.
So now, my darling, you know everything, and you must keep my secrets, every one, like grim death.
As for your journey, don’t be alarmed.
Laurence opened the gate of the cottage garden and led me inside till they should have passed.
“Well, I’m not much of a dab at it myself, though I used to tootle a little upon the cornet when I was a boy,” replied the detective, whose language had grown a little easier and was less carefully chosen as he knew us better.
However, I think I must console myself for this disgusting weather by a—a tune to-night; but I’ll be merciful and shut the doors.
My wife and Miss Christie will entertain you, and—let me see, it is half-past seven—at nine o’clock I’ll come and inflict myself upon you again, and we can have a game at backgammon.
Before I knew he was near I felt something passed round my neck and heard the snap of a clasp behind.
I put up my hand and sprang to my feet, startled.
Flashing and sparkling round my throat was a necklace of red jewels that dazzled me by their beauty.
I said I would bring you some garnets.
I put up both hands, tore them off, and flung them down with trembling fingers, and then stood, panting with fright at my own daring, wondering what he would do to me.
He did nothing.
Never mind; you shall make amends for it by and by.
You shall come back and fetch me at nine o’clock.
But I was paying little attention to him.
When the last note of the “Adieu” had died away, and Mr. Maynard’s coarse voice had broken the spell by his “Bravo—very good!” I listened for the next melody eagerly, and was struck with a chill sense of disappointment as an air from Rigoletto followed.
Of course Mr. Maynard did not notice any difference, and muttered approval from time to time indiscriminately.
It was as brilliant as ever; the execution of one of the difficult passages in the arrangement of Martha was clever, more perfect than usual; but the soul was not there, and no brilliancy of shake or cadenza could repay one for the loss.
Had the constables been able in the fog to find their way safely to the park, and would the thieves come, after all?
Would Gordon prove to be mixed up in it?
It was an awful thing to think that I, by my letter to Laurence, had set on men to hunt other men down.
From Sarah’s words and the eagerness with which the police had snatched at the least chance of catching him, it was plain that he must be a very desperate criminal indeed, for whom one could have no sympathy.
I hoped with all my heart they would catch him; and I was rather anxious to see what such a very wicked man looked like.
There must be some explanation of it all which would satisfy even Laurence, I thought to myself—almost, at least; for that letter from my mother, which she had never written—could that be explained away?
My tears fell fast as this terrible proof rose up in my mind.
How could he explain that away?
Still Maynard slumbered.
I looked at the clock; it was seven minutes to nine.
Another and another howl from the dog, followed by loud and furious barking.
We two women sat staring at each other, without a word.
When nine o’clock struck, I jumped up, much relieved, opened and shut the door softly, crossed the hall, and turned the handle of the drawing-room door.
It was locked.
I tapped; but there was no answer.
He was playing a brilliant concerto, and I supposed he had not heard me.
It was of no use for me to stand there knocking if he would not hear me, or did not yet wish to be disturbed; so, after one more unsuccessful attempt to attract his attention, I took a lamp from the hall-table and went into the schoolroom.
It was now ten minutes past nine.
Nap was barking more furiously than ever.
I knew by the mist there was all through the house how dense the fog must be outside; but I was so much struck by the noise the dog was making that I unfastened the shutters and opened the window about an inch to listen.
The fog was blinding.
I could not see a yard in front of me.
“Let me in.” He got in softly through the window, and, rather to my alarm, a middle-aged man in plain clothes, also with a lantern, followed him.
Laurence himself looked more alarming than any thief.
His face was ghastly white with fatigue, and dirtier than ever through long watching in the fog.
He turned sharply to the other man, who nodded as if to say it was just what he had expected.
“How long has he been playing?” asked Laurence.
“Ever since half-past seven.” He turned to the other man again.
“A trick,” said the latter simply.
“Who is with him?” asked Laurence again.
“Nobody,” said I, surprised and rather frightened by these questions.
I left him playing in the drawing-room at five-and-twenty minutes to eight, and he told me to call him at nine.
I hesitated, trembling from head to foot.
“Why?” asked I, in a low voice.
“Because we want to speak to him particularly,” said the other man gruffly.
Laurence put me into a chair, whispering “That’s a brave girl!”—but with such an anxious, stern face.
And the other man came back into the room, followed by a policeman with his staff ready in his hand.
“We must break open the door,” said the elder man.
I started from my seat.
I stood watching them breathlessly.
But I heard the crash of glass, and at the same instant two policemen dashed through the shattered French window, seized and handcuffed him.
Then he stood between them, white and immovable, without a struggle.
But I did not connect myself with his words.
I was too bewildered to think or to understand clearly what was going on until I saw him, handcuffed as he was, quietly draw a tiny revolver from his pocket and, without raising it, point it at Laurence.
With a scream I rushed forward into the room and flung myself in front of Laurence, and I heard a report and felt something touch my arm—I did not know what at first—and Laurence sprang forward with almost a yell.
But he was encumbered with my form; and, before he could put me down, Gordon had wrenched himself away from his captors, and, snarling, “I meant to have done for her!” had dashed through the open window out into the fog and darkness.
I knew by this time that I was shot in the arm, for the blood was trickling through my sleeve; but the wound did not pain me much yet—I was too much excited for that, and too much occupied with Laurence’s pitiful distress.
He did not attempt to join in the hopeless chase of the escaped Gordon, but put me on a sofa, tore off the body of my frock, and bandaged my arm himself.
“Tell me what it all means, Laurence,” said I.
Did you catch the thieves?
Who were they?
“Won’t to-morrow do?” pleaded poor Laurence earnestly.
Now tell me quickly all about the robbery.
Why was Gordon here instead of him?
Oh, Laurence, my head seems to be going round!
I don’t understand it at all.
I am getting quite bewildered.
And, when they went inside, Tom went last, and left the door ajar.
A few minutes later another man came up and slipped in so quietly, so quickly, that we could hardly have sworn in the dense fog to his going in at all.
Then presently Tom and the girl came out.
He said good-by to her without as much delay as she would have liked, walked a few steps away until she had shut the door, then returned and crept alongside the wall of the house until he was under the strong-room window.
There were four of our men stationed very close to that, and their chief, who was with me, crept along easily under cover of the fog, which was as thick as ever, to join them.
I followed with the other man.
In a few minutes we heard a soft whistle from the strong-room window, as we guessed.
Tom answered by another, and we saw a third man come up and join Tom.
I was so close that I saw a bundle let cautiously down from the window by a cord.
Tom handed it to the third man, whom we allowed to walk off with it—followed however by two policemen—in order to watch the further proceedings of the other two thieves.
Another bundle was let down, which Tom carried off himself; and then we watched anxiously for the next movement of the man in the house.
The strong-room window is about twenty feet from the ground; but the man jumped down and landed on his feet.
In an instant five of us were upon him, but, though I think each of us in turn thought we had caught him, he eluded us all and got clear away, and in the fog escaped us.
At that moment the elderly man left the window.
The one rogue’s got off as clear as the other.
The other detective shook him, and glanced at the wine.
And, as I looked at her, the scales seemed to fall from my eyes, my dull wits to become keener, and part of the mystery of the house on the marsh to grow clear to me.
I sank down upon the floor beside her, and she put her thin wasted arms round my neck and kissed me without a word.
And the three men quietly left the room.
We did not say much even then.
But he will make us suffer—me—ah, and you too now!
You don’t know that man yet.
He will never let Laurence marry you.
He was going to return with them to the Hall, where they would sleep, leaving Maynard to pass the night at the Alders, as his missing host had invited him to do, and a couple of constables to keep watch in turn, though there was nothing less likely than that the—the persons they were in search of would return to the Alders that night.
“The wretch!” he said, in a low voice.
But you have done your best.
You would help me if you could.
He turned to me quickly.
“You must both leave this place,” said he.
Take care of your poor little wounded arm.
Then, exhausted by the events of the day and night, I just managed to crawl upstairs to my room, and, throwing myself upon the bed without undressing, I fell into a deep sleep which was more like a swoon.
In the early morning I woke, feeling stiff and ill, undressed, and got into bed; and when the sun had risen I got up with hot and aching head, and found that my arm was beginning to be very painful.
As soon as he saw me he ordered me off to bed, and then, after making him swear secrecy, which did not make much difference, as the story would certainly be all over the neighborhood and in the London newspapers before long, I let him draw from me an account of the greater part of the events of the previous day.
Jane came up to me soon after.
She had only just come home from Wright’s Farm, and was full of curiosity excited to the highest pitch by the vague account that the cook, who was deaf and had not heard much, had given her of the events which had taken place in her absence.
My faith in the latter was gone altogether; but my affection for him was gradually coming back again.
The fearfully wicked things that he had done I had only heard about; and how could the impression so given outweigh that much stronger one of his constant kindness to me?
And to think that it was I who had drawn down justice—for it was justice, I sorrowfully admitted—upon him caused me bitter remorse.
By letting the life at the Alders go on as usual, it was hoped that he might be lured back under the impression that he was not expected to return there.
In addition to her usual pallor, she had great black rings round her eyes; and, in answer to my inquiries, she confessed that she had not slept all night.
“I have something to tell you,” she whispered in my ear.
Saunders drinks, and is not a proper guardian for Sarah.
Sarah’s room is nearly opposite mine, and I opened my door and heard what sounded like a struggle.
Maynard, who was in the room next to the dressing-room, either did not hear or did not like to interfere.
Will you leave your door open and the door at the foot of the turret staircase?
The sense of being on the alert made me wakeful, and two or three times during the night I rose and stood at the top of my staircase, listening.
And the third time I did hear something.
I heard a faint cry, and presently the soft shutting of a door, then steps in the corridor below, and whispering.
I crept half-way down the stairs; the whispering continued.
I got to the bottom, and recognized Sarah’s voice muttering to herself.
He’ll come back now.
I’ve done what he wanted.
He can marry the Christie girl now.
It’s all right.
The atmosphere of the room was sickly and stifling.
I went up to the bed.
I snatched it off.
Thank Heaven, she was alive!—for she was breathing heavily.
I rushed to the two windows and flung them wide open, pulled the bell-rope until the house echoed, and moved her arms up and down.
The cook and Jane came in, terribly alarmed, in their night gowns.
There was some on the sideboard in the dining-room, I knew; and I was returning with it, and was just outside the dining-room door, when I caught sight of a man in the gloom at the end of the passage leading from the hall.
Where was he going?
Was he going to escape by the back way?
Did he know the house was watched?
I made a step forward, anxious to warn him; but he had already disappeared, and I dared not follow him.
The cook declined to watch in place of her for the remainder of the night, but as a precaution locked the door on the outside and took the key away.
“Now, if Sarah wants to do any more mischief, let her try it on Mrs. Saunders,” said she.
I could scarcely approve of this way of settling the difficulty; but happily no harm came of it; and Mrs. Saunders profited by the lesson, and kept pretty sober after that.
The poor lady came up herself to my room, where, having made my arm much worse by my expedition in the night, I was lying in bed the whole of the next day.
And, my strong suspicion that he was in the house acting like a spell upon me, I said no more.
It was the most dreadful blow I had ever experienced to have my respect and affection for a kind friend turned suddenly into horror of a great criminal.
But I would not believe that he was all bad.
How could a man who was so kind and sweet-tempered have no redeeming points at all?
And it was I, who had never received anything but kindness at his hands, who—innocently indeed—had drawn down this pursuit upon him.
There were only two things that I could do now.
I could pray for him, as I did most earnestly, that he might repent of what he had done, and become in very truth all that he had seemed to me; and I could perhaps let him know how the thought that it was I who had brought down justice upon him tormented me.
A possible means of communicating with him occurred to me.
In spite of the Doctor’s prohibition, I sprang out of bed, got my desk, and wrote a note asking his forgiveness, and giving him a full explanation of the way in which, in all innocence, I had written the letter which had led to this pursuit of him.
I told him the house was being watched, and was to be searched before long, and begged that, when he had got away, he would find some means of letting me know he was in safety.
“But I think it ought to require an effort.” Then she told me that, when Laurence had heard that morning through Jane of the night’s adventure, he had gone to Dr. Lowe and insisted upon Sarah’s removal to the county lunatic asylum that very day; and I never saw the poor creature again.
I heard that she had gone to her old room in the left wing, and, having taken the precaution to wrap a shawl round me before entering that long cold passage, I passed through the heavy swing-door, the very sight of which I hated.
I was opposite to the store-room door, when it was softly opened, and, without being able to make any resistance, I was drawn inside by a man’s arm.
It was so dark already in the store-room, lighted only by one little high window, that, his back being turned towards it, I could not see his face.
“Don’t tremble so,” said he—his voice was always hard, but he did not mean to speak unkindly.
“Do you know where he is?” I asked eagerly.
And, if this letter had not shown you to be loyal to him, I would not have left you here alive.
I am surprised myself, knowing how set he was upon having your company, that he did not come back and carry you off with him.
But I suppose he thought better of it, begging your pardon, ma’am.
He was too tender-hearted.
I saw that he had got rid of his handcuffs.
I knocked at the door.
At first there was no answer.
I called her by name, and begged her to let me in.
“Is he here?” she faltered.
“No; he has gone to America,” I whispered.
When I found myself inside the room which had been a mystery to me for so long, nothing struck me at first but a sense of cold and darkness.
There was only one window, which was barred on the inside; the fog still hung about the place, and the little light there had been all day was fading fast, for it was five o’clock.
But, as I stepped forward farther into the room, I drew my breath fast in horror.
“He may be listening to us now.” “I don’t care!” cried I passionately.
Why did you say nothing about it?
It was this—“Tell Sarah not to forget the work she has to do in my absence.” And I remembered also the grim way in which she had received it.
Could he have meant that?
In spite of his soft manners, he has a will that acts like a spell.
He delights in making up fantastic tales of that sort, and often in making me bear witness to the truth of his inventions; it is part of his wild humor.
But the revelation was more than I could bear.
But she insisted upon remaining until I was well enough to be moved, an event which I had myself retarded by rashly leaving my room three times since I had been told to keep to my bed.
Those days that I spent in bed were a miserable time for all of us.
The bits of news brought us from hour to hour by the awe-stricken Jane—first that there was a large reward offered for his capture; then rumors, which always proved to be false, of his having been caught; then complaints of the number of people who came just to look at the outside of the house that the ugly stories were being told about!
When Monday came, I, anxious to be declared convalescent as soon as possible, and to be able to avail myself of Mrs. Manners’s invitation to stay at the Vicarage, persuaded Doctor Lowe to let me go downstairs.
I went to the top of the back staircase, descended a few steps, and looked over.
The gardener and Sam were carrying between them a door, on which something was lying covered by a sheet.
The cook opened the study-door, and they took it in.
A horrible dread filled my mind and kept me powerless for a few moments.
“Oh, Miss Christie,” she whispered, clutching my arm in terror, “they’ve found papa!” Jane ran forward and caught me as I tottered in the child’s clasp.
Manners arrived, having heard the ghastly news already.
They took us over to the Vicarage at once, and I never entered the Alders again.
In the evening Laurence told me all about the discovery.
The gardener, who had done little work for the last few days beyond keeping the gate locked and driving away with a whip the boys who would swarm over when they got a chance, “just to have a look at the place,” had been attracted that morning by the shrill cries of Mona, who, now more neglected than ever, spent all day in the garden in spite of the fog.
He ran to the pond, where she was nearly always to be found, and whence her cries came, fearing she had fallen in.
But he found her standing in the mud on the edge of it, screaming, “Come out, come out!” and clutching with a stick at an object in the water.
It was the body of her father, entangled among the reeds.
As to what had become of the jewels afterwards, Tom professed himself as innocent as a child; but, whether this was true or not, nobody believed him.
He was sentenced to fourteen years’ penal servitude, and he did not hear the sentence with half so much concern as I.
Laurence and I, who were married before she left England, undertook the care of poor little savage Mona, who has grown into almost as nice a child as her sister.
And now I have one of my own too.
Florence Warden was the pseudonym of Florence Alice (Price) James.
The William Stevens edition (London, 1895?)
Alterations to the text: Add TOC.
[Title Page] Add author’s credit.
[Chapter XIX] (“I think she is going to die, miss—I do indeed,” said…) add right double quotation mark at end of paragraph.
[Chapter XXII] “while I crept back to the school-room, and sobbed” to schoolroom.
[Chapter XXIII] “How came she to he there at this time of night?” to be.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!)
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement.
If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession.
“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.
It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.
There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.
Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States.
If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed.
Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work.
You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.
The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work.
Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change.
If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges.
Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that: • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.
The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.
Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns.
You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark.
Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from.
If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund.
If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.
If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™ Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.
It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come.
In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.
Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.
To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States.
U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses.
Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.
TWENTY LITTLE MAIDENS.
Cloth extra, $1.25.
Two volumes in a box, $2.50.
Purity of tone and reality of impression are the leading tokens of a book for girls by Miss Blanchard.
She enters with a peculiar zest into the spirit of girlhood.
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY ALICE BARBER STEPHENS PHILADELPHIA J.
HOW THEY LIVED.
It was in a comfortable-looking house, surrounded by a garden, in the most attractive part of a pleasant city not two hundred miles from the nation’s capital, that the mother of the pretty maids sat sewing one day in early October.
She was listening for the first footstep which should announce the return of her girls from school.
“Where are you going, my pretty maid?” Mrs. Holmes asked.
“I am going at something of a gait,” she replied.
[Pg 8] I can’t be stately to save me.
Where are the others?
Let me see.
“I’m not sure but that you have more real sentiment than your sisters,” replied Mrs. Holmes, as she disengaged herself from the close hold of her daughter’s arms.
And doesn’t papa always send me to pay bills when he cannot go himself?
I am just plain me, the least good-looking of your trio.
I must go and hunt up something to eat.
I am half starved.
“Lady Dignity was covered with confusion to that extent that you could scarcely see her.” “Mamma, do make her behave properly,” entreated Lisa.
I don’t believe in too much self-repression.
She trumped it up.
I don’t believe she had any to speak of.
“Oh, that looks good,” exclaimed Lisa, raising herself on her elbow.
She was the youngest of the three daughters, and many persons thought her the prettiest.
Her delicate complexion, large blue eyes, and golden hair truly gave her a spirituelle appearance, upon which the little girl quite prided herself, and of which she was apt to make capital.
She had been rather delicate as a small child, and never quite outgrew the idea that, in consequence, she must always be considered.
Lisa, the eldest, on her part, demanded with great exactness what she called “her [Pg 11] rights.” She was a tall, handsome girl, with brilliant complexion, brown eyes, and soft curling chestnut hair.
Grandmother Estabrook was a dear old lady, rather given to old-fashioned ideas of what was meet and proper for children to do, and on this occasion she spoke with decision.
“I might as well have a lump of dough for a nose,” she complained.
Nevertheless, her own simplicity and lack of consciousness gave her a charm which neither of the others possessed, and which won her more affection than she realized.
So, doubtless, it was a balance, so far as affections went.
Sit there all in a row, so I can note the effect it will have upon you.
The girls caught sight of her merry face.
Mrs. Phillips was called upon suddenly to go to California with her invalid sister, and there had been, as you know, some talk of the boys preparing for the university, so it was decided that they should enter the Latin school at once, and they packed up and came.
I knew it.
The middle-sized one always gets left.
I do not want you to have such notions about these boys.
You are to be sisters and brothers together, friends by selection.
Now, don’t let me hear any such talk again.
You know papa himself suggested to Mrs. Phillips last summer that if the boys were to go to college it would be a good thing to send them to the Latin school this year.
They talked it all over.
Well, I suppose we are not such bloated bondholders but what a little windfall like that counts nowadays when times are hard.
How many do we attend, pray?
You know mamma never allows us [Pg 15] to go to night affairs except on the rarest occasions.
Boys are such teases.
They are always playing tricks on you and making personal remarks about your looks and catching up your words.
I know how Margie Bancroft’s brothers do.
I shall feel uncomfortable the whole winter long.
They’ll be strewing the house from one end to the other with old balls and scrubby-looking caps and such things.
And she left her sister in quite a perturbed condition.
It was an awkward moment for the five young people, and, although Mrs. Holmes’s tact and sweetness helped them through the worst of it, all felt a sense of relief when the dinner-hour was over.
This latter boy was quite the least confused of the young people, being a lad afraid of absolutely nothing, not even a girl, and his bright, wide-awake manner and keen appreciation of fun made all three of the girls feel more at home with him than with his brother.
“Say, have you a wheel?” asked Porter.
We have new ones—beauties.
Mamma gave them to us as a parting gift.
I’d rather wait till she comes around.
“She has always made her home with us ever since mamma and papa were married, and she does such lovely things for us that I should be ashamed to make her unhappy.” “She’s awfully old-fashioned, I suppose,” rejoined Porter.
You don’t suppose I’d fight a girl, do you?
We must do something wild and bold and giddy.
“I know a lot of tricks,” he replied.
Then followed a whispered consultation, and the three, with suppressed mirth, stole quietly up-stairs with all the speed possible.
Was it a laugh or a cough?
This shorter individual wore a long cloak, while a black veil was tied closely over the face.
Then in [Pg 19] the darkness three white figures glimmered ghostly, but a second relighting showed no one there.
“This is really uncanny!” ejaculated Lisa.
“She was so down on the boys coming, and here she is the very first one to get them into mischief.” “I don’t know what you mean,” said a voice, plaintively.
“Why, where did you come from?” And Lisa gave utterance to her question in tones of astonishment.
“If I should tell you how long I have been here you wouldn’t believe it.” “I am going to light the lamp,” Lisa remarked.
Why, where is it?
I thought it was on the table.
“I’ll catch those tricksters,” said Mr. Holmes.
“This is getting too much of a joke,” and he secreted himself behind the door as the three white-sheeted forms appeared.
The first two were too quick for him, but the last one was grabbed, and as Lisa brought in the lighted lamp Basil was discovered.
“Then I suppose you expect me to let you off,” he replied.
“How much did that remark imply, I wonder, you sauce-box?” he said.
He isn’t, boys; he is usually a dear; but once in a while, when we are very bad, he can be terrible.
I like the fun of it.
It is so hard to run and keep the water in your mouth at the same time.
And so it was settled, while the tricksters congratulated themselves that they were let off so easily and that such a pleasant prospect was theirs.
I am always in such a hurry that I am very apt to take it up before it is done, and it gets, oh, so sticky.
This will be fine, I know.
“They are the slipperiest things I ever saw,” declared Basil, lifting a dripping face from the tub.
I think I’ll be more of a success at taffy-pulling.
While the others were laughing and talking over their sticks of taffy, Basil was turning over in his mind the advisability of trying to win Mrs. Estabrook’s approval of bicycle riding for girls.
This amusement was at that time in the early stage of its popularity, and was looked upon with discredit by many persons.
“I hope you are not going to be homesick,” she said.
[Pg 23] “I don’t believe we shall be,” answered Basil, cordially.
“Have you no girl cousins?” she asked.
Dr. Allison’s daughter?
I wish you could see the difference it has made in Mabel Allison.
She used to be so delicate.
She had dyspepsia and all sorts of things, and now she looks like another girl.
You would not mind our teaching her, would you?
The part of the city where the Holmes family lived was quite suburban, although only fifteen minutes’ ride by trolley to the heart of the city and within a short distance of the university where Mr. Holmes held a professorship.
“When once grandma sees how I can ride she’ll not say a word against it,” she confided to Lisa.
Won’t it be fine?
This was after the taffy had been pulled till it was a delicate straw-color, and the young [Pg 25] people, having eaten all they could manage, had said their good-nights with much complacency, feeling that the evening had furnished them with all the amusement they could have expected.
After all your talk about those boys coming, I notice you are the first one to be hand and glove with them.
You should have made the most of your opportunities.
That’s just like you, Lisa.
You’re always complaining that I have good times, when you have exactly the same chances that [Pg 26] I have.
The only difference is, that I go and meet the chances, and you sit and wait for them to come to you, because you’re so terribly afraid that somehow you’ll be called upon to step down from your pedestal.
If you didn’t cling so close to that pedestal of yours you’d have a better time.
I don’t sit still all the time looking for homage.
They are always getting in my way, and I get snubbed because I don’t regard them.
I wonder if I would be so top-lofty and sniffy if I were the eldest.
She was easily influenced, and any little appeal to her vanity, or a properly phrased remark as to the state of her health, generally won her favor.
Then of course you’ll want to ride with her.
Well, I’ll teach you, and you shall use mine—when I get it.
Don’t you know, that dear Sir Harry whose statue we saw in the Boston Public Library last summer?
I think I must hunt up a headless ancestor.
He’d have to perch there with his head under his arm like—who was it?—oh, yes, St. Denis, who carried his head in his hands after he was beheaded.
I don’t believe I’d care, myself, for an ancestor who had to hang.
Just because her mother keeps boarders.
I’m not going to get into any more squabbles to-night.
Here we are talking ourselves wide-awake, and it will be morning before we’re ready for it.
WHAT WON A BICYCLE.
I shouldn’t mind what your grandmother thinks.
The idea of it!
She has always been so good to us.
“I suppose he’d be furious if he knew what I thought of him,” she reflected.
“I’ll let him know some day,” she inwardly continued, her wrath rising.
A tapping on the window called her into the house.
It was Lisa who summoned.
“We are going to have a small family conclave.” And Lisa’s eyes danced.
She and Lisa had long ago “made up.” Indeed, their little squabbles were of almost daily occurrence and did not prevent them from being really devoted to each other.
Lisa yielded her opinions easily; her pleasures she grasped more closely.
Papa must be in Washington for a few days on business, and wants me [Pg 32] to go with him.
Which shall it be?
“Oh, mamma, that is a terrible strain upon unselfishness.” And she looked from one sister to the other.
“Such reasonable claims,” laughed Mrs. Holmes.
“Now, mamma, we won’t even tell you which we decide it is to be, the longest or the shortest, so you cannot exert an undue influence,” Lisa said.
Therefore, after a short conference in the corner, the girls gathered around to scan the slips of paper which Mrs. Holmes held in her hand.
The longest, we decided.
“Now I can go to see Patty Peters.” And [Pg 33] she executed a wild dance about the room.
“Patty Peters!” Lisa repeated, disdainfully.
“Of course mamma would most enjoy having Lisa,” she said to herself.
I happen to remember that you have a new coat this winter, and the most becoming hat you ever wore, so it seems a wicked waste of material for you not to go.
[Pg 34] It was, therefore, in high spirits that the party took leave.
“Everything will go on much better than if I had been left at home,” said Lisa, graciously.
Matters went on smoothly for the first day or two.
We’ll give grandma a surprise; she does enjoy warm gingerbread.
The fire was in rather a dubious state for baking, it was discovered.
The latter was energetically sifting flour, when a clattering sound, a heavy fall, and a pitiful cry reached her ears.
“Tell grandma,” she said, and then she fainted.
“I am afraid she has broken her arm,” announced Mrs. Estabrook, in distress.
She could not think for a moment where she would find another physician, but she did remember that their family doctor lived about ten blocks off.
It seemed a long way in her present state of perturbation.
She could walk there as quickly as she could go by a roundabout car-route, she reflected.
But here her eye caught sight of Porter’s bicycle leaning against the side of the porch.
“The doctor will be here right off,” she made haste to notify.
“I [Pg 37] went to Dr. Armstrong’s.” Mrs. Estabrook looked amazed.
“In this time?” she said.
We should not blame ourselves for accidents which are not the result of thoughtlessness nor wrong intention.
Your intentions were all right, and no one was to blame.
She was particular that the handkerchief should be a delicate blue, which contrasted becomingly with her golden curls and fair skin.
She was, however, a patient little girl, and only by a pathetic expression showed when she suffered.
I’ll let it out if I don’t stop.
Porter was hopping around on one foot in a high state of glee, while Basil was critically examining the different parts of a shining new wheel which stood in the hall.
“For me?” “Yes,” certified Millicent.
Where is she?
How did you come to be so dear?
You don’t know how I thank you.
I hope I have lived long enough to accept innovations gracefully when I am convinced of their value.
“And you don’t care if I do go off the block?” said the girl, her speaking eyes full of happiness.
I leave that part of it to your own good judgment.
It was Audrey Vane who first broached the plan of forming a special society among the girls at school.
Knowing her own claims to distinguished ancestry, and being anxious to emphasize the fact, she proposed to a select few that they should follow the example of their elders and start a patriotic club.
Audrey was full of enthusiasm, and was armed with arguments.
Mamma says so; and I think if we form a society that will make us take more interest in our studies, at the same time we are hunting up stories and dates about our ancestors, that it will be a great benefit to us.
“You need to be,” put in Lisa.
This was agreed upon, and the girls went home full of the scheme.
“Don’t you think it’s a fine plan, mamma?” asked Lisa, who had worked herself up to quite a pitch of enthusiasm.
I think you should not set yourselves apart from those of your school-mates who cannot lay claim to distinguished ancestry, although I do believe in preserving the records of those families whose forefathers helped to make our country.
It depends much upon the spirit of the thing.
If it is simply to form an exclusive coterie, I object seriously.
There was an uneasy feeling that Audrey’s purpose was the forming of an exclusive set, although she had not declared it.
“I think it would be a good plan to join, and then if we find it doesn’t turn out as it ought, we can withdraw,” said Lisa, slowly.
“Perhaps that will do,” agreed Mrs. Holmes.
“Come, girls, let’s go and get grandma to help us dig up our forefathers.” “What a ghastly way to put it,” laughed Lisa.
“He wasn’t colonial; he was Revolutionary,” corrected Lisa.
They found a small though strictly select party gathered at Audrey’s home.
“We have concluded to adopt the same standard of eligibility which is required by the real Colonial Dames,” informed Audrey.
Among these were the Holmes girls, whose governor was highly approved.
You Holmes girls have such a magnificent array that I feel so paltry.
However, I haven’t half my forebears hunted up; so there is no knowing what superior sort of person I may unearth.
“Don’t let us waste all our time over the business part.” “But we must at first,” responded Audrey.
“Grandma suggests Colonial Maids.” [Pg 46] “I think that is fine,” acquiesced Nellie Hall.
“Seconded,” cried Nellie.
And the meeting broke up with congratulations upon its success from one to the other.
But, pleasant as the little club promised to be, what heart-burnings followed.
The Colonial Maids were looked upon as exclusive and disagreeable by those who were not members of the club, while these outsiders were regarded as open enemies by the “Maids.” There were, of course, some girls who wisely showed no partisan spirit and were friendly to all; but these were few, not more than ten girls out of sixty pupils being of this [Pg 47] class.
I really am not, mamma, only I do think they ought to be taken down a peg or two.
Miss Adams says, although she approves heartily of our having a club, and does not object to our using the school-room, she is very sorry to see this warlike element.
And when one of the outsiders was asked to contribute to Miss Adams’s Christmas-gift she refused because she said it was taxation without representation.
She regarded the quiet, unassuming little girl as far beneath her, and treated her accordingly.
The club was in a state of great agitation.
If she thinks a thing is right you might as well try to move a mountain.
She will be asked to resign, and we can’t stay in the club under such circumstances.
“Leave the matter to adjust itself, Lisa, and don’t [Pg 50] worry over it,” she advised.
“Hoop-la!” she cried presently.
Here it is.
You see John wasn’t Jacob’s son at all; he was Henry’s son, and that makes you all right.
“Give me those papers,” she continued.
I’m glad I can count on Nellie Hall.
It was the custom of the club to present the paper of each applicant with the signature of two of the members, these papers being read aloud by the one proposing the name of a friend.
As she mentioned governor, provincial congressman, judge, signer of the declaration, general of provincial army, founder of college, and other officers, the girls looked from one to another in amazement.
The way she has acted all along proves it.
The silence was broken by Audrey.
“You might have told us before,” she said, in an aggrieved tone.
“And now I think this thing has gone far enough, so I propose that we extend our limits, since every one knows by this time that we are all grandees.” And she laughed good-humoredly.
“I propose we let in any girls who have good, fiery, old Revolutionary stock to back them.” “But that will include nearly every one of the girls,” objected Audrey.
What is it?
“Miss Adams says we can’t have the school-room to use if the club is going to cause so much dissension,” presently ventured Nellie Hall.
We’ll have to give in, girls.
We’d better hold out the olive-branch.
“She will be making all sorts of queer acquaintances after this, you see if she doesn’t,” remarked Lisa.
Why, mamma, they think nothing of helping themselves to my belongings, and half the time when I go to get a ribbon or a handkerchief I find that what I want has been taken.
I think that it doesn’t make any difference if we are sisters, that we have our individual rights, and I never know what is [Pg 56] really my own, for they use my things as if they were common property.
It is a poor return, when she is kind enough to allow you the use of what is hers, for you to be ungracious in letting her have her own again.
You should reflect that the obligation is on your side.
“There is nothing to condemn in Connie that I can see,” she said to Mrs. Estabrook.
Do not expect to be entertained every moment.
Have some consideration for the convenience of your entertainers, and help when you see that your assistance would be acceptable.
Don’t demand of the maids more than is your share of service.
You have never been away from home alone until now, and I want you to be as courteous and kind as you can, in return for the hospitality offered you.
The house was one of a long row in a crowded street, the dreariness of which was increased by the season.
Up the wooden [Pg 59] steps, which showed signs of having needed paint for many a day, the two girls went.
They were ushered into a room full of odors of cooking, mingled with the faint remains of cheap perfume.
The walls were adorned with low-priced lithographs in ornate frames, and the chairs were decked with coarse lace squares.
“She uses cosmetics as though she were on the stage,” she told herself, in disgust.
My, but he’s a swell!
We’ve been teasing him about you, Miss Holmes, and he’s all in a quiver over your coming.
I hope you dance or sing.
Bud’s awfully fond of singing.
She had a ponderous tread, and as she walked from the room the floor of the unsubstantial dwelling trembled beneath her feet.
She could not understand how she could be so very different from the others.
“I hear his latch-key.” And in a moment a young man entered.
“Oh, dear, why did I come?” She hardly heard what young Stewart was saying, and waited anxiously the summons to supper, which was presently made by means of a clanging bell, rung vigorously by Imogene.
“Now, if Connie and I can only go up-stairs and be alone after supper, I shall not mind it so much,” she thought.
But she at once remembered that it was Connie’s first evening at home, and of course she would want to remain with the family.
Hearty laughter and unlimited jesting made the meal a merry one.
As she sank, sobbing, upon the first chair she found in the nearest room her friend began to apologize.
He is used to romping about with the girls who come here; he had no idea of offending you.
“I want you to have a good time,” she said, regretfully.
You go, Connie.
I shall not [Pg 63] mind; indeed I shall not.
The dressing-bureau was littered with curl-papers and white with face-powder.
Searching in vain for a match-safe, she finally discovered two or three matches in a pasteboard box on one end of the mantel.
How could she stand it till Monday?
What was she to do about that dreadful Bud, who reeked so of bad cologne and cigarettes, pared his nails in her presence, and walked out of the dining-room chewing a toothpick?
What would Lisa say if she were to know of it?
“Mamma wanted me to be sure to see Mrs. Dixon,” she said to Connie the next day.
[Pg 64] Connie’s eyes fell.
“We’ll see her at church,” she returned.
Of course, then, she has received gifts from Mrs. Dixon, has been to entertainments at her house, she reflected.
He was not altogether a bad fellow, although underbred and lacking in delicate sensibility.
But a little ingenuity on the part of the others threw Bud into her company, and she had to make the best of it.
“Tell me about that general who was your ancestor, Mr. Stewart,” she said, hoping to start up a congenial topic.
“I’ve no ancestor like that,” he replied.
Yes, I remember.
Ma was a widow with us three children when she married Con’s father, who was a widower with only Con.
She was solving several mysteries that morning.
Connie said Mrs. Dixon was a friend of her mother’s.
Ma doesn’t know Mrs. Dixon at all.
He’s away most of the time.
He used to be right well off.
We don’t see much of him nowadays.
That’s how he got acquainted with her.
MRS. DIXON’S INVITATION.
“Let us stand here in the vestibule,” said Connie, “and then we shall be sure not to miss her.” And they waited till Mrs. Dixon appeared.
“I wish you could spend part of your time with me,” she said, looking from one girl to another.
“Oh, I can’t spare her,” said Connie.
Mrs. Dixon smiled, but she looked thoughtful immediately after.
“Couldn’t you both come and spend Saturday and Sunday with me?” she presently asked.
She wondered how people who pleaded poverty could afford to buy so much confectionery, and could put such an amount of trimming on their frocks.
She was so full of wonder at all this behavior that she made a clean breast of it to Mrs. Dixon as soon as an opportunity came.
I wish your mother had written to me before you decided to go home with Connie.
I do not mean that they are bad people.
The girls are simply silly, brainless creatures, who err because they have never been used to refined influences.
Poor little Connie should have better surroundings.
She is the [Pg 68] daughter of a dear school-mate of mine who died when Connie was scarcely more than a baby.
Connie’s father married for his second wife a woman who was not his social equal.
She has been very good to Connie in many ways, and while I regret the child’s environment, there is nothing much that can be done.
I think her school association will help her, and I hope some day she will be a fine woman.
So she is not dependent upon her father.
I should have perished with homesickness if I had stayed there till Monday; and they really tried to be kind.
Now, we must try to do our best for Constance.
I am so glad you find her companionable, and I hope some day she will prove worthy of the sweet woman who was her mother.
Mere pride of birth is a small matter.
“What are you reading, Con?” she asked, as she peeped into the quiet room.
“Oh, such a lovely book!” sighed Connie.
I mean to have just such a home when I grow up.
Mrs. Dixon said we were to join Walter there; and we can play shuffleboard or roll tenpins or do anything like that if we choose.
I don’t generally mind having hand-me-downs, except when I am away from home, and then I like to be spick and span from head to foot.
Never mind, I have two dollars’ worth of elegance in the shape of a pair of fine new gloves that grandma gave me just before I came away.
And I have a new hat; the Pigeon had to take mine.
Come, I hear the carriage.
They returned from their expedition in high spirits.
“Then Connie and I can keep each other company,” Mrs. Dixon said.
You know, Walter, that you are welcome to any of the household possessions in reason, and you always have a pile of properties to draw upon, I know.
The dénouement came when, after a startling report, Walter staggered in bearing the form of his victim.
We’ll have it with some cake in the library.
I should be glad, however, if he had a sister.
“I have had such a good time,” she told Mrs. Dixon as she took her leave.
And yet she went back home in quite a subdued frame of mind.
Lisa looked at her.
Oh, yes; of course, we all love to be with her.
“Then I was right,” declared Lisa, triumphantly.
“Dear child,” she said.
Even though she might occupy the most humble position in the world, Mrs. Brown would always be a lady, and her character would always distinguish her as one of God’s chosen ones, while poor Connie’s step-mother cannot have refined instincts, and must either be a weak woman or one lacking in delicate perception; otherwise she would not permit her daughters to make themselves conspicuous by their questionable behavior.
Innocent amusement is one thing and a bold seeking for notice is another.
“I forgot to take my soap, and that dreadful strong-scented stuff the Stewart girls used nearly made me ill.” Mrs. Holmes laughed.
“It is you I am glad to see, soap or no soap.” “That’s gross flattery,” responded Mrs. Holmes.
I’ll wait for her.
I do hate to be prompted about meals, Lisa.
It was one of the mother’s griefs that these two elder daughters always roused each [Pg 78] other’s aggressiveness.
It is not an uncommon state of affairs, and is one that often adjusts itself to an accepted consideration and forbearance as young people mature and learn to respect the good points in one another.
“Patience, my dear, patience,” was grandma’s reply.
It was nearing Christmas, and “The Maids” were planning a holiday entertainment, which just now was the chief topic of conversation in the school.
You know we are all to dress in old-fashioned costumes.
It is going to be lovely.
Basil has been making sketches for us, and he is so interested in getting up the decorations and all that.
You know we have the dear old gowns and buckles and things that you gave us, so we shall not have any trouble in getting up our dresses.
We are to wear ancestral costumes if any of us are lucky enough to have them, and we are lucky.
Leave it to me, dear.
The only heir-loom she has is a little miniature of her Grandmother Brown.
It is lovely, too.
I must ask her to show it to you some day.
Now, dear, try to keep peace between yourself and Lisa.
I do so regret these squabbles.
She had always preferred the quiet, studious little girl to any of her school-mates, although she was fond of Connie.
“It is going to be such a beautiful tea,” the girls told their friends, “and we are going to powder our hair, and will look like old pictures.” “Do tell us about your gowns,” said Audrey Vane to the Holmes girls.
We have tried them all on, and have dived into every chest and box for buckles and things.
The slippers are a perfect fit, and I have a lovely old fan.
But just then the bell rang for the opening of school, and nothing further was said.
Grandma had divided all that came to her between mamma and Aunt Esther, and she knew Aunt Esther would be glad to loan one; and so she was, and she picked out the prettiest.
Your hair is so dark that we have had to use the greatest quantity of powder on it.
“And these gold beads?” she questioned, putting her hand to her throat.
“How strange!” she said, lifting her eyes to Grandmother Estabrook.
She married my grandfather, Worthington Brown, and he went into the army when the war broke out.
He was killed at the battle of Bull Run, and she died shortly after, leaving my father, her only child.
Papa was sent to his father’s people in Maryland, and always lived with them.
I am crazy to hear about it.
My sister Mary married when she was very young, and led rather a wandering life, so that we seldom heard of her.
My father had discouraged her marrying while still a school-girl, and there was not that frequent correspondence which otherwise would have existed.
There was, too, very strong political feeling at that time, and my father felt bitter upon the subject, so a difference of views between him and Mr. Brown [Pg 85] added to the coolness.
Oh, what a joke!
I must tell Lisa.
Oh, no; shall I?
No, I’ll have a disclosure at the tea.
Just think of it.
Isn’t it the finest thing that ever happened?
We’ll have to go, and I’m just on tiptoe to hear more.
There, put that dear, sweet—what is she?—great-aunt of mine on your chain.
Isn’t that a dear little frame, all set with pearls?
There is a three volume novel in all this.
I’d like to write it up.
Looking around, one saw a lavish display of Christmas greens and potted plants.
Daintily spread tea-tables stood in one of the class-rooms; old family pieces of silver, china, and glass had been pressed into service, while on the walls of the large room hung old portraits of colonial sires and dames.
“No; she couldn’t,” she said, wistfully.
I think it was very nice to invite all the families instead of having it confined only to the young people, as Audrey wanted it, for after our mothers had taken so much pains to help us, I think it would have been mean to leave them out.
It certainly does us credit, and the floor will be fine for dancing.
You know we receive from four till seven and then dance till ten.
And before Lisa could say a word she darted away, her eyes dancing, while Lisa stood looking after her in astonishment.
She approached the little group where Mrs. Hall was standing.
“I am so glad you are here, Mrs. Hall,” she began, in a clear voice.
Grandma recognized not only the name, but the features of her only sister.
We haven’t heard all the details, but we know that much.
“Well!” exclaimed one and another.
“I certainly am glad,” declared Nellie Hall, warmly.
“Oh, I see,” continued she.
Has Mrs. Estabrook told you?
Mrs. Brown smiled.
And very soon the pretty, stately movement was begun.
The boys from the university had been in training for weeks, and in their powdered wigs, lace ruffles, and quaint, elegant costumes made fitting partners for the girls in their old-fashioned array.
“A nice thing you have done for us all,” began Lisa.
Poor, dear grandma, whom you profess to love so much; and now you’ve deliberately robbed her!
And what do you call yourself, pray?
You’d better go and live at the Browns.
“No, I suppose not,” Lisa acknowledged, with something like unwillingness.
Do tell me.
Anyhow, his family were furious because the Carters snubbed him, and there is no telling how he might have turned out if he had lived.
“They’re not real boarders; they are papa’s wards, and we are doing them a great favor,” Lisa amended.
Her “chickens” had “come home to roost,” indeed, and she was conscious of a queer contradictory feeling about the matter.
“Oh, grandma,” she began, as [Pg 94] soon as she entered, “I am so dreadfully upset in my mind; are you?” “About what, dear?” “About your giving up half your income, and all that.” Grandma smiled a little sadly.
A purely selfish consideration was what was troubling me, and that was unworthy of an almoner of my Father.
“You can help me much, dear,” grandma went on.
“Tell me,” she continued, “did you —did you use to quarrel and say snappy things to each other, you and your sister Mary?” Grandma sighed.
“How can I help it, grandma?” she said.
“For pity’s sake!” exclaimed Lisa.
A nod of the head gave the reply.
She therefore concluded that in the very first hour she had warded off a discussion, although, as she [Pg 97] pensively decided, there wouldn’t have been any need of it but for the seal.
“My goodness!” she exclaimed.
“I feel like a corked-up bottle of beer,” she continued to herself.
I’ll have to have the glycerin-bottle filled if I am to keep this up.
Oh, dear, what a mean creature I am!
It is kind of awkward, too, for they all feel so stirred up about her that they will be horrid if I ask her here.
Mamma won’t, of course, and grandma will be a love.
I’ll find out when Lisa is going out, and then I’ll go.
Oh, maybe she can have a wheel now, and we can go all around together.
After all, as grandma says, gain often comes from loss.
I don’t believe I shall mind the change of affairs so very much.
The whole affair appealed strongly to her romantic little soul, and gave her an interesting topic to discuss with Audrey.
“She’d as good a right and a better one than any of us to join it; and even if she’d never had a single ancestor, she would always be a dear, lovely girl.” Basil looked up, amused at the fierce little partisan with her remarkable statements and her readiness to take up the cudgels.
“Ah, what’s the use of squabbling?” interposed Basil, in his slow way.
Basil spoke up.
Presently he looked up.
I know you are up and down straightforward enough not to let him impose on you.
“Maybe I shouldn’t ask,” she continued, quickly, “but you know papa and mamma have always said we all ought to be sisters to you, and I would do anything I could.” “You’re very good,” replied Basil.
If I see any cause for anything further, I’ll tell you.
TROUBLE FOR TWO.
For several days Basil appeared pre-occupied and went about with an anxious look on his face, while Porter seemed keeping out of the way as much as possible.
It was only by accident, however, that she made the discovery of what was affecting the two brothers.
This was a tiny place hardly larger than a closet.
She busied herself all one morning stowing away sundry bags and boxes, and by the time the girls came home from school, with the help of the housemaid, the place had been made as [Pg 102] clean as a new pin.
“Why, grandma, what do you mean?” she asked.
“Come here, and I will show you,” was the reply, as grandma opened the door leading into the small packing-room.
Now that the boys are here, we have less space than ever; and oh, how cunning it will be!
That little window is so high up that I shall not be tempted to look out, and yet I shall have plenty of light.
How would you furnish it, grandma?
Some denims or cretonne will do to cover your boxes, and they will form a sort of divan for you.
A few pillows piled up on them will make that end of the room quite a comfortable lounging-place and about fill it up.
You [Pg 103] will still have space for a small table and a couple of chairs; then some hanging-shelves and a few pictures will look well on your walls, and that will be about all you can crowd in.
You know the place can only be entered by going through my room, and you shall have entire right of way.
The question of the reduction of Mrs. Estabrook’s income, of course, was discussed by the sisters, and they were gradually beginning to adapt themselves to the changed condition of affairs.
If we want anything very much we can buy it ourselves.
I always have some money ahead after the holidays.
I still have the five dollars Aunt Esther gave me and last month’s allowance besides.
Let’s buy the material for our own bicycle suits.
We really need them, and it will save mamma that much.
Let’s tell her now that we mean to do it.
I—I haven’t spent any, hardly.
She opened [Pg 105] her lips as if to speak, then evidently concluded to keep silence.
“I’d like to tell you, but I have promised not to,” said the younger girl, helplessly, shrinking from her sister’s penetrating gaze.
I couldn’t help it; indeed I couldn’t.
Oh, what have I done?
You have kept it to yourself.
I’m firmly convinced that Porter is at the bottom of it, and that is what has been bothering Basil.
Don’t worry about it.
In response to her knock he appeared at the door of his room.
“I have something to tell you.” “What’s up?” he asked as he followed her down-stairs.
She had nine or ten dollars after Christmas, and now she only has a few cents.
Of all contemptible things, to borrow from a girl!
“He is only a little boy, and very likely it was only thoughtlessness.” “I’ve got to find out about it,” responded Basil.
What a pretty child she is!
I wanted to tell, but I promised—I promised not to.
I think it would have been better if you had gone to the person who shared the secret with you, saying to him, I must tell my mother.
I know that [Pg 109] you and Porter were at a matinée not long ago.
“I read the book it was taken from,” she confessed.
“Oh, mamma, I see now how wrong I was.” “I thought I could trust my girls,” said Mrs. Holmes, sadly.
Compliance can get us into all sorts of trouble, and it is my little daughter’s weakest point.
Struggle against it, dear.
Make up your mind that to say ‘No,’ when it is right to do so, will win you more respect than a consent which is given because you don’t want to hurt another’s feelings.
A much deeper hurt sometimes comes from a yes than a no.
I was uncomfortable all the time.
I am so sorry—I really am sorry I didn’t mind you.
Please give me some punishment to make me remember.
Porter looked very uncomfortable, and Basil was as grave as a judge.
Having spent his pocket-money very freely, Porter found himself without the means to contribute toward a grand oyster supper some of his school friends had planned to have during the holidays.
It was to be a most elaborate affair, and five dollars from each of those who meant to enjoy it was demanded.
“You’re always so particular and preach so about going in debt that I knew you wouldn’t help me out.” “I’d rather have given it to you outright than to have had you borrow from a little, [Pg 112] gentle, generous-hearted girl.” Porter flushed up.
“You’re not helping matters much,” he remarked.
I’ll see to that.
You’re not such a cad as to stand by and see that little girl punished while you go scot-free.
He had never seen Basil so angry, and was half afraid of him in this mood.
I’d hate to have your father know.
Basil turned a reproachful glance upon her.
[Pg 113] “I know you didn’t,” returned Basil, in a different tone.
“He used to be so fond of it, too,” said Rob Van Dyke.
“I suppose they’ve had some fuss,” Lisa concluded.
Let’s go house-hunting ourselves, this very afternoon.
Still, I’ve often thought what a pretty place it could be made; at least, Basil called my attention to it once when we were out on our wheels.
You know he is going to be an architect, and his eyes are always wandering over buildings.
He said that if the house were painted another color, and had a porch around it, with a better-looking approach to the door-way, it would be so much more attractive that it would be snapped up in a minute.
There is a lovely place for a garden in front, and quite a piece of ground in the rear, but the house is a hideous color, and has been idle a long time, for no one will take it as it stands, and the owner will do nothing to it.
“That’s what I think,” he said.
Nevertheless, the judgment of the prospective architect did prove of such value that when Mrs. Brown had been made to see the possibilities of the little house, she felt that the moderate price at which it was to be obtained secured her a great bargain, since it left her a margin for repairs and alterations, making the entire outlay fall below what she had determined she could afford.
Nice old persons they were, no doubt, but probably they had as many faults as the rest of the world, and I’m sure the knowledge of them hasn’t changed me in the least; yet you would suppose they had in some way invested me with new virtues.
“Well, you needn’t take my head off on account of my sisterly solicitude,” replied Lisa.
“Where is my girl’s sunshine?” asked grandma, pleasantly.
“Oh, I’m disgusted—just disgusted!” “With what?” “Oh, I don’t know—people, girls; they are so hateful!” Grandma laughed.
It’s just this way.
Now let us get at the real, honest truth.
She is magnanimous enough to accept the advances the girls are making, so she will win herself hosts of friends of whom you are surely not selfish enough to wish to deprive her.
Let me dive into that mental scrap-bag for an experience to point the moral.
Let me see.
So when one, two, three weeks passed and no letter came I felt much aggrieved.
I heard indirectly of her good times, and fancied the girl cousin whom she was visiting had taken my place.
When my friend returned home I did not go near her, and when after a few days she came to see me I sent word that I wished to be excused to callers.
So time went on till the situation became awkward, and I did not know how to meet Alice.
Later on I heard that she had written the first week and the letter miscarried; so, receiving no reply, she did not write again at once, and later a sprained wrist prevented.
But it was too late to explain my coldness upon the excuse of such a trifle, and she never felt the same.
I remember my brother, to whom I took my woes, gave me a piece of advice on the subject.
‘Never gauge a friendship by letters, first, because there may be a fault in the mail; secondly, because we are apt to invest written words with meanings not intended.’ My brother, I remember, told me, too, that he had a friend to whom he wrote once a year, and probably no friendship was ever closer than his and Henry Vaughan’s.
“It is so nice to think that you were once a silly girl,” she said.
“It encourages me very much.” Grandma laughed.
I think I would like the editing best.
You see papa represents the college professor sufficiently, and I’d like to be something quite different.
Let us decide to be editors.
We’ll study for a journalistic career.
“‘She wears a new gown, which she purchased last year from our honored townsman, Mr. Woolly De Beige.’” The girls both went off into a fit of laughter at their nonsense.
“Of course, ho ought to be the singular of hose,” she said.
Lisa asked her the other day what she thought of a war with England.
‘Humph!’ she said.
‘I reckon we could stand it.’ ‘I’m not so sure,’ said Lisa.
You have waked her up and are making another girl of her.
“I shall never, never be so exacting again,” she said to herself as she took her way home.
But as it takes more than one stroke to fell a well-grown tree, so it takes more than one effort to overthrow a fault.
The year passed away uneventfully.
Porter and Basil returned to their home for the holidays, but were back again in the autumn, Mrs. Phillips having concluded that it would again be necessary for her to spend the winter in California, as her sister’s health demanded it.
There was, therefore, an unbroken circle in the Holmes family.
It was Lisa’s last year at school, and she was looking forward to being graduated in June.
She was divided between her love of pleasure and her desire to do her parents honor by winning distinction in a collegiate course.
Lisa had rather a good opinion of her ability, and fancied she could do or be almost anything with little effort on her part.
I have made such a talk about it.
That’s just like me to talk too much, you know.
I wish I could remember it.
I hate to be wordy.
I see the fault in others fast enough.
Connie is a bit that way.
You’re a real good brother, Basil.
How far off we are from our subject; [Pg 127] we began with Lisa.
“That’s Basil’s work, I know,” thought the girl.
Now, Porter would have given me a copy of ‘Chatterbox’—that’s just the difference between them.
No one but Basil and I will ever know just what it means; the rest will think it is intended as a hint to keep quiet while I am studying my lessons.
The fateful day arrived when Lisa would learn how she stood, and to her intense chagrin, as well as that of her sisters, it was announced that Margaret stood first.
Miss Adams explained it by saying that Lisa’s theme displayed less originality than Margaret’s and her examination papers were more superficial.
For once Lisa was humbled.
She was so used to receiving praise for her brilliancy, so [Pg 128] accustomed to having high marks for her glib recitations, that she could hardly reconcile herself to accepting the verdict, although inwardly she could but acknowledge it to be just.
In spite of the disappointment, which gave her a feeling of tightness about the throat, her eyes shone like two stars and there was a red spot on each cheek as with head held high she hastened to be the first to offer Margaret her congratulations.
One or two of Margaret’s special friends declared that Lisa’s graceful acknowledgment was done for effect, but that it was well done.
Nevertheless, there was real bravery in Lisa’s act, and to herself and Miss Adams it represented a recognition of the justice of the decision.
Especially did it seem so to Miss Adams, who saw tears in the dark eyes when she praised Lisa for having done so well as to win second honors.
She passionately declared that it was injustice, favoritism, or trickery, but Lisa stopped her with a gentle gesture.
And Lisa smiled, feeling quite sure that she could wear beauty’s palm if the other were denied her.
It was all this which decided the girl not to go to college.
“I am too ambitious to go,” [Pg 129] she declared to her parents.
He had been very proud of this handsome daughter, and had almost expected great things of her.
Brown knows of a quiet, pleasant place on the bay shore, and your grandmother has quite decided to go there.
It has the recommendation of being moderate in price, as well as being delightfully situated.
Mrs. Phillips, likewise, thinks she will join the party with the two boys, and, as Basil has determined to do some extra work this summer, that he may catch up with his class and be ready to take his examinations in the fall, your father has suggested that Mr. Danforth, one of the instructors at the college, shall go along to coach him.
Your father must go elsewhere on account of his hay-fever, and I, of course, shall go with him.
“Everything comes in a lump,” she sighed.
“I know I would be perfectly miserable down there.” “The place has many attractions,” Mrs. Holmes continued, comfortingly.
“There is delightful boating, fishing, and bathing; then the drives around are very pretty, and there will be no disagreeable persons in the house.” “No; only old women and school-girls.” “Pray, how long since you were a school-girl?” laughed Mrs. Holmes.
I don’t see anything for me, mamma, but to go with grandma.
“We can have no end of fun,” she said to Lisa.
In the first place, we don’t have to fuss over our clothes, and then we can live in the water if we like.
Then we can go cruising all around.
“Such a joke!” she thought.
Basil says he is one of the best athletes in the college; that what he doesn’t know about sailing a boat and all that sort of thing isn’t worth knowing.
Nevertheless, when Lisa encountered a pair of keen blue eyes regarding her across the table she was annoyed at finding herself disposed to wish the owner might be looking at her with favor, and in consequence avoided any appearance of giving a friendly notice to the young man.
This, however, in no way disconcerted Mr. Danforth.
He devoted himself specially to Mrs. Estabrook during his leisure time when he was not boating or riding or fishing with the boys.
Maybe you’d like rowing better.
I didn’t even catch a crab once yesterday; but, my!
She was a fine tennis player, and was equally devoted to golf.
Such sports always attracted her, but she had made up her mind that Mr. Danforth ignored her rather too determinedly, and she was not going to make advances, she told herself.
She’s as good as you are, and lots more amiable.
There, Lisa, I didn’t mean to say that.
I promised myself that if you came down here this summer I wouldn’t say one disagreeable thing.
Come, go out in the boat with the rest of us to-morrow.
You know the water is not deep enough to be unsafe if we don’t go out too far.
Mr. Danforth is going to be busy all morning.
But while they were all rocking and singing in great glee, Lisa making the most of Basil’s lessons in rowing, they saw another boat coming toward them.
“I am fairly caught,” thought Lisa.
“I can’t swim, I can’t run away, so I’ll have to make the best of it.” And she amiably lent herself to her task, although finding a very critical and exacting teacher, who was not disposed to give praise or encouragement simply because she was a pretty girl, and she felt nettled by his lack of recognition.
“I’m simply a person,” she told herself.
I don’t believe he knows whether I am old or young, good-looking or ugly.
“He told Basil so.” “Well, I am very glad,” Lisa averred.
“You are perfectly shocking,” pronounced Lisa, sailing out of the room and taking her place on the balcony where she could overlook the water.
How she can like such a flavorless, insipid creature I can’t imagine.
He always reminds me of sugar and water.
“Come, let’s go down to the beach,” she said, in a conciliatory tone.
“Why, Lisa, what is the matter?” she inquired, solicitously.
Take my wheel and go, won’t you?
One lofty-pillared porch faced the bay, another the avenue of locust-trees which led up from the highway.
From it one [Pg 139] could see the country for miles around, and on starlight nights could look out from one of its many windows and see the sparkling heavens as from an observatory.
The way to this place was through a sort of garret, in the dim corners of which one might detect an old spinning-wheel, a jumble of antiquated hats and bonnets hanging from the rafters, or perhaps a ponderous cradle in which many a representative of the family had been rocked.
Among them was a human companion whom no one ever saw, yet who was an actual identity to the child.
Callie, Ruth believed to be a little girl of her own age, and together they played strange games in the attic corner.
Since the arrival of all this houseful of strangers Ruth had felt sorely distressed, for Callie’s room, as she called it, had been given up to the guests.
The child herself slept [Pg 140] with her grandmother, and Callie could not be accommodated there.
After long thought Ruth decided that Callie must have the cradle.
She would not mind sleeping in the playroom, even if it were lonely there at night.
Ruth would give up Patience to Callie.
Ruth would say that Patience made her uncomfortable in this warm weather.
This was not quite true, Ruth felt, but she must make the excuse to Callie, and for her sake, for somehow grandma was not fond of Callie.
So, every night Patience was laid in the big cradle to be company for the invisible Callie.
From the first Ruth had conceived an adoring admiration for the beautiful young lady, whom she called her fairy princess, and to the eldest Miss Holmes the shy little child made her first advances, which Lisa, who loved little children, met half-way.
Therefore, not even Mrs. Estabrook, nor Mrs. Brown, could win from Ruth the secrets which Lisa could, and no matter how the imperious girl conducted herself toward others, when Ruth appeared all the sweetness of her nature arose as to her ready arms Ruth ran, while on Lisa’s face appeared a tenderness which not many ever saw there.
As time went on the members of this house party became on better terms, and even Mr. Danforth was not excluded entirely from Lisa’s good graces.
He was not a handsome man, but in his clean-shaved face one could detect strong intelligence, and fearless integrity.
There was an unusual sweetness in the expression of his mouth, yet his chin was firm and decided.
He is very unusual.
Just think, he has helped to support his mother ever since he was fifteen, and has educated himself besides.
That’s why he is down here, so he can make something during the summer.
I shouldn’t wonder if he were a professor like papa, some day.
However, she did concede, after a time, that he was a very intelligent man, even if he did forget to use his [Pg 142] opportunities for paying compliments, and treated her just as he did every one else; but the concession brought a sort of defiance with it.
“He’s got to treat me more courteously,” she said to herself.
She caught him looking at her sometimes in what she considered a judicial way, and she determined to change the look to one of admiration, if possible.
But a conversation she heard one evening on the porch turned her impulse in a strangely new direction.
Mrs. Estabrook, with Mr. Danforth, sat somewhat apart from the other three ladies, who were chatting upon every-day topics.
Lisa, with Ruth in her arms, was sitting in a low rocker listening to the child’s whispered confidences about Callie and Patience.
“The woman whose face indicates self-esteem and selfishness can never be beautiful.” [Pg 143] “That is a very patriarchal remark for a young man like you to make,” returned Mrs. Estabrook, smiling.
I have been my mother’s man ever since my father died, and perhaps I see the beauty of character earlier than men usually do.
“I am afraid you will never find your ideal, or else, like too many who talk as you do, you will finally be captured by an unscrupulous girl who has hoodwinked you by appearing to have a lofty spirit when she is only catering to your fancy.” The young man shook his head positively.
You do not know how much I have thought of all this, and how I have kept a watch over myself lest I should be led away by a mere exterior charm.
Oh, please don’t imagine I think we men are saints.
You are superior to that sort of thing.
“Well, my dear boy, I wish you joy in finding the ‘one woman.’” Lisa in the corner heard every word, and was battling against indignation and self- [Pg 145] reproach.
I suppose it is I against whom he is casting his arrows of scorn and letting my own grandmother know it.
Just at this moment there came a sudden rushing sound up from the water.
The sky, which had been overclouded, showed a strange funnel-shaped cloud moving rapidly along.
In an incredibly short space of time the gale was upon them.
Every one rushed into the house to lower windows and to fasten the blinds, which were flapping in the fierce wind.
For a few moments it seemed as if the spirits of chaos were abroad; the mighty roar of the wind surging along, rising to a terrific shriek as it passed over the land; the snapping of trees whose branches were hurled violently against the house; the dash of the salt spray flung with fury upon the windows looking toward the bay front; the threatening flashes of lightning; the sullen roll of thunder which, as the storm came nearer, increased to an incessant crashing, all made a season of terror to every one.
Lisa stood with her hands clasped, never saying a word, but gazing into the outer [Pg 146] world with an expression of wonder.
“It is a terrible gale,” said Mr. Danforth at her side.
“It is wonderful, mysterious,” rejoined Lisa.
“Is Ruth with you?” she asked, anxiously.
“She was with me just before we came in-doors,” Lisa informed her, feeling conscience-stricken at not keeping the child with her.
Mr. Danforth ran to the door to see if he could ascertain what had taken place.
As he was crossing the hall Lisa’s white figure passed him, and he saw her disappear up the stairway.
“Don’t go up, Miss Holmes,” he cried.
Up the first flight, on to the second she went, and then she came to the garret.
A confused sound filled her ears as she opened the door.
A faint sobbing reached her from the corner where the little girl kept her toys.
“Yes, Princess,” Ruth’s plaintive little voice answered, “I’m safe; but Patience is killed and Callie is dreadfully hurt, and I don’t know where Amber is.” Groping her way along, Lisa at last reached the child.
There was a great gap in the roof overhead, and the place was strewed with bits of plaster and brick.
The tree had indeed fallen against one of the chimneys, which had toppled in upon the roof.
“Oh, my dear, my little dear!” said Lisa, catching the child in her arms.
At the top step she encountered Mr. Danforth with a light.
“I thought she might be up here.” [Pg 148] “You might both have been killed.” And as he gave utterance to the words another crash brought down more bricks and mortar.
AFTER THE GALE.
It was perhaps half an hour after Lisa had carried Ruth to her room and the storm had spent its fury that a new excitement was furnished by the appearance of a flickering light near the bay shore, directly in front of the house.
It was Porter who discovered it and announced the fact in tragic tones.
The sky was full of scudding clouds; through the rifts a star peeped once in a while, but it was evident that, although the tempest was over, the occupants of the little yacht before them were unable to land.
A survey of the scene showed that the small rowboats usually lying in the little cove had been broken from their moorings and were tossing about, drifting farther and farther [Pg 150] away.
“I’ll have to swim for it,” declared Mr. Danforth.
Have you the boat-house key, Basil?
Then, Porter, run to the house and get it and a lantern.
But this Mr. Danforth forbade, and he was soon plunging through the surf toward the nearest boat, which he presently reached and pulled ashore, finding there the two boys ready to join him in rowing out to the larger vessel.
“Ship, ahoy!” shouted Porter, delighted to be able to hail the yacht in true sailor fashion.
The trip was longer than at first predicted, but they finally reached the little yacht and were able to lie alongside.
“What’s wrong?” inquired Mr. Danforth of the first one who appeared.
It’s my cousin, Walter Dixon, Mr. Dan.
“We’re about as wet as we can be,” the latter said.
“Why, we were coming to see you.” Basil laughed.
“I’m not such a molly-coddle as to be scared,” he returned.
“I brought Ned down to make love to the mermaids,” put in Walter, teasingly.
“Oh, come off; I didn’t,” replied Edwin, gruffly, all his effeminacy gone in the face of his late experience.
“Yes, you did, Miss Nancy,” teased Walter.
“I’ll bet a dollar you don’t go back with me.” “I don’t intend to while there is room for me and better company,” retorted Edwin, with spirit.
“You’ll have to bunk in with us, then,” said Basil.
She was [Pg 153] comforting Ruth for the loss of Patience, telling her that she was not dead, only very much hurt, and that she thought it would be well to send her to a hospital, and when she returned she would be lovelier than ever, determining that a new head should be procured for Patience if such a thing were possible.
“You should not encourage that fancy, Miss Holmes.” “Oh, I don’t think it will do her any harm,” Lisa contended.
The little girl was therefore entirely at her ease concerning her companions, and went to sleep with Lisa’s assurance that she would not leave her.
“She hasn’t the least idea that you all are here,” she said, turning to the new arrivals.
“I am glad you are here, grandma,” she said, irrelevantly, as she snuggled up to her grandmother that night after they had gone to bed.
“I never supposed for a moment there was a doubt of it,” returned Mrs. Estabrook, giving her a hug.
You’ll see how he will bob around her.
Are you going to talk about this young man all night?
How could you go up there in the dark when you didn’t know but what any moment something would come crashing in on you?
I couldn’t have done it.
However, she gave the young man food for further thought that same evening.
Naturally the appearance of two more guests at the breakfast-table was a great surprise to Lisa, and she quite exulted at the thought that here was at least one devoted cavalier who would dance attendance upon her and thereby add to her pleasure.
Lisa fancied there was a look of contempt in Maurice Danforth’s eyes as he passed them on the porch, and she flushed angrily.
“He shall know what I think of him,” she said to herself.
“How lovely you look!” “Don’t!” cried out Lisa, sharply.
Why wasn’t Lisa pleased?
She always liked to be told that she looked lovely.
It was after an early tea that Lisa found an opportunity to “pay back the pedagogue,” as she expressed it to herself.
Most of the party had gone to see the damage done by an enormous oak-tree which had fallen some distance away, bringing down in its fall sundry other trees.
Mr. Danforth came out from the house and leaned against one of the pillars of the porch, while he looked out upon the water, now blue and serene, showing no sign of [Pg 157] yesterday’s storm.
What had he done to provoke it?
Now, I think a girl is a—a—perfect goddess.
I was simply telling you the kind of man I despise, you know.
The sight of it so roused Lisa’s sense of humor that she began to laugh, and Ned smiled fatuously.
The figure leaning against the pillar did not move until the reconnoitring party returned, and then, in the midst of the slight confusion their coming caused, he approached Lisa and said, “Will you take a little walk with me?” The color rose to the girl’s face as, with an assenting motion, she made ready to go with him.
There was scarcely a word said until they reached the fallen tree; then Lisa, taking a seat upon one of the leafy boughs, said, lightly, “As this seems to be a silent session, I shall sit here until the spirit moves me.” Mr. Danforth stood looking down at the graceful figure in the cloudy pink drapery framed by the green of the tree.
She leaned over and pulled a little switch from the tree and began to tap the toe of her slipper with it.
“I have a confession to make to you,” Mr. Danforth went on.
“And then I saw that in my ignorance, in my warped, one-sided views of womankind, I had misjudged you, for I saw a girl whose tenderness for a little child made manifest her capacity for self-forgetfulness, and so I want to ask your pardon for my first opinion of you.” “It was my fault,” responded Lisa, now completely disarmed.
She wasn’t going to forgive him, she told herself.
“You are very rude,” she said, petulantly, tearing the leaves to bits.
“And you will not forgive me because I will not say I prefer your looks to your soul.” “I can’t have you say such things,” cried Lisa, passionately, rising and letting a shower of green fall from her lap.
“Perhaps,” he said, “I do it for the same reason: there is no friend like a mother.” Lisa felt a strange sense of mingled fear and pleasure.
Then she turned and held out her [Pg 160] hand.
“I forgive you,” she acknowledged.
“Will you say the same?” “There is no need,” replied Mr. Danforth; “you have done me a service, for you have shown me a fault.” Such magnanimity!
Lisa felt ashamed at being outdone by this—this pedagogue.
I heard you say that little Ruth was mourning the disaster which happened to her doll, and you were wondering where you could find an old-fashioned head to supply the place of the one which was smashed.
Was this man never to be done with his surprises?
“And you can be very certain,” Mr. Danforth continued, “that my mother will give me the doll to do with as I wish, since it would afford me a very great pleasure.” “You are very good,” returned Lisa.
I must be with my mother a little while.
I have promised Walter to go back with him, for Ned declines to return in anything less than a steamboat.
But that night when the house was silent she lay awake a long time.
Life looked more serious to her than ever before.
Perhaps she would best go to college.
No; she would think of something else to do to rouse her best self.
Danforth—mean by saying that—that strange thing?
Perhaps he talked so to her for the same reason her mother did.
“A mother is the best friend one can have.” He said that too.
Did he mean, then, it was for friendship’s sake, or—or——?
And Lisa buried her face in her pillow.
And so it happened that Patience was supplied with a new head, to the surprise and delight of Ruth.
“It is just like you, princess,” she said.
She has been to fairyland I know.
“Do you know, Ruth,” she said, “that you and your grandma are coming to see us in the winter, and when we go away next week you will have that to anticipate?” For Ruth had grieved sorely over the prospect of Lisa’s near departure.
Poor Ned kept his place persistently by Lisa’s side, despite that maiden’s very contemptuous treatment.
“You never can tell what a girl means to do,” Ned had confided to Basil.
“You know they say a girl often treats you very badly when she really likes you.” “Can’t you see through a millstone when it has a hole in it?” returned Basil.
And Ned [Pg 163] pondered as deeply as he was capable upon the remark, finally concluding that Basil meant to suggest in a delicate way that Lisa’s conduct toward him indicated an opposite state of feeling from that which appeared upon the surface.
No amount of persuasion or temptation would induce the girl to allow one lesson to be slighted, and in consequence, by the time the summer was over she had an assured prospect of finishing her studies at Miss Adams’s school earlier than at first seemed possible, and she was planning for her college life with high hopes.
“I miss Mr. Dan, but Basil is a great help,” she told her sister.
It was doubtless because he was bored to [Pg 164] death down here.
I know he was just dying to get off with Walter away from us females.
I want your help, mamma.
This was Lisa in a new mood which her mother scarcely understood.
“My darling, I imagined in that quiet, drowsy old place you would have little cause for considering any question of moment,” she made reply.
Lisa shook her head.
I have a way with little children, I find, and I should then have some purpose in life; it would have a meaning [Pg 165] beyond that of a mere butterfly existence.
“And so you have come to a woman’s estate,” she replied.
“I did not think it would come to you so soon.” And there was a new tenderness in her voice.
“What come?” “Your knowledge of your heart,” returned her mother, gently.
“I hate him!” she whispered.
Ah, my darling, I am glad your best self is aroused.
“He is too good; but, oh, mamma, he doesn’t—oh, I don’t know.” And then from a full heart she told her mother all that had occurred which bore upon her acquaintance with Mr. Danforth.
“That is what he said,” replied Lisa, in a low tone.
He has been offered and has accepted a position in the preparatory school, and some day perhaps he may occupy a professor’s chair at the university, unless some other profession attracts him more.
“Don’t tell papa,” she entreated.
“I thought you were going in for society, and would be a tremendous success; and now to think all that grandeur is nipped in the bud.” “It’s the bud that refuses to be nipped,” laughed Lisa.
Now you see how our ambitions change as we grow older.
There is something unique in the ambition.
I don’t mean to be a nun.
I think I shall try genealogy, and hunt up people’s pedigrees.
“You certainly would,” they declared.
“How did she manage to do it?” they asked.
It’s all down in black and white.
I saw it.
I don’t like nips.
“Tell me, my bud, what is the Popinjay going to do if you ignore society?” “I’m not going to ignore it.” And over Lisa’s face a cloud came.
Then she arose from her place and left the room.
She’s ever so much gentler, only she’s more—sort of uneven.
One day she is as gay as a lark and the next she’s down in the dumps.
“I am afraid, my dear child, it is going to be a greater expense than we can afford,” he told her.
“Papa says I can’t go to college next year.” And the tears began to flow afresh.
Lisa put down her books upon the table.
“I am awfully sorry,” she replied, with real sympathy.
Hard times, you know.
I’ll try to get something to do myself—I don’t care what.
“I shall have to tell Miss Adams, I suppose,” she said, taking up her books.
She took an early opportunity of telling Miss Adams of the disappointment, being sure that her teacher, who knew her bright little pupil’s ambition, would give her sympathy.
Do you really think I could?
I’ll do anything.
I’ll study harder than ever.
“I’ll try anyhow,” she made known her determination, after a moment’s reflection.
“Maybe some way will be arranged for me.” “That is the proper spirit,” approved Miss Adams.
“I don’t see why you study so unusually hard,” she said.
But a little injured look on her sister’s face told her that she had made a mistake in making this answer.
“Oh, dear, I forgot that Lisa came out second,” she thought to herself.
A SPRING MEETING.
The winter passed with busy days crowding each other closely.
Her kindergarten studies gave her plenty of mental application, and she also became interested in a church guild, talking with a little womanly air about her “girls” and their needs.
“Lisa, you are a beauty,” she said one evening, as she sat rolled up in a warm wrapper upon the bed.
I can see him in my mind’s eye.
“Then he is not to marry you!” “Do you suppose I am going to make an idiot of myself?” “Then why do you keep him dangling after you?” “I don’t know.” And picking up her fan, Lisa went out.
“Now for the midnight oil,” she said, and she had but just gone to bed when Lisa returned.
Some weeks later Basil came in with the announcement that the spring meeting of the college athletic association would soon take place.
“I want to have a real jolly party to go from here,” he said to Mrs. Holmes.
“Who will chaperon the party?” she asked.
“Are you sure Mr. Dan will go, Basil?” she asked.
Lisa cast a swift look at the big vehicle as it drove up.
Numbers of other teams had already arrived, and salutations were exchanged while the college lads were preparing for their feats.
“Go bring him here, Basil.” And she leaned eagerly forward, while Lisa shrank farther back in her seat, as Basil proceeded to hunt up his friend, after calling on Wilson to look after the horses.
“He has nearly forgotten me by this time,” thought Lisa, a sudden wave of humility rushing over her.
Lisa was the last to give recognition.
“It is quite a gay sight, isn’t it?” he said.
“Yes,” replied Lisa, laconically.
Three slim lads stood abreast, each intent, alert.
“Go!” And they dart forward.
Basil is ahead.
Harvey Dana has passed him.
Once around and Harvey Dana is ahead.
“It is the best out of three,” Mr. Danforth told her, consolingly.
“The Grasshopper should be one of them; shouldn’t he, Lisa?” Lisa laughed.
Why didn’t you tell me?
“The Grasshopper is beaten; it is the Toad that has won,” she cried.
“And who is the Toad?” asked Mrs. Dixon, quite enjoying the spirit of the thing.
He always reminds me of a toad.
He is a very blasé sort of chap.
I wonder he joins these sports.
Yes, that is [Pg 180] Steve Boyd.
Yes, he has!
Oh, Basil, keep ahead!
“Oh, I can’t wait for the third heat,” she said.
Isn’t it exciting to have Basil and Mr. Dana so close?
Oh, dear, I’m afraid I shall be very much disappointed if Basil comes in second.
“Don’t try to outgrow your enthusiasm,” he said.
Off they go, heads up, shoulders back, neck to neck.
Harvey is ahead, Basil gaining.
One quick glance behind causes Harvey to lose ground, and Basil, seeing his advantage, darts ahead with a sudden spurt.
There is no hope for [Pg 181] Harvey; he has used his best strength too soon.
On, on goes the winner, until with one last effort he reaches the goal, passes beyond, and drops exhausted.
Never mind, he shall have them when he comes out.
Isn’t it fine to have such a champion runner for a brother.
“Isn’t this jolly?” cried Kitty, as she greeted Basil’s company.
And then, being called by Mrs. Dixon, she returned to her special party of friends, who were by this time ready to take supper.
Great fun they had over it, getting once in a while so uproarious that Mrs. Dixon had to remind them that they were in a public place, and must not make themselves conspicuous by such loud laughter.
The long porch of the Inn faced a grassy slope, below which ran a winding river.
Lisa stood in one corner of the porch, having escaped from the others, who were established at the other end of the building and were continuing their nonsense.
The spring was still too young for the trees to show much leafage, but there was the [Pg 183] thrill of expectancy perceptible in the waiting world.
There was a spring-like odor in the air which hinted of bursting buds and overturned sods.
“Of what were you thinking, off here by yourself?” he asked.
One was this waiting world, and another was your mother.
I only heard of her illness a day or two ago.
It has been an anxious time, but she is out of danger, and I am able to face my duties again.
“I have not been so very frivolous,” she said, with a little smile.
“I have been studying and working.” And she told him of her interest in the kindergarten, of her guild, of certain hopes in herself, while he listened gravely.
Isn’t this moonlight lovely?
THE FIRST BREAK.
This warty, pop-eyed little toad Concluded one fine day That life was very flat indeed, The world far, far from gay.
Oh, good gracious, don’t you think I hear enough of that?
“I’m very sure I’ll be the one to beat.” So off they went.
I saw them go, With energetic hop; They cleared the walk, they passed the wall, But never did they stop.
Indeed, I’d really like to tell Which of them won the bet; They hopped so far, for aught I know, They may be hopping yet.
We have all finished long ago.
Everybody with any sense knows a girl hates to rig herself up in the midst of blazing heat.
Why couldn’t he have waited till evening?
I hated to see you obliged to make the exertion to go up-stairs and change your dress.
Men haven’t very much sense about some things.
“Yes,” she answered.
No one knows yet, except mamma.
“Oh, Lisa!” was all she could ejaculate.
“I am so afraid you might marry a missionary, and you’d have to live there always in one of those funny little houses with paper partitions, and it would be so dreadful.” Lisa laughed.
My one winter in society has shown me that missionary work served up without the sauce of other diversions would not be to my liking, so count the missionary out, if you please.
She wants me to stay a year, but I cannot make up my mind to do that.
I shall give in at once if you do that; and indeed it is better for me to go.
It is, truly.
A few evenings after her departure, Mr. Danforth called and was told of the breach made in the family circle.
Mrs. Holmes watched him narrowly as she gave the information; but, although he was much interested and said he quite envied Lisa her good fortune, there was no shadow of regret in his words.
But she smoothed it out and kissed it directly after.
We are going to have a regular Greek setting, and all the graduates are going to wear Greek costumes.
Basil is going to show me about mine.
We are going to have our themes written on long scrolls and everything as much in keeping as possible.
I mean it will be truly Grecian.
What a difference one little word makes.
I believe in encouraging those who deserve it.
“How nice it will be!” she declared.
“I always said I meant to be an editor.” Mr. Danforth smiled, and later on this ingenuous avowal came back to him.
You always see the artistic side of things.
You know we are to hear to-morrow who is to be first-honor girl.
And she was in reality very happy over her cousin’s success.
Class-day dawned with fair skies and balmy breezes.
It is just perfection.
Oh, I am so happy!
Just think of having blue skies and roses, delicious odors, a picturesque costume, and first honors all at once.
I think Lisa and I are both getting more sense as we grow older.
And then, Basil—oh, yes, Basil is a fine example of how one can disapprove silently.
I shall not need much breakfast, for the Juniors are going to give us a luncheon, and I shall want to save up for that.
We are going to pass around the staff or wand, or whatever you call it, and each one who receives it is to respond a sort of toast, you know.
Nellie has written a fine parody on the famous oration, and it is to be delivered at the grave.
It was truly a beautiful sight to the looker-on, the young graduates, in classic attire, marching slowly down the long school-room and into the open air, the first six carrying, uplifted, the bier, upon which a tall Grecian urn, lightly draped and strewn with white flowers, was held.
Into the summer-garden the little procession passed, all eyes following, and as the rose-petals fell softly from the vine above the young heads.
All had done her honor; the sunshine of praise had shone upon her; she had been at her best all day; Mr. Danforth, Basil, Wilson Vane, had been sedulously attentive during the evening.
“It is nice to have attention.” But late as it was when she reached home, she stopped at her grandmother’s door, knowing that the dear old lady would lie awake till her return.
“My heart is so full, grandma,” she whispered.
While still chafing under the disappointment, a call from Mr. Danforth drew forth her confidence.
“It was quite natural,” she told herself, that she should tell her former tutor of this special affair.
Why, I haven’t had a bit of experience.
We want something attractive to children.
You have a fund of humor, good taste, good judgment, and a decided faculty for analysis.
Oh, Mr. Dan, you don’t know what a load it will lift for me.
It will put a reason into my days.
I had intended joining the Monday Afternoon Club, and I shall still keep up my interest in the Maids, but this seems so much more real than anything else.
“I shall have a volume to tell you when I do get home,” she wrote.
These she was to correct and return; and in this way a pleasant correspondence was kept up.
Sometimes a little poem would be slipped in, or accompanying the bundle might be a letter giving comments upon the last corrections; and once Mr. Danforth came down [Pg 200] to spend Sunday at the old place.
Mrs. Phillips’s sister is so much better, and has made so many friends in California, that she is going to live there altogether, and Mrs. Phillips will take a house somewhere in the city.
I must suggest it.
The boys come in very often; for, although they have a very pleasant boarding-place, they say it is not like home, and they pop in on us at all sorts of odd times.
I did hate to think of going without you, and I quite enjoy the getting well.
I think, after all, it has turned out for the best.
I think it would have been almost too much for the family if I had gone away too.
I get such funny manuscripts to look over, and such absurd letters come.
I only have a certain part of the work to do.
It is very interesting, and I think I shall earn enough to help me through the first year at college.
It’s just this way.
[Pg 203] There was no immediate reply from the latter.
“I don’t know why I feel like crying,” she said.
If I were just going to visit and not go to college.
There, it’s all right.
You mustn’t get worked up over it.
You are not strong enough yet to talk of business matters.
Yes, I’ll manage by hook or by crook, and we will settle it when the time comes.
It was a cold day, and as she wended her way through the business portion of the city she hoped she would not be detained long, but could reach home in time for a hot luncheon; yet she rather enjoyed her little trips to the office.
This was done by pasting in an old copy of the paper the new proofs just where they were intended to be arranged in the coming issue of the paper, and it was sometimes quite a puzzle to fit the matter within a given space.
“What a mean advantage to take,” she said, merrily.
Oh, dear, how late it is!
I have been working over this thing for an hour, and I still have some other work to do.
There were plates, cups and saucers, a can of chocolate, and one of coffee, disclosed.
Where is our little tin bucket?
Off goes the boy, back comes the feast.
That is my favorite word for [Pg 206] something to eat, since I have taken up journalism.
Here comes Jimmy with the pies.
We are not at the end of our resources.
Your housewifely arts are too much for me.
We have a very small, but very convenient, gas-stove.
This is a most delightful change from the usual routine.
I smell that wood; the pies must be warm.
Please give me one; I am half starved.
Will you keep my place for me till I come back?
But, no; that is pressing friendship rather too far.
I [Pg 207] should not require such a thing of you.
“You suggest such possibilities that I can scarcely grasp them,” she said, presently.
But then I wonder, wonder, wonder all the time.
It seems to me every day brings some new mystery.
But there, I have talked enough, and eaten enough, too.
I’ve not been to the haunts of the ancestors since I was a wee thing.
I used to imagine they called them so because the trees belonged to a dwarf, and I was afraid to touch them.
Where was it?
I can barely remember the place and the nice, kind man who took me in charge.
[Pg 209] “Is he still living, and shall we see him?” “He is still living in the same place, and you shall go there if you like.” There was a very sober look on Mrs. Estabrook’s face as she made the reply.
Are you doing it just for my sake?
There are distant cousins scattered all through that part of the country, and we shall be continually coming upon some of them.
[Pg 210] They will put on their spectacles and turn you round to the light, to see if you look like the Carters, or who you are like; won’t they, grandma?
Are we going to that queer little town where those three sisters live, the ones who are so old?
They call her ‘Babe’ still, and she wears little blue bows in her hair and at her collar because blue was considered her color when she was young.
Aunt Esther told me about them.
In a lumbering old coach they were taken to the small hotel, which rejoiced in the name of the “Mansion House,” and presently were conducted to their rooms by a small colored boy.
After passing along two long porches they found themselves at one end of the building, where three large comfortable rooms were opened to them.
All the rooms open on the porch, and you don’t go through any inside hall-way at all.
Oh, look at those mountains right in front of us.
“I am ready to admire everything antique, you know, so long as they draw the line at butter and mutton.” Passing through the long porch, down a flight of steps, through another porch to the other end of the building, they reached the dining-room, where a most excellent and plentiful dinner was served them.
I think this place is perfectly fascinating.
I am almost sorry we shall never be able to live here.
Up the long street, along whose sides were gardens where lilacs were making ready to bloom, they took their way that afternoon, and finally stopped at one of the oldest houses, long, low, and white.
With exclamations of pleased astonishment the visitors were greeted by the eldest of the sisters.
Come here, my dears; let me look at you.
Isn’t it wonderful?
“This is Mary Carter’s grandchild.” “A little look of the Carters,” echoed the two sisters.
This, however, was declined, but a compromise was made by giving a promise to spend an afternoon with the old ladies; and the girls, with Mrs. Estabrook, departed.
“But I don’t believe Miss Babe has made up her mind not to be married,” she said.
Perhaps if we should come here to live we would be the same.
After all, there is something rather pathetic in the thought that I shall go down to posterity only as a collateral, no matter how famous I may be in my age and generation.
In yonder brick house, surrounded with trees and walled about by a brick barrier ten feet high, lived the famous Judge Herrick, beneath whose roof many notables had been entertained.
In such a spot a duel had been fought.
At this corner stood an old pump at which Mrs. Estabrook remembered stopping many a time when a little girl.
And so it went till, tired out, they returned to their hotel ready for supper and for an early going to bed.
A drive the next day took them to a true specimen of an old Virginia plantation, where they were all greeted cordially by other cousins of several removes, but who, though distant in relationship, were far from being so in manner, and who would have had them stay indefinitely.
Every foot of ground was familiar to Mrs. Estabrook, whose father and grandfather were born upon the spot, and tender retrospection almost overcame her as [Pg 215] they drove up before the door.
We must call her cousin, although she is four removes.
They all seem, however, to have the various ramifications at their fingers’ ends.
He is an old bachelor, and lives on the adjoining place.
You fed me on ripe gooseberries and let me play with that very Venus over there.
Oh, mayn’t I go see the garden where the gooseberry bushes grew?
“I am going to ask your acceptance of the little statuette,” he said before they parted, giving the exquisitely modelled figure into her hands.
I can remember what a joy it was to be allowed to do that.
I had always longed to dabble in ink, which was one of the forbidden [Pg 217] things.
Both the girls were rather silent on the return drive, although Cousin Dolly chatted volubly and told them tales of the neighbors whose homes she pointed out.
“Oh, grandma,” she whispered, “how could you?” “How could I what, my dear?” “How could you not marry that dear, nice Cousin Ambrose Peyton?” Mrs. Estabrook smiled a little sadly.
Some day I will tell you; but you must not rake over old ashes just now.
One of these days you shall hear all about it.
Cousin Dolly says he is not, and it seemed so to me; but oh, grandma, what a delightful old house it is!
I never knew such hospitality; but then I’ve never been below Mason and Dixon’s line before, although my father was a Marylander.
“I am so glad we came.” But no visits made such an impression on the girls as those paid to the stately Cousin Ambrose and to the Three Gray Sisters.
Tea taken with the latter proved an event of great interest.
I love to hear those war stories, and all about those duels and law-suits and valorous deeds.
They make me tingle to write them down.
“I wish we could find something surprising to meet us,” she added, as she mounted the steps.
Strange to say, the surprise was there, for when she opened the door of her room there sat Lisa.
THE OLD DESK.
How did you get here?
Oh, you dear old thing!
Let me see if your eyes have a slant upward, and if you wear bodkins stuck in your hair.
“Didn’t I surprise you nicely?” said Lisa, at length.
Yes, I am safe and sound.
I had a chance to come with some friends as far as New York and the rest of the way was nothing.
Oh, my, but we shall have to talk all night for a week, to catch up.
I just had to come home, although I have had a perfectly lovely time.
Presently she darted forward and caught Lisa’s hand.
“That?” she answered, trying to look unconcerned.
“Not to a Japanese!” she said, quizzically.
Although I always have heard that these naval officers are great flirts, and are not always as moral as they should be.
He is thoroughly manly and intelligent, and yet he likes society; and as for his morals, he is as good as gold.
Now tell me all about your trip.
“He isn’t handsome, but he has a nice face.” “No, he isn’t specially good-looking, but he is just my dear Rick, and I would not have him any different.” And Lisa put away the photograph a little jealously.
I wasn’t here at Easter, so he has sent them as a welcome home.
I hear great accounts of you and Mr. Dan.
What do you mean?
Why, Lisa, I never gave him a sentimental thought.
We are just good comrades; that’s all.
He has been awfully good to me.
Could there be any other than friendship’s message intended to be conveyed by the flowers?
“Nonsense!” she said.
Why, Lisa, I thought you couldn’t bear him.
“Yes, I suppose it was,” she said, after a moment’s reflection.
Of course, girls often do have two or three fancies sometimes before they really find their true love.
Mamma was such a help.
She saw just how it all was, and she wrote me exactly the best things to make me get over it.
Don’t think for a moment that I owe Mr. Danforth a grudge; in fact, I feel myself rather under obligations to him, for he opened my eyes to several very wholesome truths, and I am sure I should never have appreciated Richard’s goodness quite so much if Mr. Danforth had not shown me what to avoid in men and what qualities to cultivate in myself.
“I should like to have had Mr. Dan for a brother,” she said.
I wish you hadn’t told me, for I shall always be regretting.
I haven’t seen grandma, remember.
“The house seems more like itself with my pretty maids all here,” Mrs. Holmes said, fondly, as she looked at the bright faces of her daughters in the library that evening.
“It will be many a day before I spare one of them again.” “Oh, mamma!” expostulated Lisa.
“Yes,” said Mrs. Holmes, decidedly.
I’ll go just to make you glad to have me back again, and you’ll be so glad you’ll want to keep me always.
What d’ye call ’em?
And, what do you think?
Connie is living at Mrs. Dixon’s.
I think it was lovely of Mrs. Dixon to have her, and it will mean everything to Connie.
She has refined instincts, but they were in danger of being blunted by her home surroundings.
I don’t think much of him anyway.
Imogene really did very well in her marriage.
And that is the news in Connie’s direction.
Nellie Hall is just the same dear old good thing, and Margaret Greene has joined all the clubs going.
I know there is one about her and Mr. Peyton, and to think that even now he feels so about her.
I do not believe in that saying, ‘All’s fair in love and war.’ All isn’t fair, and persons have no right to deceive each other.
“Isn’t it a dear old thing?” she said.
I feel quite pensively sentimental over it.
“Oh, here is a tiny little drawer,” she said.
Let me see.
[Pg 229] “Why, what are these things?” she exclaimed.
She married a good and noble man, and was a happy wife and mother.
It was only when I lost her that I realized what a foe to me was the wine-cup.
But her dear helping hand was stretched out to save me, for when, in a moment of frenzy, I struck down a neighbor, believing I had killed him—which, thank God!
I have never seen her since then, but her image has never faded and her nobleness and generosity has been ever a holy memory.
Your little friend has told me of your hopes and ambitions.
The little ring was my mother’s.
The dear old man!
How he has suffered; and what a story lies between the lines!
I can’t help it!
First Lisa comes home and tells me she is engaged, and then I read that letter, and then this comes.
It is too much all at once.
I seem to see that poor, young, desperate fellow rushing to his cousin and begging her help.
I can see [Pg 231] grandma appealing to his better self.
“I shall always wear it,” she said.
To think of my being a ‘bloated bond-holder’!
He hasn’t appeared upon the scene so far.
WINGS TO FLY.
I think it is dated that same day.
Life was a battle for him in many ways.
With all the comforts which his means provided, he still had a strangely sad life, and I am thankful that he is at rest.
The things he most desired in this world were never his; many things which might have added to his happiness seemed to slip away from him.
What a year of changes it has been.
In it Lisa has been away, and has come back engaged; the boys have left us; I have started on my journalistic work; and now this comes.
Before that everything went along so uneventfully.
“I don’t feel as if I could part from my girl again so soon,” Mrs. Holmes had said.
During the intervening time there were many plots and plans laid.
She was very lovable these days.
“No, I didn’t,” repeated Lisa.
He never pretended not to like me from the first.
He always looked it; and yet he has seldom said he admired me.
I think he brought all the best of me to the surface by his belief in that best.
“I knew it,” continued Lisa.
And next Lisa proceeded to arrange her sister’s glossy black hair.
“Now go off and show yourself,” she said, when she had completed the wonderful structure.
“I hear Basil in the library,” she said.
Ruth was overjoyed to see Lisa again, but the little girl was outgrowing her belief in fairies, and Callie was fading into a creature of the past.
Patience and Amber still held their places in the child’s affection, but such a very sedate cat now objected to being dressed up as a fairy prince, and, moreover, was now seldom called upon to take such a character, while Patience sometimes sat for a whole day staring ahead of her without once changing her point of vision.
He and Lisa were now on excellent terms.
Then Lisa, with eyes made wise by her new experiences, saw possibilities which probably none of the others discerned.
Lisa liked much to be with her grandmother these days.
To the dear old lady she could talk of her sailor-boy and be sure of an interested and sympathetic listener.
I don’t believe her heart has waked up yet.
Probably each one will make some very different selection, eventually.
“Time enough,” returned grandma.
I must talk over my little romances to you, grandma.
I think I should prefer Basil for a brother.
Her eager young mind craved knowledge.
She liked companionship which could yield her pleasant mental stimulus, but she had a lofty scorn for triflers, even though she did enjoy nonsense in a most hearty way.
The first of November found the house deserted, shutters barred, and doors bolted.
It looked very lonely to Porter and Basil as they passed it each day on their way to college.
“We’ll see them all next summer, Port,” said Basil, “but I do miss them every one.” “And I, too,” returned Porter.
“I believe Port is going to turn out all right,” he thought.
“He needed Mr. Dan, as well as the others, to take him in tow.” But it was not all Mr. Dan, nor even the others, who had been [Pg 243] of most use to Porter, for the unswerving example of his elder brother had been his best guide.
With illustrations by Florence P. England.
With illustrations by Ida Waugh.
The title indicates its character—the story of the lives of two girls.
They are girls of entirely different temperament, and the lessons deducted from their respective experiences, and the manner in which each met the daily troubles and tribulations of early life, make the book one of more than ordinary importance to the young, and especially to young girls.
It is a story with a moral, and the moral, if rightly followed, cannot fail to influence the lives of its readers.
With illustrations by Ida Waugh.
Blanchard Library for Girls.
3 volumes in a box.
This story tells of the adventures of a young girl, Philippa, who, in the capacity of a lady’s maid, accompanies her married sister on a visit to the latter’s connections by marriage.
She understands the art perfectly, and never by indifference fails to remember the essential things that have won for her so many devoted readers.
A Collection of Four Sketches for Young Readers.
In her manner of telling these little tales there is a remarkable resemblance to Hawthorne’s writings for the young, while in invention and imagination the author pushes closely the writers of classic juveniles.
Moreover, each one of the stories contains a wise moral.
Mr. Garrett has well illustrated the volume.
The present book contains four stories, ‘A Dog of Flanders,’ ‘A Provence Rose,’ ‘A Leaf in the Storm,’ and ‘A Bunch of Lilacs.’ The opening story, for pathetic beauty and descriptive power, has rarely been surpassed in the entire range of classic juveniles.
The others are of a like touching, pathetic character, revealing on the part of the gifted author a tender sympathy with the poor and humble, and a wonderful power in picturing their every-day experiences.
Two Little Wooden Shoes.
With illustrations by Edmund H. Garrett.
BY “THE DUCHESS.” The Three Graces.
With 6 full-page illustrations.
BY ANNE H. WHARTON.
A Last Century Maid.
Cloth, ornamental, $1.50.
The first three stories deal with colonial days in the vicinity of Philadelphia, and a more charming picture than that drawn of the little colonial Quaker maid we have never seen drawn by the pen.
The second story is that of a little girl who was stolen by the Indians and brought up by them with great affection; the third is a delightful story of ‘Christmas in Seventeen Seventy-Six,’ and the others are all very charming.
It is a book that children will read, fall in love with, and read again repeatedly.
BY LAURA T. MEAD.
Catalina, Art Student.
With 8 full-page illustrations.
Catalina is an artistic girl of Spanish descent, beautiful and winning.
The Girls’ Own In-Door Book.
CONTAINING PRACTICAL HELP TO GIRLS ON ALL MATTERS RELATING TO THEIR MATERIAL COMFORT AND WELL-BEING.
Edited by Charles Peters.
With over 150 illustrations.
Cloth extra, $1.75.
“It gives illustrated directions for acquiring a wide variety of practical and ornamental arts, with health and etiquette, and all is set forth with refinement, taste, and good sense.”—New York Tribune.
The Girls’ Own Out-Door Book.
Edited by Charles Peters, EDITOR OF “THE GIRLS’ OWN IN-DOOR BOOK.” 180 illustrations.
Cloth extra, $1.75.
“With such a table of contents, no right-minded and intelligent girl can fail to reap pleasure and profit from a careful study of this volume.”—San Francisco Bulletin.
“A handsome volume that will carry pleasure and profit where it goes.”—Philadelphia Ledger.
The Boys’ Own Book of In-Door Games and Recreations.
Edited by G. A. Hutchinson.
With over 700 illustrations.
It is especially a boy’s book, calculated to afford both pleasure and profit, treating of those topics in which boys take particular interest.
There are chapters on gymnastic exercises, games, and sports of all kinds; the boy’s workshop; how to build boats, etc.
Boys’ Own Book of Out-Door Sports.
UNIFORM WITH BOYS’ OWN BOOK OF IN-DOOR SPORTS.
Cloth, gilt, $1.75.
“This is a capital book,” says the New York Independent.
Illustrated by Charles S. Stephens.
When Captain King sets his hand to a boy’s story he is sure to be an ideal creator of heroes.
Redskins and blue-jackets, and lovely girls and daring youngsters are in his dramatic company; camp-fires, blazing villages, rifle-reports, and narrow escapes.
He is never coarse nor sensational, but with his sweeping style carries you on from start to finish like a stiff and wholesome breeze.
“They are just the stories to captivate the young reader.”—Philadelphia Evening Bulletin.
“Captain Charles King has never written more captivating stories of frontier life than the two that are embraced in this neat volume just issued.”—San Francisco Bulletin.
“Captain King has done many good things, but perhaps none better than these animated tales, which are full of Indians, good and bad, scouts, cowboys, and everything needful to keep a restless boy quiet on an evening.”—Philadelphia Evening Telegraph.
By A. Laurie.
“It is a suggestive as well as an interesting story.”—Boston Literary World.
By the Rev.
H. C. Adams, M.A.
Extra cloth, $1.50.
Mr. Adams has long distinguished himself as a writer of books for boys.
In the present instance he has drawn a hero of the type which all boys love.
With twelve full-page illustrations by Stanley L. Wood.
Robin Hood was a Saxon of noble descent, and was unjustly outlawed through the hatred of the Norman conquerors, after having been condemned to death and made his escape from the dungeon in which he was confined.
He gathered around him in Sherwood Forest a band of more than a hundred men as bold as himself, and for many years baffled all attempts to capture him.
He robbed the rich and gave to the poor, and suffered no woman to be oppressed, or otherwise molested.
B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY, PHILADELPHIA.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!)
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement.
“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.
It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.
There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.
There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.
Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States.
If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed.
Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work.
You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.
The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work.
Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change.
If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges.
Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that: • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.
The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.
Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns.
Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.” • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark.
Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from.
If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund.
If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.
If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come.
In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.
Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States.
U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses.
Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.
957: the Founding of the Priory by Maud, Countess of Chester, about the year 1150, its dissolution in 1538, its destruction in 1553, and the Founding of the School in 1557.
The hand of time, and man, especially the latter, has gradually destroyed anything ancient, and “restorations” have completely changed the aspect of the village.
The Church, Priory, Hall, and “Cross,” still serve as links between the centuries, but, excepting these, only one old house remains, in Well Lane, bearing initials “T.S.” and date “1686.” Even the Village Cross was restored!
Down to the year 1806, the shaft was square, with square capital, in which an iron cross was fixed.
More might have been included, and more written about them, the great difficulty was to curtail both, and at the same time make an interesting, and intelligible record of the chief points of interest in the places described.
In conclusion, I wish to return thanks to those who by their advice, and information have helped me, especially the Rev.
[vi] Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, (Rolls Series).
Church Notes, (1710).
Birch, W. de Gray.
Churches of Derbyshire.
Women under Monasticism.
Diocesan Histories, (S.P.C.K).
Glover, S. History of Derbyshire, (1829).
Green, J. R. Making of England.
Chronicles, (Rolls Series).
“A View of the Present State of Derbyshire,” (1789).
History of Staffordshire.
[ix] Plate 1.
[x] Page 12.
Transcriber’s Note: These corrections have been made to the text.
(Prior Overton’s Tower, page 81.)
At some time unknown, the course of the river was interfered with.
In Shakespeare’s play of Henry IV.
A map of England and Wales is before them, which the Archdeacon has divided into three parts.
The dam can be traced just below the bridge, and on the Parish Map, the junction of the two is marked.
They are still known as the Canons’ Meadows.
Since the “Itineraries” neither mention nor mark it, its original makers must remain doubtful until excavations have been made on the spot.
Its dimensions are, North side, 75 yards, 1 foot, South side, 68 yards, 1 foot, East side, 52 yards, 1 foot, West side, 54 yards, 2 feet.
Within the four embankments are two rounded mounds, and parallel with the South side are two inner ramparts, only one parallel with the North.
In Domesday Book it is described as belonging to him and the King, having a church and two priests, and two mills.
The Village consists of two main streets, which meet at the Cross.
In 1687 a wonderful skeleton, nine feet long!
The skeleton was in a stone coffin, with others to the number of one hundred arranged round it!
During the year 1787 the grave was reopened, and a confused heap of bones was discovered, which were covered over with earth, and a sycamore tree, which is still flourishing, was planted to mark the spot.
Four of the MSS.
Now as to the meaning of the name.
There is no doubt about the suffix dun, which was adopted by the Anglo-Saxons from the Celts, and means a hill, and was generally used to [7] denote a hill-fortress, stronghold, or fortified place.
The question is, which of these is the most probable meaning?
The first three seem to suit the place and position.
It is a very common thing for a hill or place to bear the name of the owner or occupier.
As regards the two last suggestions, the arrival of the Norsemen, in the eighth century, would be too late for them to name a place which had probably been in existence, as an important town, for nearly two centuries before they came.
Most probably the camp was constructed by the Danes when they wintered there in the year [8] 874.
So far as to its name.
Now we will put together the various historical references to it.
The names of several of the Abbesses have been recorded.
After existing for over 200 years the monastery was destroyed by the Danes in the year 874.
The sweet disposition of his youth is described, at length, by his biographer, also the choice of a military career, in which he spent nine years of his life.
During those years he devastated cities and houses, castles and villages, with fire and sword, and gathered together an immense quantity of [12] spoil, but he returned a third part of it to those who owned it.
Many stories are related, by Felix, of his encounters with evil spirits, who tried to turn him away from the faith, or drive him away from their midst.
Of course the miraculous element abounds all through the narrative, chiefly connected with his encounters with evil spirits, whom he puts to flight, delivering those possessed with them from their power.
The roll, of vellum, is nine feet long, by six inches and a half wide, on it are depicted, in circular panels, eighteen scenes from the life of the Saint.
He has seized one, and is administering a good thrashing with his whip.
A ray of light stretches from heaven down to the face of the saint.
The monks took the opportunity of inspecting the relics, and to prove their genuineness, which some doubted, subjected them to a trial by fire, the broken bones were placed in it, and were taken out unhurt and unstained.
This church served for a considerable time, when it was re-built of stone.
The floor of the chancel, supported on beams of wood, was higher than the present one, so the chancel had an upper and lower “choir,” the lower one was lit by narrow lights, two of which, blocked up, can be seen in the south wall of the chancel.
Round the four walls is a double string-course, below which the walls are ashlar, remarkably smooth, as though produced by rubbing the surface with stone, water and sand.
The vaulted roof springs from the upper string-course, the ribs are square in section, one foot wide, there are no diagonal groins, it is ten feet high, and is covered with a thin coating of plaster, which is continued down to the upper string-course.
There were recesses in each of the walls of the crypt.
In the wall of the west recess there is a small arch, opening into a smaller recess, about 18 inches square.
There are two passages to the church, about two feet wide and ten feet high, made from the western angles of the crypt.
A doorway was made, on the north side, with steps leading down to it, from the outside, during the thirteenth century; there is a holy water stoup in the wall, on the right hand as you enter the door.
For many years it has been a matter of dispute how far the recesses in the crypt, on the east, north, and south sides, extended.
Excavations just made (Sept. 1898), have exposed the foundations of the recesses.
× 1 ft. 9 in.
On a level with the stone foundation, to the south of it, are two slabs under which a skeleton was seen, whose it was, of course, cannot be said.
The present walls across the recesses, on the south and east, block them half up, and were built in later times.
The recess on the east end was destroyed when a flight of stone steps was made leading down to the crypt.
These steps (there are six of them) are single, roughly made stones of varied length, resting on the earth, without mortar.
The steps would afford an easier and quicker approach to the crypt and church, but when they were made cannot now be said.
The recess on the north side was also destroyed when the outer stairway, and door, were placed there, probably, as before stated, in the thirteenth century.
On the outside surface of the three walls, above the ground level, are still to be seen traces of the old triangular-shaped roofs which covered the three recesses, and served as buttresses to the walls.
The eastern end of the north aisle is the only portion of the ancient transepts above the ground level.
During the restorations in 1886 the foundations of the Anglo-Saxon nave were laid bare, they extend westward up to and include the base of the second pier; the return of the west-end walls was also discovered, extending about four feet inwards.
Over the chancel arch the removal of many coats of whitewash revealed an opening, with jambs consisting of long and short work; a similar opening to the north of it used to exist, it is now blocked up.
The Early English Style is only represented by foundations laid bare during the restoration in 1885, and now indicated in the north and south aisles, by parallel lines of the wooden blocks, with which the church is paved.
In the south aisle the foundations of [20] a south door were also discovered (see plan of church).
To this period belong the windows in the north side of the chancel, and in the narrow piece of wall between the last arch and chancel wall on the north side of the present choir.
There were two corresponding windows on the south side, one of which remains.
All these windows have been blocked up.
The Decorated Style is represented in the nave by four out of the six lofty pointed arches, supported by hexagonal columns; the two, on either side, at the east end of the nave, were erected in the year 1854.
The tower and steeple were finished in the year 1340.
The north and south aisles were extended to the present width.
These walls were removed in 1792, when “a restoration” took place.
The other windows in the church of one, two, three, and four lights, are very simple examples of this period, and, like the chancel arch, have very little pretensions to architectural merit, in design at least.
The Perpendicular Style is represented by the clerestory windows of two lights each, the roof of the church, and the south porch.
The high-pitched roof of the earlier church was lowered—the pitch is still indicated by the string-course on the eastern face of the tower—the walls over the arcades were raised several feet from the string-course above the arches, and the present roof placed thereon.
The space above the tie-beams, and the principal rafters is filled with open work tracery.
Between the beams the roof is divided into six squares with bosses of foliage at the intersections of the rafters.
It had a window on either side, and was reached from the south aisle by a spiral staircase (see plan of church).
In the year 1719 a singers’ gallery was erected at the west end of the church, and the arch there was bricked up.
In the year 1779 the crypt was “discovered” in a curious way.
One of the monuments which used to be on the top of an altar tomb “at the upper end of the north aisle,” was placed in the crypt, where it still waits a more suitable resting-place.
During the years 1842 and 1848 galleries in the north and south aisles, extending from the west as far as the third pillars, were erected.
(F. C. H.) (Page 3.)
In 1854, the two round arches and pillars, on either side of the eastern end of the nave, were removed, and were replaced by the present pointed arches and hexagonal piers, for, as before stated, the sake of uniformity!
To him our thanks are due for allowing me to copy it.
It shows what the church was like in his time, 1847.
In 1885 the last restoration was made, when the Rev.
The floor of nave and aisles was paved with wooden blocks, the choir with encaustic tiles.
A new pulpit was given in memory of the Rev.
W. Williams, who died in 1882.
The splendid arch at the west end was opened.
The outside appearance of the church roof was improved by the addition of an embattled parapet, the roof itself was recovered with lead.
1584 Richard Newton, curate.
1739 Lowe Hurt, M.A.
1742 John Edwards, B.A.
1843-56 Joseph Jones, M.A.
1857-82 W. Williams.
A. McMaster, M.A.
They extend from 1580 to 1670.
The oldest Volume extends from 1580 to 1629: the second from 1629 to 1655: the third from 1655-1670.
The Churchwardens’ and Constables’ Accounts from 1582 to 1635.
The entries are very legible, and extend from 1655 to 1670.
THE FOLLOWING ENTRIES OCCUR.
1652 Old Ashe of Milton bur Oct 12.
(2nd usher of school.)
(3) The names and amounts paid by Tenants of Parish land.
(4) Money paid by the Parish to the Constable.
(5) Money “gathered for a communion,” 1st mentioned in the year 1596.
(6) The various “items” expended by the Churchwardens and Constable.
Dr. Cox’s article is most helpful in explaining many obsolete words, curious expressions, customs, and references to events long ago forgotten, a few of the thousands of entries are given below: The first five leaves are torn, the entries are very faded and illegible.
Special arrangements were made to meet it.
A general muster of (pressed) soldiers was made in Derbyshire.
First one Bible.
13 and 14.
I have copied out most of the references to our bells entered in them, which will, I hope, be interesting to my readers.
1772, Oct. 7th.
The third bell was cracked, upon ringing at Mr. John Thorpe’s wedding.
The bell upon being taken down, weighed 7 cwt.
18lb., clapper, 24lb.
It was sold at 10d.
Re-hung the third bell, Nov. 21st, 1774.
Weight 8 cwt.
24lb., at 13d.
8d., clapper, 1 r. 22 lb., at 22d., £1.
For some time our ring of six bells had only been “chimed,” owing to the state of the beams which supported them, it was considered dangerous to “ring” them.
Four of them were sound, but two, the 5th and 6th, were found to be cracked, the 6th (the Tenor bell) worse than the 5th.
The crack started in both bells from the “crown staple,” from which the “clapper” hangs; it (the staple) is made of iron and cast into the crown of the bell.
This has been the cause of many cracked bells.
The two metals, bell-metal and iron, not yielding equally, one has to give way, and this is generally the bell metal.
The “Canons,” as the projecting pieces of metal forming the handle, and cast with the bell, are called, and by which they are fastened to the “headstocks,” or axle tree, were found to be much worn with age.
New bell-frames of iron, made in the shape of the letter H, fixed into oak beams above and below, support the bells, which are now raised about three feet above the bell chamber floor, and thus they can be examined more easily.
The information thus obtained, together with that in Vol.
The 1st (treble) Bell.
At the east end of the north aisle of our Church there is a mural monument to his [47] memory.
The 2nd Bell.
The 3rd Bell.
This is the bell referred to in the extract quoted above from George Gilbert’s diary.
The 4th Bell.
The 5th Bell.
8), alternately arranged.
Above the circle the sacred emblem of S. John Baptist, the lamb, cross, and flag.
The name of the firm within the circle.
Below, a border like that on the fifth Bell.
(Owing to the difference of the type of the inscription, and names, it is supposed that this bell was recast in 1677, so it may have been one of the “three great bells” in Edward VI.’s time.)
Key-note E major.
[50] THE PRIORY.
Dr. Cox is of opinion that it was founded later, at the end of the reign of William (Rufus), or at the beginning of that of Henry I. circa 1100.
About that date a Priory of Canons regular of St. Augustine, dedicated to St. Giles, was founded.
iii., p. 346.
Each section of the Chronicle begins with a letter which, together, form the Author’s name, a monkish custom not uncommon.
He died at Rome, Dec. 7th, 1159.
For some reason or other, not known, the villagers, armed with bows and arrows, swords and cudgels, with much tumult, made an assault on the Priory gate-house.
On October 26th, 1503, during the reign of Henry VII., an inquisition was held at Newark.
A visitation was made in 1535, the results were laid before the House of Commons, in a report commonly known as the “Black Book.” In 1536 an Act was passed for the suppression of all monasteries possessing an income of less than £200.
By this Act 376 monasteries were dissolved, and their revenues, £32,000.
From this inventory, and Mr. St. John Hope’s articles in the journal, a very good account and description can be given of the Priory as it was at the time of its dissolution.
How well he accomplished the work is proved by the ruins uncovered during the years 1883-4.
The Priory followed the usual plan of monastic buildings, differing chiefly in having the cloister on the north of its church, instead of the south.
This alteration was necessary owing to the river Trent being on the north.
In choosing a site for monasteries the water supply was of the first consideration, as everything, domestic and sanitary, depended on that.
Kitchens, buttery, cellars, with Guest Hall over them, on its west side.
The Priory precincts, (now the Cricket ground), were surrounded by the existing wall on the west, south, and east sides; on the north flowed, [55] what is now called, “the Old Trent,” and formed a boundary in that direction.
(F. C. H.) (Page 62.)
On the east side of the Priory was the Mill.
The wall, with arch-way, through which the water made its way across the grounds in a north-westerly direction, is still in situ in the south-east corner of the Cricket ground.
Proceeding through the arch-way of the Gate-house, we find ourselves in the precincts.
The Priory Church consisted of nave, with north and south aisles, central tower, north and south transepts, choir, with aisles, and a south chapel, and a presbytery to the east of the choir.
Central Tower (25 ft. by 21 ft. 6 in.)
Through the passage under the screen we enter the Choir.
The step leading down to the choir floor, much worn by the feet of the canons and pilgrims, is still in situ.
The Choir (26 ft. wide, 31 ft. long) was separated from the south Choir aisle, by an arcade of five arches, from the north choir aisle, by an arcade of three arches.
On the south of the choir was a chapel dedicated to St. John, with his image, and [57] alabaster table, similar to that in the choir.
On the east of the choir was the Presbytery.
Here were “seats,” and “a lavatory of lead,” but, owing to alterations, very little indeed is left except the outside walls.
0d., made up of the following items.
6d., so there remained in the hands of the Commissioners £124.
Pensions were also granted to the Sub-Prior and the Canons, varying from £6.
Reginald, about 1230.
Ralph, died 1317.
Simon de Sutton, election confirmed 1st August.
Ralph de Derby, 1356-7.
William de Tuttebury, 1398.
John Overton, 1437.
Thomas de Sutton, 1471.
William de Derby, 1511.
Outer Arch of Gate House.
The mental revolution of the sixteenth century broke suddenly on the dull cold sleep of past ages, with the mysterious impulse and pregnant energy with which a Scandinavian Spring bursts forth from the bosom of Winter.
Kings and Cardinals and Prelates led the way; Knights and Gentlemen and Yeomen followed.
By the munificence of Wolsey and King Henry, the noblest Colleges of Oxford and Cambridge were established:—Edward VI.
His father was a student in the Middle Temple, and, after being called to the Bar, filled many offices at it.
In the year 1525 he was raised to a Judgeship of the King’s Bench, and was knighted.
After the dissolution of the Monasteries, King Henry VIII.
At the coronation of King Edward VI.
Like his father, he married twice.
In the year 1553 he was one of the “Knights of the Shire” for the county of Derby, and served the office of High [63] Sheriff for the same county in 1554.
III., part 2, p.
Joan Waste, a blind woman, was tried and found guilty of heresy, and was burnt at the stake in Derby.
The School Master to have yearly twenty pounds, and the Usher ten pounds.
These went on till the days of Godfrey’s son Gilbert: he determined either to put an end to the annoyances, or to the School, he did not care which, as we shall see.
In 1652, soon after he succeeded to the estates, he commenced a suit against the School.
(Mr. Watson stalled them in a room in the Priory itself!)
This he refused to do, so the alleged trespass, and annoyances went on for another twelve years, when, owing to the conduct of Gilbert, the School brought an action against him.
The High Court of Chancery appointed four gentlemen, as Commissioners, to try the case.
Their depositions, in answer to interrogatories, were taken on April 15th, 1663, and fill sixty pages of folio.
The number of Schoolmasters varied—in Watson’s time two, in Whitehead’s three, Schoolmaster, Middle Master, and Usher.
The award was well known, and agreed to at the time, 1653, but the defendant had refused to comply with it, and had stopped several ways, and blocked up a door leading to the brook, from the north-east corner of the Schoolmaster’s garden.
[70] (1) The School to build up the way out of the School House garden in the north wall, and to give up all rights to go (that way) to the Brook.
A receipt for £14.
0d., half the cost of building the wall, signed by Wm.
During the work they came unexpectedly upon patches of a stiff red clay, quite unlike the ordinary soil of the place, with here and there fragments of encaustic tiles, such as have from time to time been found in other parts of the Old Abbey (Priory) grounds.
Presently they found a considerable number of whole tiles of various patterns, in two rows of layers, placed face downwards.
The more perfect specimens were placed over the fire-place in the old “big school,” and formed a most interesting mantel-piece.
When the room was dismantled in 1889 they were taken down and placed in a cupboard in the inner room till a suitable place can be found for them.
During the excavations made in 1883-5 on the site of the Priory Church, many more tiles were discovered which, with many carved stones, have been affixed to the old north aisle wall, where they can be seen in various stages of decay, suffering from the effects of exposure to our climate.
The letters are the initial ones of Ave Maria, and probably adorned the “Chapel of Our Lady” in the Priory Church, where one was found during the excavations.
Emblems of Saints Peter and Paul, (Bell, Key, and Sword).
Geometrical, Foliage, especially oak leaves, with acorns.
Of four tile patterns there are some good examples, geometrical designs with foliage (oak leaves), and armorial bearings.
A third, also circular, still more elaborate, with dragons in the corners.
There are also some elegant border tiles, with patterns, consisting of undulating or waving foliage, or birds perched on the side of a straight branch, with double circles and pellets between them.
Besides these there are some curious examples of tiles simply indented or stamped, with circles and foliage, and painted within the pattern with green glaze, not filled with “slip,” as the liquid clay was called, and two have a pattern which has evidently been cut or incised with some sharp instrument, not stamped as all the rest have been.
The size of the tiles varies from 10 inches square to 2½ inches square, by 1¾ inches to [74] 1 inch thick.
The body-clay is red, the patterns are filled in with white or yellow “slip,” which is brushed or poured over the face of the tile, then the “slip” is scraped off the surface of the tile, leaving “slip” in the pattern.
A larger tile-kiln was discovered at Dale Abbey, about thirty-eight years ago, close to the ruins of the gatehouse of that Abbey.
The next day a much larger number of invited guests arrived.
The Headmaster, Dr. Pears, read an account of the Founder, and founding of the Hospital and School, of its incorporation by royal charter, granted by King James I. in 1622, and subsequent benefactions to the School.
He, further, gave an address on the principles, objects, and practical working of the School, and other kindred institutions.
The prayers were read by him, and the Headmaster, the lessons by the Rev.
G. P. Clarke.
The [76] sermon was preached by Dr. Vaughan, the Headmaster of Harrow, the text chosen was Romans XI.
In commemoration of the 300th Anniversary of the Foundation of SIR JOHN PORT’S SCHOOL AND HOSPITAL.
The first stone was laid August 26th, 1858, By RICHARD WILLIAM PENN EARL HOWE, Acting Governor of the School and Hospital.
Hereditary Governors of the School and Hospital: EARL HOWE, for Marquis of Hastings, a minor; EARL CHESTERFIELD; SIR R. GERARD, Bart.
Master of the Hospital—REV.
A. PEARS, D.D.
G. P. CLARKE.
G. P. Clarke.
A. N. Mosley, Esq.
I. Clay, Esq.
E. J. Selwyn.
C. Worthington, Esq.
The Chapel originally consisted of nave and two transepts, with a five-light window in the east end.
In 1884-5 a south aisle was added, the organ removed to its east end, the middle window inserted in the west wall of the nave, and gas was introduced.
The style of the building is Perpendicular.
The windows in the apse, three pairs of lights, are full-length figures of Moses and John the Baptist, two of Our Lord, and S.S. Peter and Paul.
Beneath the figures are medallions illustrating an event in their lives; (1) Moses striking the rock, (2) John baptizing our Lord, (3) Jesus in the home at Nazareth, (4) Jesus with S.S. Peter, James and John, (5) S.S. Peter and John at “the gate Beautiful,” (6) S. Paul preaching at Athens.
In the south transept, a beautiful little window, our Lord with an infant in His lap.
[78] TO THE GLORY OF GOD, AND IN LOVING MEMORY OF E.S.F.
30TH SEP. 1887.
In the south aisle are six pairs of lights, with full-length figures and medallions, illustrating the Beatitudes.
DIED OCT. 18, 1893.
BORN NOV. 21, 1862.
DIED FEB. 11, 1894.
DIED SEP. 6, 1894.
WHO DIED DEC. 22, 1884.
AGED 33 YEARS.
At the west end of the south aisle is a three-light window.
The three lights below representing Faith, Hope, and Charity.
At the east end of the nave is a beautiful window with angels and flowers.
AGED 14 YEARS.
On the nave walls are brasses in memory of the following boys:—C.
It is supposed that the School acquired the Hall, as a residence for the Headmaster, about this time.
The letters T and S are supposed to be the initials of former priors.
Prior, Headmaster from 1767-79, raised the number of boys to over two hundred, and it is generally thought that he was the first to occupy the Hall.
The School Register was so badly kept, or not kept at all, it is difficult to say how many there were with any certainty.
When Dr. Pears was appointed in 1854 there were only forty-eight boys in the School, in three years the number was one hundred and eight, and soon it became necessary to build more houses, the difficulty was to obtain sites.
Pears Memorial Hall Window.
E. Latham opened his house about the same time.
It had formerly been a malt house and cottages.
Joseph Gould in 1865.
In 1871, the Rev.
A. F. E. Forman.
In 1885, Mr. Gurney built his house.
The Pears Memorial Hall, and rooms beneath it, built on the site of the Priory Chapel, were opened on Speech Day, June 17th, 1886.
The Hall is one hundred and one feet long, by forty-three feet wide, with a fine open roof, forty feet high, supported by wall pieces, with hammer beams, which rest on corbels of stone, carved to represent shields.
(2) Philip and Mary, in whose reign the School was founded.
(4) James I., who granted a Charter to the School.
The bottom five full-length figures of (1) Sir Thomas Gerard.
The principal entrance to the Hall is up a staircase in the tower at the east end, there is also an entrance at the west end.
Beneath the Hall are four Class-rooms, a “Common-room” for the Masters, and lavatories.
The rooms open into a Cloister which is on the south side of the building.
The inner room is about to be similarly fitted up.
How former generations of O.R.s would stare if they could see the accommodation for the present Sixth Form!
The space thus separated from the floor beneath was formerly enclosed in the manner of a pew, and contained seats for the accommodation of nearly the whole of the Sixth or head form.
The last improvement is now (1899) being made.
In the year 1890 the Governors acquired the freehold of the “Hall Orchard,” at its south end a Sanatorium was erected and opened in the year 1894.
The “Orchard,” owing to the unevenness of its surface, could not be used, properly, for games, so subscriptions for levelling it were asked for, O.R.s and others responded, as usual, in a very liberal manner, and the work was commenced at the end of last year.
When finished there will be three fine “pitches,” one across the south end, and two, divided by a terrace, from it and themselves, down the remaining part of the “Orchard.” Owing to the unevenness referred to it was impossible to make it of one level.
Mr. Gurney’s House.
[87] CHIEF EVENTS REFERRED TO, OR DESCRIBED.
1699 The river Trent made navigable, up to Burton-on-Trent, by Act of Parliament.
1706 William Gilbert Charity founded.
1736 William Hunt’s Charity founded.
1749 Richard Coming’s Charity founded.
1766 The “Common” fields enclosed by Act of Parliament.
1792 The Church restored, p. 21.
1804 The weather-cock on the spire repaired by Joseph Barton.
1815 The Methodist Chapel built.
1836 The Independent Chapel built.
1838 The Church School-room built by public subscription.
1839 A two-edged sword, and a large quantity of human bones found, whilst digging out the foundations of the culvert bridge over the “Old Trent.” 1842-8 Galleries on the north and south sides of the Church built, p. 22.
1843 A troop of yeomanry raised.
1854 The two round Saxon arches and piers removed, replaced by the two pointed arches, and hexagonal piers, p. 22.
1866 Tile Kiln discovered on the Paddock, p. 71.
1867 School Chapel enlarged by the addition of an apse, in memory of Mrs. Pears, p. 77.
1868 A new clock in the Church, also in her memory.
1880 School Chapel extended about twenty feet to the west, p. 77.
1884-5 South Aisle added to School Chapel, p. 77.
1887 Engineering Works established by W. Stephenson Peach, Esq.
1888 The block of Form rooms erected on the east side of the Priory.
1889- Old “Big School” converted into “Sixth Form Library,” p. 85.
91 1890 Freehold of Hall Orchard purchased, and Cricket Pavilion enlarged.
1891 Freehold of Hall and Cricket Field purchased.
1894 New Sanatorium opened.
1896 Porter’s Lodge built.
1897 New Fives’ Courts made.
1899 Hall Orchard levelled.
In the pages of “Contributions to the Flora of Derbyshire,” by the Rev.
The lover of the picturesque will find much to please him in the varied scenery of the valley of the Trent, and its numerous tributaries.
What reader of “Ivanhoe” does not remember one scene, at least, in that well-known romance, “The Gentle and Joyous Passage of Arms of Ashby,” which has shed such a lasting halo of chivalry over that town?
The first authentic mention we have of it is about the year 1066, when William the Conqueror granted the Manor to Hugh de Grentemaisnel, one of his most valiant captains at the battle of Hastings.
In Domesday Book we read of its having a priest and church.
Alan settled at Ashby, and added the family name to it, to distinguish it from the other towns of that name.
In that year Edward, Duke of York, became King, and rewarded his partisans with titles and grants of land.
In the year 1474 he built Ashby Castle, nine years later the Protector (Richard, Duke of Gloucester) accused him of high treason, and, without trial, had him beheaded on a log of wood on Tower Green.
His remains were interred in Windsor Castle, where a splendid monument was erected to his memory.
Ashby Castle was, as we have seen, built by the first Lord Hastings in 1474.
It stands on the south side of the town.
Judging by its ruins, it must have been indeed a stately pile.
The west front of this block has been destroyed, so nothing can be written about its chief entrance, its height is about seventy feet, the dimensions of the kitchen are fifty feet long, by twenty-seven broad, and thirty-seven feet high.
At the west end, over the west door, is a gallery, to which a spiral staircase leads.
Adjoining the east end, to the south of it, were rooms for the chaplain.
On the south is a courtyard formed by the chapel, chaplain’s rooms, a thick wall, and the Great Tower.
Very probably there was a wall from the Great Tower on its west side, like that on its east side, which met a wall built out from the kitchen.
The ground plan of the Castle would form a parallelogram with kitchen, servants’ hall, great hall, drawing room, and chapel on the north side, chaplain’s room at the east end, Great Tower, with walls on the south side, and a wall and kitchen at the west end.
The chief historical events connected with the Castle are the visit of Mary, Queen of Scots, in November of the year 1569.
Charles I., flushed with the success of his army at Leicester, spent a short time at the Castle.
The “Manor House” on the north-east side, occupies the site of a suite of apartments made to accommodate King James I. in the year 1617.
Ashby Church, dedicated to St. Helen, occupies the site of an earlier building, probably Norman.
During the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries it was rebuilt, and consisted of chancel, nave, north and south aisles, with tower at the west end.
Now it consists of nave with two aisles on its north and south sides, all the galleries have been removed, and the old pews have been replaced by well-designed oak seats.
The choir stalls are placed at the east end of the nave, leaving the chancel unoccupied.
Every detail of it is well worth a very close inspection.
There are also many mural tablets in the chapel.
Within a sculptured recess in the north wall of the church is a finely executed figure of a pilgrim.
Lying on his back, the head rests on a cushion, just above the right shoulder a portion of a pilgrim’s hat with scallop-shell is seen.
Round the shoulders, and over the breast, is the collar of SS.
The figure is clothed with a long cloak, the feet, which rest on a dog, are shod with laced boots with pointed toes.
Across the body is a pilgrim’s staff, clasped by the left fore-arm, the hands meet over the breast, pressed together in the attitude of prayer, his scrip, ornamented with scallop-shells, is suspended, diagonally, [97] from his right shoulder.
It is in front of the screen which separates the nave from the tower.
The town of Ashby is well known for its baths.
In the year 1822 they were opened, but the great expectations of converting the town into a fashionable health resort have not been realized.
The water is not found at Ashby, but is pumped from deep coal pits at Moira, some three miles distant, and conveyed to the baths in tanks specially constructed for that purpose.
Ashby received quite an unusual class of visitors in the year 1804.
During the prolonged wars between England and France many thousands of prisoners were landed on our shores.
According to Sir Archibald Alison there were no less than 50,000 French prisoners in Great Britain.
For the accommodation of “the rank and file” such places as Dartmoor prison were erected, but the officers were quartered in different towns.
They lived on excellent terms with the good people of Ashby for ten years, they were allowed liberty to walk a mile in any direction out of the town.
Some escaped, and some were exchanged for English officers imprisoned in France.
He also had access to a diary kept by an Ashby physician (Dr. Kirkland).
The church registers contain entries of marriages contracted between the officers and residents, also entries of baptisms and burials, which, as the Canon writes, “show, among other things, that the prisoners of war, who were quartered at Ashby, did not allow national prejudices to prevent them forming the closest ties with the inhabitants of the place of their captivity.” Little more remains to be written about this interesting town.
In gratitude for this he conveyed to the trustees of the school certain property on condition that the bells “should be rung for a quarter of an hour at four o’clock in the morning.” This custom was kept up till 1807, when it was discontinued.
On Thursday, July 24th, 1879, a memorial cross, in design like Queen Eleanor’s cross at Northampton, was unveiled.
In the year 1804, it was enclosed by Act of Parliament, and divided among the adjoining townships.
A Norman arch divides the nave from the chancel, the rest of the church is of the Decorated period.
It has a tower terminated by an octagonal spire.
Barrow-on-Trent, as it is usually called, dates back to Norman days, when it had a [100] priest and a church.
For a full and interesting account of the connection between Barrow and the Knights, see “Cox’s Churches of Derbyshire,” Vol.
The church, dedicated to St. Wilfred, consists of nave, chancel, north and south aisles, south porch, and tower at the west end.
There are now no remains of the Norman church.
During the reign of Henry III.
(1216-1272), the church was probably rebuilt, and again, in the Decorated and Perpendicular periods, alterations and additions were made.
In the reign of Edward I. it belonged to John de Beke, or Beck, and Robert de Holland.
Joan, wife of John de Beck, left it to her son and heir.
This mansion was fortified, and the bridge defended by earth-works, for the King, by Colonel Hastings in 1642.
The modern part of the bridge, over the river Trent, is about 138 yards, the remainder forms a raised causeway, about eleven or twelve feet wide, with arches, here and there, so that the flood water can escape.
The greater part of the bridge is in the parish of Stanton-by-Bridge.
There is a legend that the old bridge was erected at the sole cost of two maiden sisters, who lost their lovers when attempting to ford the swollen waters, to pay a visit to their betrothed ones.
It is also said that the ladies spent the whole of their fortunes on the bridge, and lived a life of penury ever afterwards.
The earliest mention of the bridge, discovered by the Rev.
II., m. 31.; 1st Pat., 12 Ed.
III., m. 26.
[102] Given at Westminster, March 1st, 1338.
The 3rd will be found in 3rd Pat., 20 Ed.
III., which refers to the ruinous state of the bridge, and appoints John the son of Adam de Melbourne, senior, and John the son of Adam de Melbourne, junior, to receive tolls for the reparation of the bridge for three years.
The village, now chiefly known as a fishing resort, with its church, and posting house, is pleasantly situated on the banks of the Trent.
Beneath an arch, to the north of the altar, is a raised tomb on which is fixed a large alabaster slab, on this is carved the effigies of a man and woman, the front of the tomb is divided into four compartments, in the two middle ones are figures of seven sons and seven daughters.
In it are two large raised tombs, each supporting a pair of recumbent effigies.
The church, dedicated to St. Michael, is a small one, about 60 feet long, and consists of nave, chancel, north aisle, south porch with a bell turret on the west gable.
About a mile south of Stanton is a farmhouse called St. Bride’s, supposed to be once a grange chapel of Burton Abbey.
Built into its walls are many remains of Norman work, and in the yard are stone coffins, and other fragments of worked stone.
It is not known when the castle was pulled down, but most probably in the days of Philip, 1st Earl of Chesterfield (1585-1656), who built a mansion on the present site, within the park.
The old castle stood on the land to the south-west of the church, the grass [105] covered mounds indicate the foundations of a very strong fortress, consisting of two courts.
The masque is printed in “Glover’s History of Derbyshire,” Vol.
II., part I., p 184.
In the year 1780, the young Earl “was persuaded ‘by an artful steward,’ to pull down [106] this splendid mansion and chapel, as being in a dangerous state of decay, though it was afterwards proved to have been very substantial.” The gardens also suffered a like fate.
Fortunately the fine cedar of Lebanon, planted in February 1676-7, on the east side of the house, escaped destruction.
The present house was begun by the 5th Earl, who died in 1815, when the building operations ceased.
A ground plan of the house is printed on page 187 of “Glover’s History of Derbyshire,” Vol.
When completed it will form a four-sided building, with a courtyard within it.
It occupies the old site with the addition of an aisle, which forms a large pew for the noble owners, and a vestry, both on the north side.
The village consists of a few scattered houses.
The east window of the chancel, of two lights, belongs to the Decorated period.
The embattled tower is a fair specimen of the Perpendicular period, and contains a ring of five bells.
In front of the tomb are representations of their six children, three sons and three daughters.
Many other ancient monuments used to be in the church, but they have been “made away with.” There is a fine old parish chest, seven feet long, in the vestry.
The churchwardens wrongly described it as the head of St. John the Baptist.
Round the head is a nimbus, with rays issuing from it.
The church, dedicated to St. Wilfred, consists of chancel, nave, aisles, [110] and low west tower.
The 2nd bell is supposed to be the only one left when the others were sold for the repairing of Monks’ Bridge.
Four exhibit emblematic devices of the four elements, earth, air, fire and water, and armorial bearings, in each compartment.
Earth is represented by Ceres (Demeter) in her chariot in a garden, with fountains in the background.
By the side of the chariot stands her daughter Persephone, wearing a mural crown.
Lions and other wild beasts occupy the foreground, the bordering is composed of fruit and flowers.
Fire is represented by Vulcan working at his forge, attended by Venus and Cupid, at the back is a cave with a furnace in its recesses.
Weapons, and instruments of metal form a bordering.
Water is represented by Neptune and Amphitrite, in a chariot drawn by sea-horses.
Within the last two years it has become noted to all who take an interest in churches, and works of art.
It consists of nave with aisles, central tower over the choir, and chancel.
The east end [112] of the south aisle is separated from it by an arch and a stone screen, with wrought iron gates, and forms a small chapel.
The east end of the north aisle is used as an organ chamber, with vestries for the clergy and choir behind it.
The tapestry in the chancel was designed by the late William Morris.
He rebuilt and extended the Castle, and founded the Priory.
His descendant, Robert de Ferrers, joined Leicester in a rebellion against King Henry III., which ended in Robert being fined £50,000.
Unable to pay so large a sum, he forfeited his estates to the King, who granted them to his son Edmund, 1st Earl of Lancaster.
After many privations, the garrison, at last, yielded up the Castle on April 20th, 1646.
On the elevated mound, at its west side, the [114] Julius Tower used to stand, now its site is occupied by an artificial ruin.
Within the walls was a chapel, dedicated to St. Peter, the site of which cannot now be found.
1080, and occupied the north side of the present church, which belonged to it.
Various, very curious customs were observed, which will be found in “The Book of Days,” Vol.
II., p. 224.
Then the minstrels rushed after the maddened beast, and if they could cut off a portion of hair or skin before it [115] crossed the river Dove, it belonged to the Minstrels, if it escaped it was returned to the Prior.
In 1831 some workmen, digging gravel out of the bed of the river, about thirty yards below the bridge, four or five feet below the surface of the gravel, discovered “upwards of 300,000 valuable coins,” which Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster, lost, together with his baggage, when he was attempting to cross the river, in flood.
For five hundred years the coins, consisting of English, French, and Scottish pieces, had remained hidden below the bed of the river.
In 1540, King Henry VIII.
The church, dedicated to St. Helen, consists of nave, chancel, north aisle, south porch, and a low embattled tower at its west end.
Originally the nave was separated from the north aisle by an arcade of four semicircular Norman arches, supported by round piers with indented capitals, the two arches, nearest the east end, have been thrown into one, and a pointed arch substituted.
The chancel is Early English, but most of the church, including the tower, has been rebuilt in the Perpendicular style.
Early in the century the partition was taken down, and the seats removed to their present position.
It has been taken up, and used to block up a door on the north side of the chancel.
The tomb has been much mutilated, the heads of Sir John and one of his wives have been knocked off.
He wears his robes of office, with a collar and pendant.
Nothing worth seeing, but, for those who admire tapestry, there are two beautiful pieces.
One representing a garden scene, with a pagoda-like building, columns, flowers, fruit and [119] Cupids.
At the bottom the goddess Diana and other figures.
Another piece represents scenes in the life of King David: playing before Saul, Battle scene, Marriage with Bathsheba.
The border consists of a series of figures, chiefly ladies, with dogs, fruit, and flowers.
The Hospital was built as directed.
In 1825 the number of “poor men” was increased to sixteen, and the four rooms were added on the east side of the Hospital.
1622- [2] Rev.
John Jennings, M.A.
1657 1657- [2] Rev.
John Jackson, M.A.
[121] 1691 1692- [2] Rev.
1713- [2] Rev.
James Cheetham, D.D.
1740 1740- [2] Rev.
1746- [2] Rev.
1785 1785- Rev.
Joseph Turner, M.A.
1809 1809- Rev.
William Beer, M.A.
1821 1821- Rev.
1842- [2] Rev.
1866 1866 [2] Rev.
David Crawford Cochrane, M.A., Trinity College, Dublin, B.A., 1857, M.A., 1860.
It was the nearest farmyard to Derby.
The course of the walls was plainly indicated by the raised ground where they had stood.
IV., p. 530.
The chancel is separated from the nave by a high oak screen, glazed with large sheets of glass.
There are four five-light windows in the east end, and sides of the chapel.
A gallery was erected in 1819.
In the bell-tower are four bells bearing the bell-mark of George Oldfield with the following inscriptions:— I.
Then a greater portion of this singularly beautiful retreat was destroyed, but a grove of beech and lime trees still afford a grateful shade on a lawn where, during the summer months, “parties” are, or used to be held.
There are also some very curious cellars excavated in the red sandstone rock beneath.
The face of the rock is irregular and broken into picturesque bays, with ivy-covered fissures between them, the whole crowned with trees, brushwood, and bracken.
Here he dwelt, far from the haunts of men, in quietness and solitude.
Who he was?
It has been enlarged at various times, at present it consists of a series of four cells.
Melbourne was in very ancient times a royal manor, and is mentioned in the Domesday Survey as having a priest and a church.
Queen Margaret, wife of Henry VI., is said to have ordered it to be dismantled in 1460, and it gradually fell into decay, only a few traces of it can now be seen.
Later on a small church was erected over the spot, which was replaced by the present one, “one of the finest and most interesting Norman churches in England—and the earliest date we are inclined to assign to its commencement is circa 1090.” Originally the church consisted of nave with side aisles, central tower, with north and south transepts, three apses at the east, two western towers, with a recessed doorway between them.
The triforium on the north side has triple round arches, that on the south, of later date, has double pointed arches.
The three apses at the east end were removed probably during the reign of Henry VII.
A square end was then made, and is lit by a five-light Perpendicular window.
The apse arches in the transepts were built up and a three-light [126] Decorated window was placed in the south, and a three-light Perpendicular window was placed in the north transept.
Later alterations and additions have been made which certainly have not added to the beauty of the church, but, in spite of these, the church remains, as Dr. Cox writes, “one of the finest and most interesting Norman churches in England,” and well worth a visit.
In the year 1132 Henry I. founded the bishopric of Carlisle, and granted the church to it as one of its endowments.
The bishops built a palace at the east end of the church, where they lived occasionally.
They are open to the public on Wednesday afternoons.
About thirty-five years ago it was burnt down.
The view from the terrace is a very extensive one, over the valley of the Trent, with Derby and the high lands of the Peak district in the distance.
While all round is marl and sandstone, this hill is composed of mountain lime-stone.
Rising to a height of about one hundred and fifty feet, it is seen for miles round, and is known as “the Bulwark,” and was once an ancient camp.
Its sides have been quarried, and lime kilns at its base, when at [127] work, do not improve the air.
On its summit is a church, all that remains of a Priory of Austin Canons, built in Norman times.
There is a legend which accounts for its exposed position.
It is said that evil spirits interfered with its erection at the foot of the hill, and removed the foundations as often as they were laid.
The house is now occupied by the tenant of the farm.
The church consists of nave, chancel, north aisles, and bell turret on the west gable.
The blocked-up Norman doorway in the west end is the only relic of ancient days.
It had a very interesting old chapel, dating back to its Norman days, but in the year 1862 it was completely destroyed.
It must have been like the chapel at Little-Over.
The present church consists of nave, chancel, and tower, with a spire at the west end.
The Hall-mark shows it to be of the year 1564-5.
It is a small sculptured block of alabaster, 8¾ inches by 7 inches, and 1½ inches thick.
There is a beautifully drawn and painted copy of it in Vol.
J. Charles Cox.
On the right side is a bare-headed, full length figure of St. Peter, holding a key in his right hand, and a book in his left.
The head, dish and robes an orange brown.
The hair, rim of the dish, and edges of the robes, books, key, and cross-staff are gilded.
The lining of St. Peter’s robe is red, that of the archbishop is blue.
The head and dish occupy three quarters of the space.
The chief differences are in the figures above and below the central head and dish.
There is a cut on the forehead over the left eye.
Several suggestions have been made respecting the head.
All the examples known were made about the same date, at the end of the fourteenth or the beginning of the fifteenth century.
The ancient manor-house, and chapel, dedicated to St. Leonard, have disappeared.
A farmhouse occupies the site of the former, and only a few cedar trees and Scotch firs remain near the house to connect it with the past.
The manor was held, in the reign of Henry III.
The picturesque church, which has been carefully restored, contains specimens of all the styles of architecture from the Norman, downwards.
It consists of nave, chancel, north and south aisles, with chapels, at the east end, separated from them and the chancel by pointed arches.
The chancel arch was probably removed during the Perpendicular period.
There are three very ancient monuments of knights, which are well worth a close inspection.
The third, on the south side, opposite number two, is a very beautiful effigy in alabaster, resting on an altar tomb of the same material.
On the sides are eleven shields.
The effigy will well repay a very close inspection, it is one of the most highly finished in the county.
From its head (wearing a bassinet) down to its feet, every detail has been elaborately worked out.
The effigy of Sir Henry Every, Bart., has been transferred from the chancel and placed [132] beneath the west window of the tower.
It is of marble, and the effigy is clad in a toga and sandals of a Roman citizen, the contrast, between it and the other two ancient ones, is most striking!
From charters, quoted in Vol.
From the same source we learn that the chapel was originally dedicated to St. Thomas à Becket.
In the year 1841 it was decided, at a vestry meeting, to build a new church, the old one being so much out of repair.
About fifty yards to the north of the old one the present church was erected, consisting of nave, with aisles, chancel, vestry, and tower with spire.
Formerly a good trade was carried on in the limestone quarries, but of late they have been closed.
The “caverns” present a most picturesque appearance, and afford a grand field for the geologist in search of fossils, which abound in the carboniferous limestone there.
There was also a pottery works, with a kiln, which have also been closed and [134] pulled down.
The octagonal brick-built “round house” still remains by the side of the main street, and forms a link between the old and the new.
At the beginning of the eighteenth century the present “Abbey” was built on the site of the old priory, as it ought to have been called.
The church is said to be dedicated to St. Giles, who was also the patron saint of the priory.
At the west end is a small embattled tower, in which is a door, the only entry to the church.
The village consists only of a few houses, but it is very prettily situated.
Robert, the 2nd Earl, was created Earl of Derby in the year 1138.
This title remained in the family till the reign of Henry III., when another Robert (the 5th Earl) was deprived of his titles and estates owing to his repeated acts of rebellion.
Situated in a lovely valley, overlooking a lake, bounded by sloping ground adorned with trees, and other shrubs, the house is one of the finest of its kind among our “stately homes of England.” It is built in the style of Andrea Palladio (Classical or Renaissance) with a pediment supported by Ionic pillars, which are upheld with Doric columns.
The material is stone, or brick ornamented with stone.
The south-west front, built in the form of the letter H, is surmounted with the statue of a huge lion.
The entrance gate of the Hall is of most elaborate and beautiful specimen of iron workmanship.
By the side of the lake is a [136] beautiful little Gothic church, consisting of chancel, nave and two aisles.
From the walls of the church are hung funeral trophies of the family, like those in St. George’s Chapel, Windsor.
Abraham, 63, 119.
Agincourt, Battle of, 125.
Alison, Sir Archibald, 97.
Allen’s Close, 5.
“Anchor Church,” 123-4.
Anglo-Saxon Chronicles, 6, 9.
Anne, Queen, 126.
Anne, wife of James I., 94.
Askew Hill, 91.
Augmentation Office Book, 53.
Augustine, St., 50, 129.
Bailey, George, 128.
Barker, Robert, 37.
Bartholomew, St., 12, 14.
Bath School, 61.
Beaconsfield, Earl of, 98.
Beaumont, Sir George, 92.
Becket, St. Thomas à, 129, 133.
Bell Marks, 46.
Robert, 51, 53, 65, 85.
Birch, Walter de Gray, 13.
Birmingham School, 61.
“Black Book,” 53.
“Black Canons,” 50.
Bodleian Library, 46.
“Bonnie Prince Charlie,” 102.
Bosworth Field, 135.
Bride’s, St., Farmhouse of, 104.
[138] “Brook End,” 4.
Robert, 4, 51, 81, 123.
Thomas, 103, 121.
Burnett, Sir Hugh, 93.
Burton-on-Trent, 1, 4.
Burton, Abbot of, 129, 132.
Butler, Earl of Ormond, 93.
“Bygone Leicestershire,” 98.
Canons of, 10.
Canons’ Meadow, 4.
Canute, King, 9, 16.
Carlisle, Bishop of, 126.
Chad, St., 8.
Charles I., 5, 95, 113, 126.
Chester, West, 62.
Chesterfield, Philip, 1st Earl of, 104.
Chronicles (Rolls Series), 15.
“Churchwardens’ and Constables’ Accounts,” 30-41.
Civil War, 5, 105.
Coke, Sir Thomas, 126.
Conway, Sir W. Martin, 46.
Cox, Dr. Charles, 17, 30, 50, 117, 122, 126, 128, 129, 132.
Cromwell, Thomas, 53.
Abbey, 14, 15.
“Day Bell Houses,” 98.
Domesday Book, 3, 4, 6, 9, 92, 113, 115, 124, 132, 135.
Dove, River, 8, 114.
Edgar, the Peaceable, 9, 17.
Edward III., 103, 130.
VI., 42, 61, 62, 134.
Elizabeth, Queen, 130.
Every, Sir Edward, 110.
Henry, 130, 132.
Simon, 109, 130.
“Evidences, XVIII pieces of,” 35.
Fairfax, Sir Thomas, 95.
Family of, 129.
Finger Pillory at Ashby, 97.
Flora Lady, daughter of 1st Marquis of Hastings, 95.
“Flora of Derbyshire,” (W. H. Painter), 91.
Sir Robert, son of John, 22, 52, 121.
French Prisoners at Ashby, 97-8.
Fuller’s Church History, 53.
Gaunt, John, Duke of, 114.
Gerard, Sir Thomas, 62, 116.
Giles, St., 50, 134.
Glover, S. (History of Derbyshire), 105, 106.
Glover’s Mill, 4.
Greaves, C. S., 122.
William de, 109.
Gresham, Sir Thomas, 127, 129.
“Hall Orchard,” 86.
Hampton Court Conference, 36.
Sir George, 128.
Sir John, 4, 55, 103, 133.
Sir Henry, 4, 134.
Sir Richard, 4, 101, 103, 130.
Hastings, Francis, Marquis of, 125.
Sir William, 93.
Henry I., 50, 126.
III., 43, 130, 135.
VII., 125, 135.
VIII., 53, 114, 115, 127, 130.
Hope, W. H. St. John, 53, 81, 108.
Howe, Earl, 75.
“Hundred Rolls,” 101.
“Itineraries,” 3, 7.
James I., 36, 75, 84, 113, 125.
Jennings, John, 65.
King’s Newton, 126.
Lancaster, Thomas, Earl of, 115.
[140] Layton, Dr. Richard, 53.
Leigh, Sir Henry, 109, 130.
Dr. Thomas, 53.
Lindsey, 6, 9.
Earl of, 125.
Louis XI., King of France, 93.
Lyon, John, 61.
Margaret, wife of Henry VI., 125.
Martin, F. O., 63.
Matilda (Maud) Countess of Chester, 10, 51.
Memorial Hall, Pears, 83-5.
Mercia, 7, 8, 9, 15.
Milton, 4, 51.
“Monks’ Bridge,” 110.
Sir William, 92.
Mosley, 63, 119.
Sir Oswald, 113.
Needham, Col., 95.
Newark, 52, 102.
Newton, Alderman Hugh, 67.
Richard, 24, 127.
Nottingham, Charles, Earl of, 125.
“Old Trent,” 2.
Pack and Chapman, 47.
Sir William, 127.
Palladio Andrea, 135.
Parish Chest, 20.
Patent Rolls, 101.
Pears, Dr., 62, 71, 75, 76, 82.
Memorial Hall, 83-5.
“Pieces of Evidence XVIII.,” 35.
Pilgrim, statue of, at Ashby, 96.
Pilkington, J., 3.
Pipe, Sir Robert, 130.
Powell, James and Sons, 23, 112.
Prior, Dr., 21, 82.
“Saltpeter men,” 34.
Scott, Sir Walter, 92.
Selwyn, Bishop, 11.
“Severn Shore,” 2.
Sherwood Forest, 1.
Shirley, Sir Henry, 135.
Shrewsbury School, 61.
“Sleepy Quire,” 20.
William de, 130.
B. W., 128.
Stafford, Nigel de, 121, 132.
Stanton by Bridge, 103-4.
Starkey, Simon, 63.
Staunton, Harold, 135-6.
Stephen, King, 51.
Bridge, 52, 101-2.
Tamworth, 6, 9.
Taylor, John, & Co., 23, 45, 48-9.
Mary, 4, 54, 81.
Thorpe, John, 45.
“Topographer,” 7, 8.
“Tournament Field,” 92.
Vaughan, Dr., 76.
Ward, John, F.S.A., 74.
Waste, Joan, 63.
[142] Watson, Mr., 66, 69.
West, Chester, 62.
Whitehead, Mr., 69.
William Rufus, 50.
“Winchester, Statute of,” 34.
Windsor Castle, 93, 136.
Wright, Mrs. Margery, 97.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!)
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement.
If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession.
“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.
It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.
There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.
There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.
Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States.
If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed.
Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work.
You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.
The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work.
Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change.
If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges.
Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that: • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.
Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns.
Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.” • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark.
Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from.
If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund.
If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come.
In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.
Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.
To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States.
U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses.
Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.
