The 2024 election cycle has kicked off.
Though Election Day is over a year away, the race is well underway.
President Joe Biden announced he will seek another term, and with former President Donald Trump's hat also in the ring, a rematch of their 2020 race is a real possibility.
Though the Democratic establishment is expected to fall firmly behind Biden, the Republican side is more of a toss-up.
Trump-endorsed candidates suffered in the midterm elections, and with his legal troubles mounting, the GOP may consider other options.
Polls still show Trump with a strong lead however, and many of those trying to unseat him have floundered including Florida Gov.
DeSantis who generated early buzz has suffered in the polls, struggling to translate popularity in Florida to popularity at the national level, and recently firing much of his campaign staff in a major shake-up.
Here are the latest developments on the path to the 2024 election:
And here are the candidates who have announced their intention to run for president in the 2024 election:
Political party: Democrat
Family: Biden has spoken candidly about grief throughout his political career.
His two young sons, Beau and Hunter, were injured in the crash but survived.
In 2015, Biden lost Beau to brain cancer and has made it a major political goal to champion cancer research.
He remarried in 1977, tying the knot with now-First Lady Jill Biden.
The two share a daughter, Ashley, and a large clan of grandchildren.
Biden's son Hunter has been the subject of scandal in recent years and has written about his struggles with drug addiction.
The GOP-led House has seized on Hunter's business dealings, hosting hearings to investigate his finances and the potential influence he has on his father.
Previous political experience: Joe Biden is a veteran of the Senate.
First elected in 1972, he served as a senator from Delaware for 36 years before being elected as vice president on the Obama ticket in 2008.
After serving two terms as vice president, Biden took a brief hiatus from government work before returning to run, and win, in 2020.
His views: Biden's campaign is focused on the "battle for the soul of America," doubling down on the central message of his campaign four years ago.
He said the question facing the nation is "whether, in the years ahead, we have more freedom or less freedom, more rights or fewer."
Political party: Democratic
Family: Williamson was married once in the late 1970s to a Houston businessman whom she has not named.
She has one daughter, India Emmanuelle, whose father has not been publicly identified.
Previous political experience: Williamson is a self-help author and spiritual leader who ran unsuccessfully for president in 2020.
Then she was largely drowned out by a crowded Democratic field, breaking through for a rare viral moment, but eventually written off as a non-traditional candidate whose views involved centering the "politics of love" and rejecting a “dark psychic force of collectivized hatred.”
Her views: Williamson supports abortion rights, a single-payer health care system and reparations for descendants of formerly enslaved Americans.
She has suggested creating a U.S. Department of Children and Youth to increase child advocacy, and a U.S. Department of Peace.
He is also a faith leader, having co-founded and serving as the pastor at Create Church in Richardson, Texas.
He says he wants to stand out in a crowded field by prioritizing unity, and leaning on his faith and business experience.
Political party: Republican
He remarried in 2016, tying the knot with current wife Kathryn.
He was elected governor of North Dakota in 2016 and reelected in 2020.
He is a vocal supporter of the oil industry, and the U.S. role in exporting it to other nations, and has said he favors smaller government and lower taxes.
Family: Christie met wife Mary Pat at the University of Delaware and the two wed in 1986.
They share four children: Andrew, Sarah, Patrick and Bridget.
Previous political experience: Christie was appointed U.S. Attorney for the District of New Jersey in 2002 and served for six years.
He was elected governor of New Jersey in 2010 and occupied the office until 2018.
Christie has been a prominent figure in the GOP since he launched his first presidential campaign in 2012.
He ran again unsuccessfully in 2016 and, despite prior criticism, ultimately endorsed Trump and later joined his campaign.
His views: Christie is anti-abortion, but does support some exceptions in the case of incest, rape, and danger to the mother.
He is not for a federal ban, instead believing the issue should be left to the states.
He has advocated for a more secure border to stem the flow of fentanyl into the country and is in support of U.S. aid for Ukraine.
Political party: Republican
Family: The governor wed former television host Casey DeSantis in 2009 and the couple share two daughters Madison and Mamie and one son Mason.
Previous political experience: DeSantis serves as the 46th governor of Florida.
His national profile grew during the pandemic when he spoke out publicly against mask mandates and pushed to keep many Florida businesses and schools open.
Since then, he has captured national attention with controversial legislative measures on education and immigration.
While in law school, DeSantis joined the U.S. Navy as a JAG officer, later deploying to Iraq for active duty.
Prior to his run for governor, he served in the House of Representatives as a congressman for Florida's 6th district for three terms from 2013 to 2018.
He is widely viewed as Trump’s biggest threat in the Republican primary.
Similar in politics but different in demeanor, DeSantis represents a younger, some say more predictable, alternative to the former president.
His views: DeSantis is campaigning on a hard-right agenda to make America look more like Florida.
He is in favor of "defending parental rights and eliminating CRT," and is anti-abortion and pro-Second Amendment.
Political party: Republican
Family: Elder has no children and has been married once.
Previous political experience: Elder is a lawyer and conservative talk show host who mounted a campaign against California governor Gavin Newsom in 2021's recall election.
Though he lost, Elder received the highest number of votes of any candidate besides Newsom.
We can enter a new American Golden Age, but we must choose a leader who can bring us there.
His views: Elder backs school choice, including vouchers and charter schools.
His platform also includes a vow to be tough on crime, to secure the border, and to "contain China" by asserting military dominance in the South China Sea and minimizing reliance on the country's manufacturing.
Political party: Republican
Family: Haley is one of four children born to Indian-American parents in Bamberg, South Carolina - a town she has described as divided by race.
Previous political experience: Haley started her political career in the South Carolina state legislature where she served for 6 years before mounting a successful campaign for the governor's office in 2010.
She won reelection in 2014 and has bragged that she has "never lost a race."
In 2016, former President Trump nominated Haley to be U.S.
Ambassador to the United Nations, a position she held for a year before unexpectedly stepping down in 2018.
Haley has played up her role as a female candidate in what is expected to be a largely male primary field.
Her views: Haley is anti-abortion and pro-Israel.
She supports cracking down on illegal immigration and "getting tough" on China and Russia.
She has supported Trump in the past but also criticized him after the Jan. 6, 2021, Capitol attack.
Political party: Republican
The two first met in 2009.
Previous political experience: A former CIA officer, Hurd served three terms in Congress representing Texas in the House after first being elected in 2014.
His views: Hurd stands out from an increasingly crowded GOP field as a rare vocal critic of Trump.
He joins the likes of Chris Christie and Asa Hutchinson in publicly disavowing the former president and in his campaign launch video listed illegal immigration, inflation, crime, and homelessness as legislative priorities.
Political party: Republican
Family: Hutchinson has been married to wife Susan since 1973.
The two share four children and seven grandchildren.
Previous political experience: Hutchinson has had a long career in Republican politics.
He was first elected to the U.S. House of Representatives to serve Arkansas' 3rd district in 1997; he served until 2001 when he was appointed DEA administrator and later undersecretary for the Department of Homeland Security for the George W. Bush administration.
While in the House, Hutchinson served as impeachment manager in the trial of former president (and fellow Arkansas native) Bill Clinton.
After leaving Washington he was elected 46th Governor of Arkansas.
He served for two terms, from 2015 to 2023.
His views: He supports lower taxes, a strong national defense, and opposes abortion.
Family: Johnson tied the knot with wife Diane in 2008, and the pair share three sons.
Previous political experience: A businessman trying his hand at politics, Johnson built his wealth with the launch of Perry Johnson Registrars Inc., a company that ensures auto, aerospace and other businesses are complying with industrial standards.
In 2022, he threw his hat in the ring for the GOP nomination for Michigan governor before being disqualified because of invalid signatures.
His views: Johnson told a group of Iowa voters in July that he was "pro-life, pro-Second Amendment, anti-woke and anti-China," − and "if you don't like it, well, tough."
His campaign's signature "2 cents" proposes cutting 2 cents off every dollar of federal discretionary spending.
Family: Pence wed wife Karen in 1985 and the two share three children: Michael, Charlotte, and Audrey.
Previous political experience: Pence entered politics in 2000 when he won his local congressional seat.
He went on to serve six terms in the House of Representatives before being sworn in as governor of Indiana in 2013.
In 2016, Donald Trump chose Pence as his running mate, and he served one term as Vice President.
The role thrust him into a precarious situation in 2021 when Trump sought to pressure him to throw out some of Biden's electoral votes to overturn the election.
Pence ultimately defied Trump and certified the results, infuriating MAGA voters and Trump himself.
His candidacy will likely involve a difficult tightrope walk as he attempts to distance himself from the former president without alienating the base.
His views: Pence is a vocal opponent of abortion, and of what he sees as the nation's long-term debt problem.
He favors cuts in government spending and lower taxes, and while he often touts his time as vice president and speaks well of the policies that came out of the Trump White House, he has begun to distance himself from his former running mate in terms of tone.
He has also criticized Trump's actions during the Jan. 6, 2021 riot at the U.S. Capitol.
Political party: Republican
The pair have two sons together.
He is the author of three books, including "Woke Inc.: Inside Corporate America's Social Justice Scam," which explores how American politics and capitalism have become increasingly intertwined.
His views: He has peddled ideas such as ending affirmative action and eliminating the Department of Education.
His elevator pitch: He'll go farther than Trump ever did or could today.
Political party: Republican
Family: Scott is unmarried, with no children.
He was raised by a single mother in North Charleston and has one brother.
Previous political experience: Scott first entered politics in 1995 during a special election for City Council in Charleston.
His profile grew nationally when he suggested posting the 10 Commandments outside the council building, a proposal that was denied.
Scott served for two years in the state legislature before being elected in 2010 to the House of Representatives for South Carolina's 1st district.
He served one term before being appointed to the Senate by then-governor Nikki Haley and becoming the first Black U.S. senator from the state.
Scott is pitching himself as a more hopeful alternative to Trump, drawing on Reagan-era ideals and centering a tone of optimism.
His views: Scott joined the Senate in 2013.
He’s anti-abortion and pro-Second Amendment.
He says on his website that his “signature legislation,” Opportunity Zones, put $75 billion into “distressed communities” across the country.
Political party: Republican
Family: Trump is the son of real estate magnate Fred Trump.
Born and bred in New York, he first made his name developing skyscrapers and casinos.
Trump first married in 1977, wedding Czech-born model Ivana.
The two were married for 13 years and share three children: Ivanka, Donald Jr. and Eric.
In 1993 Trump married actress and model Marla Maples.
The two had one daughter: Tiffany.
Following his divorce from Maples, Trump tied the knot for a final time with model Melania, who is mother to his youngest child, Barron.
Trump's family was uncharacteristically involved in his presidency.
Ivanka and her husband Jared Kushner played prominent roles in the administration, and both Don Jr. and Eric were often cited as close advisors.
Prior to 2016, he dabbled in politics, often sounding off on controversial issues like the birther movement meant to cast doubt on Barack Obama's citizenship and the guiltiness of the now-exonerated Central Park Five.
However, he was still primarily known for real estate and his forays into reality television, famously starring in "The Apprentice."
In 2016, Trump shocked pollsters by securing victory over Hillary Clinton in the presidential race.
He served a full four-year term and was defeated by Biden in his reelection bid.
His views: The former president has centered much of his campaign on his purported “political persecution” by Democrats.
He supports securing America’s borders, “reclaiming free speech,” and “dismantling the Deep State,” according to his campaign website.
He has said he would consider pardoning participants in the Jan. 6, 2021, Capitol riot, which was inspired by his false claims of election fraud.
Family: Kennedy bears a powerful last name in Democratic politics.
He is the son of Robert F. Kennedy, the former attorney general who was assassinated during a 1968 presidential run, and the nephew of former president John F. Kennedy.
Though he originally launched his campaign as a Democrat, Kennedy is now running on an Independent ticket.
Kennedy has been married three times and has six children.
He wed current wife Cheryl Hines in 2014.
Hines is a television star best known for her role on "Curb Your Enthusiasm."
Previous political experience: Kennedy is an environmental lawyer known for trumpeting a debunked theory that vaccines can be linked to autism.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, Kennedy opposed vaccine mandates, calling them an infringement on individual liberty and at times used the Holocaust as a historical comparison.
In 2017, former President Trump invited Kennedy to head up a presidential commission on vaccine safety.
His views: He is campaigning on a platform of fighting for the "liberties guaranteed by the Constitution," according to his campaign website.
Political Party: Green Party
Though West originally announced his candidacy under the People's Party, he later officially filed as a Green Party candidate.
Family: West has been married five times and has two children.
He has taught at a number of Ivy League institutions and works now as a professor of philosophy at Union Theological Seminary.
As a third-party candidate, West alleged "neither political party wants to tell the truth" on various issues.
His bid with the People's Party represents the first independent ticket to enter the race thus far.
His views: West is a proponent of Medicare for All, and removing oil and gas subsidies as well as drilling on public lands.
Long a vocal opponent of militarism, West's campaign website lists "end the wars" as a key priority which would include disbanding NATO and banning nuclear weapons across the globe.
Political party: Republican
Family: Suarez is the son of another prominent Florida politician: Xavier L. Suarez, who was Miami's first Cuban-born mayor.
He is married to Gloria Fonts Suarez, and the two share one son and one daughter.
Previous political experience: Suarez serves as the 43rd mayor of Miami, a seat he has occupied since 2017.
Views: Suarez has said he did not support Trump in either 2016 or 2020, instead using his ballot to write in the names of Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, and Former Vice President Mike Pence respectively.
As mayor, Suarez has championed growing Miami's tech economy, and he has also backed low taxes and increased police spending.
This story will be updated as additional candidates officially enter the race.
But a senior U.S. official said late Monday that Iran certainly is complicit in funding Hamas, the Palestinian Islamist movement, providing weapons to it and training its paramilitary forces.
Analysts say such complicity could have a significant impact on a rapidly intensifying crisis that until now has been limited to battles between Israeli and Hamas forces.
The Biden administration said Monday that at least 11 Americans have been killed in the terrorist attacks.
And the White House confirmed it believes at least some Americans are among the hostages Hamas operatives abducted and brought back with them to Gaza.
The militant Islamic group is one of two major political parties that rules over at least 2 million Palestinians in Gaza.
The U.S., European Union and dozens of nations have designated Hamas a terrorist organization for its armed resistance to Israel, but it pales in comparison to Iran and another of Tehran’s proxies, Hezbollah, when it comes to terrorist reach and capability.
Here’s what you need to know about Iran, Hamas, and the attacks in Israel that some experts are saying is the country's 9/11.
More:Israel responds to barrage of rockets sent by Hamas militants with air strikes
The Biden administration has been careful in saying it has no evidence of a “direct” Iranian role in the attacks.
On Monday morning, principal deputy national security adviser Jon Finer said the Biden administration is investigating, but it lacks “direct information” that Tehran was behind it.
The Journal cited senior members of Hamas and Hezbollah, another Iran-backed militant group.
“So taking a step back, I think what we can be quite clear about is that Iran is broadly complicit in these attacks, for having supported Hamas going back decades, for having provided financial support, for having provided training, for having provided weapons to Hamas,” Finer said.
“What we don't have is direct information that shows Iranian involvement in ordering or planning the attacks that took place over the last couple of days.”
We've obviously seen it.
The Israeli military also has said there is no concrete evidence of Iranian involvement in the Hamas attack from Gaza.
For its part, Iran has denied any role in the attack.
Tehran’s mission to the United Nations said Sunday that Iran was not involved in one of the bloodiest attacks in Israel's history, when Islamist group Hamas killed hundreds of Israelis and abducted perhaps 100 more.
"The resolute measures taken by Palestine constitute a wholly legitimate defense against seven decades of oppressive occupation and heinous crimes committed by the illegitimate Zionist regime," Iran's U.N. mission said in statement, according to a Reuters report.
For all their denials about finding a direct connection, U.S. officials have been quick to say that Iran has a history of supporting these kinds of attacks, and Hamas in particular.
White House spokesman John Kirby said Monday night that there’s “no question there's a degree of complicity here.”
"So absolutely, there's a degree of complicity here, writ large."
The U.S. would continue “looking through the information streams” to find any connections, and hard evidence that Iran was directly involved planning, launching or carrying out the sets of complex attacks Hamas pulled off over the weekend, Kirby said.
The Wall Street Journal report raised alarms in Washington, in part because of the specificity of the allegations.
Sen. Chris Coons, D-Del., a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, was one of several lawmakers briefed on the Hamas attacks by the Biden administration.
In a CNN interview, Coons said Iran has a history of supporting others in their acts of war and terrorism.
And he said that in this case, it is especially under suspicion because Hamas publicly thanked Tehran “for their funding, their training, their contributions for this horrific attack on Israeli civilians.”
Iran, Coons said, is Russia’s partner in its brutal war in Ukraine, providing drones that are carrying out deadly attacks on civilians.
And Iran has sent its Revolutionary Guard fighters into Syria, where they can threaten Israel from the northeast, he said.
“And it is Iran that has funded and trained Hamas that has carried out this attack from Gaza,” Coons said.
As President Biden and his top aides have stressed repeatedly, the U.S. is a staunch ally, and the two nations share many security goals and strategies in the Middle East and beyond.
As such, they are extremely close when it comes to sharing even the most sensitive and timely intelligence.
Biden "has also spoken with many of our allies and partners, including the leaders of France, Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom, just this afternoon to help coordinate our efforts," Kirby told reporters Monday night.
According to a White House statement, Biden "directed his team to follow up on coordination with Israel on all aspects of the crisis and to continue their work with regional partners to warn anyone who might seek to take advantage in this situation."
It's also clear that various U.S. intelligence agencies, especially the CIA and the National Security Agency, have devoted considerable resources to understanding the intentions of Iran's civilian government leadership and the mullahs, or religious clerics who wield significant power within the country.
At a security conference this summer, CIA Director Williams Burns acknowledged Iran is meddling in the Ukraine war by sending weapons and other help to its ally Russia.
And more broadly, Burns said, "in terms of our commentary on intelligence we collect about what’s going on inside the Iranian leadership."
And each year, Burns and other U.S. intelligence agency leaders provide a worldwide threat assessment to Congress and say they are intensively investigating Iran’s connections to a wide array of terrorist groups.
And in the meantime, he said, authorities need to be very careful about pointing fingers – especially when it comes to an adversary as capable as Iran.
On Monday, there was widespread public and media speculation that Iran was behind the attacks.
One national security reporter posted on X, formerly Twitter, that “Iran's goal is to draw the US into a broader conflict: senior intelligence source tells me.”
But some experts said that’s not Iran’s modus operandi.
“Sorry, not believable,” tweeted Joel Rayburn, a former career Army officer and Trump administration State Department and White House National Security Council official focusing on Iran and the Middle East.
“At no time in his 34-year rule has Ali Khamenei wanted a “broader conflict” with the United States,” Rayburn said of the supreme leader of Iran.
At his briefing Monday night, White House spokesman Kirby was asked specifically whether the U.S. would intervene militarily in the conflict, especially if Iran or Hezbollah are found to be responsible – or if they join to attack Israel.
“There's no intention to put U.S. boots on the ground,” Kirby said.
But he added that the Biden administration already has ramped up its presence in the region, including sending the massive Gerald R. Ford carrier strike group into the eastern Mediterranean as a message to Iran and Hezbollah.
“President Biden will always make sure that we are protecting and defending our national security interests wherever those interests are, including particularly in that part of the world,” Kirby said.
“And I think I'll leave it at that.”
Related:Israel seeks Iron Dome missiles, U.S. guided weapons after Hamas attack
USA TODAY will be providing live coverage beginning at 1 p.m.
You can watch at the video at the top of the page or on USA TODAY's YouTube channel.
More than 1,600 Israelis and Palestinians have died since the conflict began, including at least 11 Americans, and thousands more injured.
Hamas has claimed to have taken more than 130 hostages, and Israel has ordered a siege on Gaza pledging to cut electricity, food and fuel to the impoverished home of more than 2 million Palestinians.
Biden has also condemned the Hamas attacks in an address, saying the U.S. stands with Israel, and his administration's support for Israel's security is "rock solid and unwavering."
Live updates:Israel regains control over Gaza Strip border; rocket attacks intensify
Israel intensified its assault on Gaza Tuesday, stepping up rocket attacks and tightening a blockade on food and fuel as the war sprawled into a fourth day.
The Israel Defense Forces said it regained control over the border with Gaza Strip early Tuesday, three days after Hamas militants crashed through the barrier and launched an invasion that saw over 1,000 Israelis killed or kidnapped.
At least 11 Americans are among the dead, U.S. officials said.
Hundreds more have been killed in Israeli strikes in Gaza, Hamas health officials said.
French President Emmanuel Macron, supporting statements from U.S. officials, said his country has no evidence that Iran was directly involved in Hamas’ attack.
Involvement of Iran, which has denied playing any role in the war, could threaten to expand the war.
∎ President Joe Biden will speak Tuesday in a display of U.S. support for Israel.
The address comes three days after Biden gave brief remarks declaring "the United States stands with the State of Israel"
∎ Russian President Vladimir Putin on Tuesday blamed failed U.S. foreign policy for the war.
∎ The United Nations health agency says the medical supplies pre-positioned in seven Gaza hospitals have already been used up.
Israeli retaliation:Could be felt 'for generations'; FBI searching for Americans impacted by attack
Iran, however, also has denied providing drones to Russia for its invasion of Ukraine despite extensive evidence that the armed drones were Iranian-built.
“When injustice and crime exacerbate, when savagery reaches its height one should wait for a storm,” Khamenei said.
The IDF said he funneled money for financing and directing terrorism inside and outside Gaza.
He also belonged to the organization's senior forum and was involved in the organization's decision-making and planning of terrorists attacks, the IDF said.
The International Committee of the Red Cross said it was attempting to gain access to people being held on both sides to provide medical care and learn news of their fate for their loved ones.
Health care workers must be protected to ensure people needing help can receive treatment, he said.
"If the situation continues to escalate, then civilians on both sides will suffer immensely."
But a senior U.S. official said Monday night that Iran certainly is complicit in funding Hamas, the Palestinian Islamist movement, providing weapons to it and training its paramilitary forces.
Analysts say it could have a significant impact on a rapidly intensifying crisis that until now has been limited to battles between Israeli and Hamas forces.
− Josh Meyer
He spent summers in Maine, loved baseball and hiking and felt a sense of duty as a soldier in the Israeli Defense Forces.
Read more here.
− Alexandra Rivera, Rockland/Westchester Journal News
More than 30 University of Florida students were sent to a local hospital late Monday after a vigil for victims in Israel erupted in chaos with students trampling over others.
Earlier accounts of the incident included some fearing they heard gunshots, though no shots were fired.
It is believed that the person's bag or items dropped to create a loud noise.
The Israeli military estimated 1,000 Hamas fighters crashed across the Israeli border Saturday, igniting a rampage that included shooting hundreds of civilians and kidnapping people who were transported back to Gaza.
Hamas, the largest Palestinian militant group, also has fired rockets from Gaza that have riddled Israeli cities.
Israeli security services routinely raid the compound.
“Today the people are regaining their revolution.”
But diplomatic connections developing between Israel and some Arab nations have been a concern to Hamas and to Iran.
The war could compel those Arab nations to choose a side.
Ripples of fears and countless prayers for an end to the violence traveled through Jewish, Israeli and Palestinian-linked communities in the United States this week.
As news of the tragedy spread, many Jewish and Israeli communities in the United States shifted from celebrating to holding vigils and protests.
“There’s an unspoken deep bond and connection that no matter where we are, we have this shared pain,” said Melissa Chapman, chief executive officer of the Jewish Community Center in Berkeley, California.
Read more here.
Gaza, or the Gaza Strip, is a densely populated Palestinian exclave of about 2.3 million people.
The narrow strip of land − less than 150 square miles, it is less than half the size of New York City − is about 25 miles long and six miles wide.
Gaza shares a northern and eastern border with Israel, a southwestern border with Egypt and its western border is on the Mediterranean Sea.
The Palestinian Authority, controlled by the rival Fatah movement, administers semi-autonomous areas of the Israeli-occupied West Bank.
Hamas was founded in 1987 during the first Palestinian uprising against Israeli occupation of Gaza and the West Bank.
The group’s charter calls for establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel.
The militant organization is committed to the destruction of Israel and has been designated a terrorist group by the U.S., the EU and various nations.
The political wing of Hamas has controlled Gaza since winning elections in 2007.
It was founded by a Palestinian activist connected to the Muslim Brotherhood, a transnational Islamist organization with ties to Egypt.
The dispute is rooted in pre-biblical times.
Though its borders have shifted over the years, Palestinian territories used to be what is now Israel, Gaza and the West Bank.
Both Israeli Jews’ and Palestinian Arabs’ history, culture and identity are linked to the Palestinian territories.
As the number of Jewish immigrants increased, many Palestinians were displaced.
They began pushing back and violence resulted.
In 1948, the Jewish People's Council met in Tel Aviv and established the State of Israel.
The U.S. officially recognized the new nation later that day; the USSR acknowledges it three days later.
Read more here.
Former baseball star Steve Garvey announced Tuesday that he is entering the race for a U.S. Senate seat in California, hoping to succeed Sen. Dianne Feinstein, who died last month.
The 74-year-old Garvey is a Republican.
Butler has not said if she is going to run for the full six-year term.
No Republican has won a U.S. Senate seat via election in California since 1988.
Garvey says he is focusing his campaign on quality-of-life issues, public safety, and education.
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
"It’s going to be a common sense campaign."
Garvey played 19 seasons in the major leagues with the Los Angeles Dodgers from 1969 to 1982 and for the San Diego Padres from 1983 to 1987.
He was a 10-time All-Star, won four Gold Gloves at first base, and was the National League MVP in 1974.
Jones' weekly appearance on 105.3 The FAN comes days after the Cowboys were embarrassed on national television on "Sunday Night Football" by the San Francisco 49ers in a 42-10 rout.
Prescott threw for 153 yards, was intercepted three times and sacked three times against the 49ers.
And San Francisco had a very good outing.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
NEVER MISS A SNAP:Sign up to get the latest NFL news and features sent to your inbox
"No," Jones said.
"In any way, no."
The Cowboys' offense ranked third in total yards and fourth in scoring offense last season.
Through five games in 2023, Dallas is 18th in total yards and eighth in scoring offense, averaging 26.8 points a game.
Dallas (3-2) faces the Los Angeles Chargers on "Monday Night Football."
The arrest of three Florida teenagers last week may have prevented an attack on a high school where the suspects had identified potential targets and acquired aerial photos of the campus to map out their plot, authorities said.
Text messages that the boys exchanged revealed the identities of other students who the teenagers planned to target in their attack at Creekside High School in the Jacksonville suburb of St. Johns, according to the St. Johns County Sheriff's Office.
Deputies reportedly discovered that the texts included the encircled photographs of the intended targets, as well as their class schedules and home addresses.
The trio also sent one another aerial photographs of the high school, according arrest reports provided Tuesday to USA TODAY.
All three of the students — two 14-year-old boys and a 15-year-old boy — were arrested Thursday and each were charged with two felony counts related to accusations regarding their written threats and also that they had unlawfully used communications devices.
USA TODAY does not identify juveniles charged with crimes.
"I am proud of the youth services deputies assigned to this investigation, who acted quickly on the information that was provided and prevented a potential tragedy."
Michigan:Search for nonverbal, missing 3-year-old boy enters day 2
The group created a logo that they placed on a patch as an identifying insignia and distributed applications to recruit other members into their organization, arrest reports state.
Not long after, the teens began formulating a plan to attack the school in multiple conversations in a group text messaging chat, where they also discussed the potential use of weapons, according to the arrest reports.
One conversation between the charged trio and another unnamed individual contained both a "hit list" of students they wanted to hurt and a "lethal hit list" of students they wanted to kill, according to the reports.
One of the charged students was accused of sending a text in the chat saying "I'm nothing without a weapon."
In another exchange, one of the students said "I'm bringing my AK-47 tomorrow," prompting one of the accused to respond: "me too."
The students made it clear in the exchanges that the plan "was not a joke," which prompted the unnamed member of the group chat to become "concerned and fearful enough" to report it to school officials, deputies wrote in the reports.
The investigation remains ongoing.
The St. Johns County School District did not immediately respond Tuesday morning to USA Today's request for comment.
Vermont:1 dead, 1 injured after Amtrak collides with SUV
The potentially foiled plot comes as school shootings rise nationally and as gun violence rages in the Jacksonville area, where shootings have recently left 20 people injured and seven dead in a five-day period.
In late August, a 21-year-old man entered a Jacksonville Dollar General wielding a rifle emblazoned with a swastika, where he fatally shot three Black people in a racist attack before turning the gun on himself.
Just last week, two people opened fire during a dispute between two groups at Morgan State University homecoming events in Baltimore, Maryland, wounding five people who authorities do not believe were the intended targets of the shooters.
Unfolding on a university campus, the shooting was at the time the latest to take place in an academic setting.
Shootings with casualties at public and private elementary schools more than doubled in the 2021-22 academic year, which marked the second year in a row that school shootings in the U.S. hit a record high.
Of the 188 shootings at American elementary schools, 57 included fatalities, according to the most recent federal data.
Last year’s figure of 93 school shootings was the highest in two decades.
Reach him at elagatta@gannett.com
WASHINGTON — From fiery debates over controversial issues to promises for swing state voters, high-profile factors typically sway the results of a presidential election.
But sometimes, these factors come in the form of a state-level race a year out from Election Day.
The judge they elect could shape the 2024 presidential election.
In recent years, lawsuits over voting issues and allegations of election fraud have rocked Pennsylvania.
After the 2020 election, former President Donald Trump’s campaign filed a lawsuit alleging Philadelphia officials violated state law while ballots were being tallied, which the Pennsylvania Supreme Court dismissed.
Contentious debates around Act 77, Pennsylvania’s mail-in-voting law, have also landed at the state’s Supreme Court.
But if arguments over ballots, polling places and other voting questions emerge in the 2024 presidential election, whoever is elected to the state's Supreme Court this year could be crucial as these fights play out in Pennsylvania.
Here's how this state-level race could have major implications for the 2024 race for the White House.
He pointed to the high court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade last year, ending the constitutional right for women to have an abortion, as well as rulings on the First Amendment and LGBTQ rights.
If Trump loses the 2024 race, the former president may bring allegations of election fraud to the Pennsylvania court.
She pointed to her time as a federal prosecutor representing victims of crime.
And, though she hasn’t ruled on election litigation, she has served as a member of the board of elections in Montgomery County.
She has previously criticized Act 77, Pennsylvania's mail-in voting law.
Earlier this year, she told a Republican forum that "Not much I can say, but I can tell you that Act 77 has been very bad for our Commonwealth," the Associated Press reported.
However, she argued that there was inconsistency with the Pennsylvania State Supreme Court's rulings on undated and incorrectly dated ballots.
Pennsylvania is known to be a swing state in presidential elections, but the state’s Supreme Court race could also be a close battle as voters weigh both candidates.
He “will preserve the right of everybody to vote, and the right of everybody to have unfettered access to vote and not have to face obstacles.”
“I think it's important to everyone, no matter which side of the aisle you're on as a candidate, voting integrity is huge, and it's an important issue,” Nestor said.
But the race could chip away at the court's Democratic majority, especially if justices split on issues in the future.
J.J. Abbott, executive director of Commonwealth Communications, who was a press secretary to former Pennsylvania Democratic Governor Tom Wolf, said that some cases are nuanced, and Democrats could take opposing viewpoints.
In cases where the courts have deadlocked, the results of this election could have big implications.
He added that if the 2023 race did result in a narrower 4-3 Democratic majority, future elections could flip the majority on the court, resulting in potential challenges to Act 77.
More than 1,600 people have died, including at least 11 Americans, and fighting continues after the Palestinian militant groups Hamas and Islamic Jihad launched thousands of rockets from Gaza against Israeli cities and sent an estimated 1,000 gunmen across Israel's border to attack and kidnap civilians Saturday.
The coordinated assault, the deadliest attack on Israel in decades, caught the nation and the world by surprise.
Israeli Defense Forces responded with airstrikes and rocket attacks against cities inside the Gaza Strip.
At least 900 Israelis have died, Israeli media reported.
"Never before have so many Israelis been killed by one single thing, let alone enemy activity in one day," he said.
Unable to view our graphics?
Click here to see them.
Dozens of Israelis, and an unknown number of Americans, were taken hostage and are being held in locations across Gaza, USA TODAY reported.
Israel formally declared war Sunday and said it would use “significant military steps” to retaliate.
U.S. officials expect Israel will launch a ground incursion into Gaza soon, The Washington Post reported.
Palestinian authorities said more than 680 have been killed by Israeli counterattacks in Gaza.
Each side reported thousands of wounded.
More than 123,000 people in Gaza have been removed from their homes, according to the United Nations.
President Joe Biden condemned the attack Saturday and reaffirmed American support for Israel.
The Pentagon is sending military aid, including the USS Gerald Ford Strike Group, to the eastern Mediterranean, Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin said in a statement.
Hamas said it attacked Israel in response to mounting Palestinian suffering under Israeli occupation and blockade of Gaza, The Associated Press reported.
The 16-year blockade by Israel and Egypt has decimated Gaza's economy, according to the Guardian.
Hamas is a militant Islamic group in the Gaza Strip.
It's one of two major political parties and rules over at least 2 million Palestinians.
The U.S., EU and dozens of nations have designated Hamas a terrorist organization for its armed resistance to Israel.
Hamas and Israel have clashed many times.
Islamic Jihad is the second-largest militant group in the Gaza Strip, according the National Counterterrorism Center in Washington.
It is a Sunni Islamist militant group that wants an Islamist Palestinian state that is committed to the destruction of Israel, the center says.
The attack began with thousands of rockets fired from inside the Gaza Strip into Israel early Saturday.
About an hour later, Hamas gunmen crossed the Israeli border at different locations and began attacking residential areas and military bases.
It took place on Simchat Torah, a holiday near the end of the weeklong Jewish festival known as Sukkot, or the Feast of Tabernacles.
It also fell on the 50th anniversary of the 1973 Yom Kippur War, in which Egypt and Syria attacked Israel on Yom Kippur, the holiest day of the Jewish year.
An unknown number were taken hostage.
Thousands attended the event, including some American and British nationals.
The attack began with rockets fired from Gaza.
Then armed militants arrived in vans, shooting people as they tried to flee.
The death toll could rise as teams clear the area, The Associated Press reported.
Times are local and approximate
6:30 a.m.: Hamas launches Operation Al-Aqsa Flood against Israel, firing thousands of rockets from inside the Gaza Strip into Israeli cities, including Tel Aviv and Jerusalem.
Hamas says it has fired more than 5,000 rockets.
The Israeli military says 2,500 rockets were fired.
7 a.m.: Hamas militants kill at least 260 people at an open-air music festival in a field about 3 miles from the Gaza border.
An unknown number of hostages are seized.
7:40 a.m.: Israeli Defense Forces say Hamas fighters have crossed into southern Israel from Gaza.
8:15 a.m.: Air-raid sirens sound in Jerusalem.
8:25 a.m.: Israeli officials announce Hamas is taking hostages in southern Israel.
10:30 a.m.: Israel begins airstrikes inside Gaza.
11:35 a.m.: Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu addresses Israel, says nation is at war.
1:45 p.m. Israel says it has hit 21 Hamas military buildings.
6:08 p.m.: President Joe Biden speaks with Netanyahu, assures him of U.S. support.
10:16 p.m.: Netanyahu makes another address, vows vengeance against Hamas.
2:19 a.m. On social media site X, formerly Twitter, Netanyahu says Israel has destroyed the sites used to launch the rocket attacks.
The mortars damaged the roof and shrapnel hit the hall's entrance, the ministry said.
The crossing has been closed amid the fighting.
Israel’s defense minister says electricity, food, water and fuel to Gaza will be halted as part of a “complete siege” of the nation.
Israel launches strikes inside Gaza on Monday morning.
Several mosques and a marketplace are hit and an unknown number of people are injured.
The Israeli military says it's conducting one of the largest airstrikes ever against Hamas in Gaza and says more than 1,200 targets were hit.
Hamas seized dozens of people as hostages from various locations during its attack and have detained them in Gaza.
The exact number isn’t known, but the hostages, from Israel and other countries, include “civilians, children and grandmothers,” an IDF spokesperson told CNN.
A Hamas spokesperson said Monday the group will kill one civilian hostage each time Israel targets civilians in Gaza without warning.
A Hamas official said Saturday that the hostages could be freed in exchange for Palestinian terrorists serving prison sentences in Israel.
The U.S. is sending the USS Gerald Ford Strike Group to the eastern Mediterranean, Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin said in a statement Sunday.
Those Navy ships include:
The U.S. is also preparing to add air power, including F-35, F-15, F-16, and A-10 fighters, to Air Force squadrons in the region.
U.S. airlines have suspended flights to and from Tel Aviv.
American, Delta and United have issued travel waivers for rebooking.
SOURCE USA TODAY Network reporting and research; Associated Press; Council on Foreign Relations
The chicken may be getting an upgrade.
In a scientific first, U.K. researchers have used gene editing technology to create poultry that's partially resistant to bird flu infection, according to a study published Tuesday in Nature Communications.
It’s no bionic chicken.
But study authors say growing disease-resistant chickens in the lab is an important first step to giving farmers a tool to combat bird flu, which wiped out tens of millions of chickens amid an H5N1 outbreak over the past two years
Though experts say gene editing in poultry could have many benefits, they also warn that more research must be done to prevent possible unintended consequences.
But Peng is aware of the consequences of pushing forward too quickly.
Scientists in the study made the genetic changes to germ cells and injected the gene-edited cells into chicken eggs.
The gene they edited, called ANP32A, is a protein that supports the influenza virus once it invades the host cell, study author Wendy Barclay said at a media briefing last week.
Scientists aimed to prevent the virus from using this gene to replicate.
“This strategy could be used not just for H5N1 (bird flu virus) but for any of the strains because it’s fundamental to the way the virus works,” she said.
The germinated eggs grew into adult chickens, which scientists bred with others to generate more gene-edited chickens while monitoring the flock’s growth, behavior and health.
Once they determined the edited gene did not hurt the chickens’ growth, they sent the flightless birds to a containment facility to test their resistance to bird flu.
Researchers infected both gene-edited and regular chickens with a low dose of the bird flu virus and allowed them to interact with one another in the facility.
They found the gene-edited chickens were “almost entirely” resistant to infection.
“The results are pretty cool,” said Peng, who is unaffiliated with the study.
The resources farmers have on hand to prevent bird flu infection are pretty limited, experts say.
Farmers could increase biosecurity by keeping poultry inside, instead of allowing them to roam free, to prevent contact with infected wild birds.
They also could vaccinate the entire flock, but that can be time-consuming, costly and less effective against the latest bird flu strain, said Dr. Meghan Schaeffer, a zoonotic influenza epidemiologist.
In theory, study authors say, gene editing should protect against any type of flu strain, prevent infection and eradicate transmission among domesticated chickens.
“It could save ... chickens’ lives, an enormous amount of money and not interrupt the food supply,” said Schaeffer, who is also the national public health adviser for SAS, a statistical programming company for epidemiologists and data scientists.
Protecting poultry also drastically reduces the risk of transmitting the bird flu virus to mammals, including possibly to humans, experts say.
The transmission of the disease across species became a growing concern in the most recent bird flu outbreak when it began spilling over into wild animals, including otters, seals and foxes, among others.
“You take a major player out of the picture if you deal with domestic poultry,” Schaeffer said.
As with all technological advances, experts warn of unintended consequences – and one such consequence may have already been detected in the study released Tuesday.
Scientists who exposed the gene-edited poultry to a higher dose of bird flu virus – 1 million units rather than 1,000 – reported a breakthrough infection in half the chickens.
When researchers looked at the virus that had sickened half of their birds, they realized it had already mutated in the chickens.
The mutations didn’t appear harmful when introduced to human cells in the lab, but experts said more menacing mutations could sprout.
“We do have to be very vigilant as a field because evolution is really powerful,” Peng said.
She also stressed the importance of studying how gene-edited chickens could affect the environment and ecosystems.
Making poultry resistant to certain diseases could give them a fitness advantage Mother Nature did not intend.
There’s more work to be done before flu-resistant chickens become a viable option for farmers.
One reason is that study authors tested a common but a less pathogenic bird flu strain, H9N2, not the H5N1 strain that wreaked havoc in birds around the world.
Researchers said in last week’s briefing the latest strain was tested on new cells in the lab and had favorable results, but they have yet to infect the highly transmissible strain into chickens.
Experts also said more research is needed to learn how consuming gene-edited chicken could affect people, Peng said.
On a broader scale, the federal government will first have to figure out how to regulate gene-edited animal products before Americans can start ordering up flu-resistant chicken wings.
Follow Adrianna Rodriguez on X, formerly Twitter: @AdriannaUSAT.
Thousands of people across the U.S. gathered Monday for vigils and protests over the rapidly intensifying war between Israel and Palestinian militants.
More than 1,600 people have died in Israel and Gaza, including at least 11 Americans, and thousands more injured since Hamas launched its stunning attack on Israel Saturday.
The militant group has claimed to have taken more than 130 hostages.
Israel has since ordered a siege on Gaza, pledging to cut electricity, food, and fuel into the impoverished home of more than 2 million Palestinians.
On Tuesday, the United Nations agency for Palestinian refugees said that it has been struggling to accommodate over 187,518 Palestinians in Gaza displaced by ongoing Israeli strikes as hospitals and schools that it runs across the Gaza Strip were damaged in the fighting.
In Rhode Island, the Jewish Alliance of Greater Providence hosted a vigil Monday evening in response to the crisis across the globe.
"It feels like a total nightmare," said Stephanie Hague, chief policy officer for the alliance.
Hague said her in-laws in Jerusalem have been taking cover in a bomb shelter, and that her father and stepmother were in Israel to attend a wedding that has since been canceled and are now trying to get a flight back.
Rabbi Sarah Mack, senior rabbi of Temple Beth-El, said the community was celebrating Simchat Torah when the attacks began.
The holiday marks when the Torah reading cycle restarts again and is a time of gratitude and rejoicing with Torah scrolls.
The temple is offering support as members of the community try to account for loved ones’ whereabouts, she said.
"The Jewish community is gutted by this."
In Ohio, politicians, Jewish leaders, and private citizens packed two auditoriums at a prayer vigil Monday night, as Jewish leaders led attendees in prayer and song.
Organizers at the Jewish Community Center of Greater Columbus called people to light candles for those affected by the war, including the relative of an Ohio family who had died in the attack.
Event organizers called on people to ask their political representatives to push for aid to Israel.
 "Today Ohioans and Americans all over our great country are united with one message: We stand with Israel," Brown said.
But some in the community have voiced support for Palestinians they say have long suffered injustices at the hands of Israel, and are now concerned about what will happen to civilians as a result of Israel's declaration of war against Hamas.
The Ohio State University chapter of Students for Justice in Palestine, a pro-Palestine organization with chapters at universities around the United States, held a rally Sunday at the Ohio Statehouse attended by nearly 100 students and other community members.
"Today, October 7th, 2023, an unprecedented series of events have taken place, led by our heroic resistance in Gaza who have shown the world yet again that the spirit of the Palestinian people cannot and will not be trampled, and that our resistance to Zionism and Western imperialism remains strong," the group wrote in a Facebook post before the Statehouse event.
He believes their bag or items dropped, creating a loud noise.
Campus police said people began calling out "911," which was misunderstood by some nearby, and the crowd began screaming and running for safety.
People fell and tripped over each other, witnesses said.
In Rochester, New York, Palestinian supporters rallied at the Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Park.
Jonathan Corey, a Palestinian American organizer with the Rochester Committee to End Apartheid said about 50 to 60 people attended the coalition’s rally.
Corey said Palestinians have long been dehumanized and mischaracterized by forces across the globe, and events over the last few days have heightened a grim sense of disappointment.
Organizers also expressed frustration with how people in Gaza and the West Bank have been treated under occupation, citing human rights violations.
"Gaza lives under the most dismal circumstances," Corey said.
Timeline of the conflict:Why the 2023 Israeli-Palestinian fighting is among the most brutal in years
In Ormond Beach, Florida, a group of Israeli supporters gathered at the Granada Bridge, holding posters emblazoned with the Israeli flag.
"I'm coming out to show support for the Jews locally, for Israel and for America," said Raquel Levy, an attorney who organized the demonstration as a way to show support for her cousins in Israel.
Levy relayed a text message from her cousin that the pain is widespread throughout Israel.
I don't know what the future holds.
About 85 miles north from Levy, Palestinian supporters rallied in Jacksonville, Florida, Monday evening.
Sara Mahmoud, a Palestinian American organizer for the Jacksonville Palestine Solidarity Network, noted high energy and turnout of more than 100 people for the grassroots organization’s demonstration.
"We stand with Palestine, and we stand with the Palestinian people," Mahmoud said.
The longstanding conflict is often characterized as one of religion, but Mahmoud argued it was a conflict of occupation.
The organization is demanding the end of three things: U.S. aid to Israel, siege and blockade in Gaza, and Israeli settlements in the West Bank.
"Palestinians have a right to dignity and self-determination," Mahmoud said.
The demonstrations Monday followed widespread rallies across the U.S. over the weekend, from Times Square to Los Angeles.
A skirmish broke out Sunday between opposing demonstrators near the United Nations compound in New York City after a large group of Palestinian supporters rallied in Times Square, and others protested outside Israeli consulates in Atlanta and Chicago.
Dozens of rallies have already taken place since this weekend, and many more are scheduled for the coming days.
People who had tickets to the band's show at Chase Field were eligible for a refund and given a presale code to purchase tickets at the new venue.
Many fans, however voiced their frustration with Chase Field for double-booking and the new process to go to the concert.
"Stadium’s staff didn’t believe the team would make it to the playoffs," one fan commented.
Another added: "The AZ Diamondbacks executive office are at fault for this snafu— should have never happened."
Very conveniently they postponed then ‘canceled’ the show.
Moved it to a smaller place.
But refund does not come till sometime later.
Tickets for the new location went on sale Sunday, Oct. 8, at ticketmaster.com.
LAS VEGAS – The Green Bay Packers aren’t a talentless team.
They probably have as much or more talent than two of the three teams that have beaten them this year.
But, boy, are they a bad team.
Their offense is a mess.
Their defense can be pretty good but only to a point.
They are affected any time one of their starters can’t play because of injury.
And they have too many players who just do what they’re told and not whatever it takes to be a difference-maker.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
After waking up with no voice, Scott Van Pelt was unavailable to host "Monday Night Countdown" for Week 5, the ESPN host posted on social media ahead of the Las Vegas Raiders hosting the Green Bay Packers.
"Unfortunately, I woke up to zero voice at all," Van Pelt wrote on X.
The rest of the "Countdown" team includes Ryan Clark, Robert Griffin III, Marcus Spears and Larry Fitzgerald.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
"Very frustrating to put everyone in this spot," Van Pelt wrote.
"Hopefully back at it soon."
As part of his contract extension at ESPN, Van Pelt added "Countdown" host to his list of responsibilities.
Will Ferrell knows how to throw a party!
The "Barbie" star and comedian stole the show at parents weekend at the University of Southern California during a tailgate party ahead of the school's big football game against the University of Arizona Wildcats.
Ferrell, whose eldest son Magnus is a sophomore at USC, took a page from his 2003 film "Old School" in returning to his alma mater.
Instead of an attempt to relive his glory days, the actor took center stage as DJ at a Sigma Alpha Mu fraternity party.
In videos shared to social media, Ferrell had a crowd of hundreds of college students dancing to Survivor's "Eye of the Tiger" and Jay-Z and Kanye West's collaboration "(Expletive) in Paris," the latter of which includes a snippet from his movie "Blades of Glory."
The "Strays" actor was all business in a backwards USC cap, sunglasses, a zip-up sweatshirt and headphones while he worked a turntable.
In addition to Ferrell's son Magnus attending USC, the actor is a 1990 graduate of the university with a bachelor's degree in sports information.
Ferrell has been back to his alma mater several times since graduation, most notably in 2017 when he delivered the commencement speech and received an honorary doctorate degree.
Ferrell recounted all the times during his four years at USC when he subconsciously prepared for life as a comedian and trusted his intuition despite getting a degree aimed at sports broadcasting.
For many of you who maybe don’t have it all figured out, it’s okay.
"Enjoy the process of your search without succumbing to the pressure of the result."
Ferrell ended with words of encouragement.
'Strays' review:Will Ferrell's hilarious dog movie puts raunchy spin on 'Homeward Bound'
WATERTOWN TWP., Michigan − Authorities in Central Michigan on Tuesday morning entered day two of a search for a missing 3-year-old boy with special needs.
The Clinton County Sheriff's Office said the toddler, who is autistic and non-verbal, was reported missing about 2 p.m. on Monday.
The toddler was last seen walking away from his home on South Bauer Road, just north of Clark Road in north Watertown Township, a rural community about 15 miles northwest of Lansing, Michigan.
Missing Kentucky mom update:Ex boyfriend arrested in case of Crystal Rogers, Kentucky mom who disappeared in 2015
In a post on X, Michigan State Police said the boy was last seen wearing gray-and-blue shorts and a blue sweatshirt.
Authorities, who have not released the toddler's name, said the child has long, curly dark hair and did not have shoes on when he disappeared.
"The missing boy is reported to also be a climber and could be in a tree or any other elevated structure," the sheriff's office reported.
Temperatures dipped into the low 40s overnight in the area, according to the National Weather Service, and as of 7:45 a.m.
ET Tuesday the temperature registered 43 degrees at the Capital Region International Airport in Lansing.
Updates:More than 123K displaced in Gaza after attack, UN says; US sending warships, ammunition to Israel
The sheriff's office reported law enforcement from several agencies, as well as numerous civilian volunteers, spent most of Monday night searching for the boy.
"Specialized units worked throughout the night and at this time, have been unable to locate the missing child," the agency wrote in a post about 7 a.m.
The sheriff's office said the search for a missing boy would continue Tuesday morning after searchers failed to locate him overnight.
The sheriff's office asked residents to check their sheds, outbuildings, or areas of shelter or bodies of water.
Anyone who sees the boy is being asked to immediately call 911.
"Please keep the family in your prayers as we move forward," the sheriff's office posted on social media.
Reach her at nalund@usatoday.com and follow her on X @nataliealund.
NFL power rankings entering Week 6 of the 2023 season (previous rank in parentheses):
49ers (1): What else is there to say about a team that's been in the top spot since the season started?
S.F.’s +99 point differential is already 20 better than the next team.
Probably have the best defense (though that can be settled at Cleveland on Sunday).
Might have the best offense.
Stars on basically every unit.
And second-year QB Brock Purdy continues to effectively play mistake-free football, his league-leading 123.1 passer rating testament to that.
Eagles (3): They're 5-0 in successive seasons for the first time.
Next up, the Jets – a team Philadelphia has never lost to in 12 previous meetings.
Feels safe to slot the reigning NFC champs at 6-0 and look ahead to their Week 7 date with Miami.
Sunday, Montgomery became the first Detroit rusher to top 100 yards in consecutive games since … Kevin Jones in 2004.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Weird as this sounds, Milano might be the more valuable player to Buffalo's defense.
Dolphins (7): How fast is Miami?
Per Next Gen Stats, the Fins have produced the five top speeds among all plays this season and seven of the top nine.
Jaguars (14): The first team to play multiple international games in a season is now the first to win multiple – both coming against teams with winning records.
Stay in Europe, Jags – it seems inevitable, and you're apparently better for it.
Cowboys (4): Good thing they're not part of the NFC West … even if it would make more sense geographically.
In its two defeats (to Arizona and San Francisco), Dallas has lost by a collective 70-26.
Steelers (12): They've gained the third-fewest yards in the league and surrendered the third most, the delta more than 600 yards.
But 11 takeaways, 17 sacks and just enough clutch plays from QB Kenny Pickett can mask such warts … and propel you to the top of the AFC North.
Ravens (8): It's been an uneven start, to say the least, but it's also unusual to play four of five away from home so early in the season – and Baltimore's three-game roadie winds to a conclusion Sunday in London.
Rams (9): Sure, they're 2-3, but they've hung tough against the league's top teams, San Francisco and Philadelphia.
Seahawks (10): Coming off their bye, they're currently not scheduled to face a team with a winning record until November.
Time to make serious hay toward a playoff berth.
Buccaneers (16): This marks three times in four years that QB Baker Mayfield has won three of his first four starts.
His only 4-1 beginning led to a deep playoff run in Cleveland.
Saints (20): Great sidebar to Sunday's 34-0 runaway in New England.
Pretty cool story amid the NFL's annual "Crucial Catch" campaign for cancer screening.
Falcons (18): If you know anything about the NFL, and running backs in particular, best to appreciate their genius while you can.
Texans (11): No matter Sunday's outcome, this will be their best six-game start since 2019.
But it would help if Houston would run the ball better after cracking 90 yards just once so far this season.
Chargers (22): Did you know WR Keenan Allen owns the NFL record for most games – three – with at least 15 receptions?
With wingman Mike Williams down for the count, wouldn't be a shock if Allen extends that mark before this year is out.
Bengals (26): They'll only be on the road two more times before December, so maybe the comforts of home are good for QB Joe Burrow's calf and team focus with a brutal upcoming schedule (Seattle, San Francisco, Buffalo) for a Cincinnati club that may finally otherwise be turning the corner.
Raiders (28): If they're going to salvage their season and use Monday's win as a catapult, now is the time.
The Silver and Black face three one-win teams (Patriots, Bears, Giants) over the next four weeks.
Packers (19): No worse way to go into a bye week than off a terrible loss.
But Green Bay's next three opponents (Broncos, Vikings, Rams) have a combined four wins, so hopefully a good time for the Pack to get healthy figuratively and literally.
Vikings (25): Why is offensive balance often a virtue?
Consider one-win Minnesota, which has thrown more passes (204) than any team in the league while attempting the fewest runs (91).
Bears (32): The Justin Fields-to-DJ Moore Show has sparked Chicago's revival.
But look closer, and you'll also note a running game averaging better than 170 yards the past two weeks and some encouraging signs of life on defense at Washington.
Commanders (15): Only Denver has surrendered more points than Washington's 160.
Only Minnesota has turned it over more times than Washington's 10.
Some consolation for a team that hasn't run an offensive play with the lead yet and has now been outscored by a league-most 91 points.
Cardinals (27): No NFC team is blitzing less frequently – worth wondering if that's the right approach given the way Arizona's D has been torn up the past two weeks.
Patriots (23): If the dynasty wasn't already dead, then life support has officially been unplugged.
Panthers (31): The NFL's only winless team just turned it in its worst defensive performance (42 points allowed) of the season.
A trip to Miami.
Follow USA TODAY Sports' Nate Davis on X, formerly Twitter @ByNateDavis.
"If I had not been married, I would've actually hoped we would've had a love affair," Brooke said.
The couple married in 2011, and she filed for divorce in 2018.
Brooke explained, "You are intertwined with someone's body; when you are not a dancer, there is no way I have ever been so connected besides with a lover or a husband than I was with Derek, and it's every single day."
Why do you think people fall in love?
You smell them.
You feel them.
"He kept telling me how hot you were on your season," Cheryl said.
What just happened?
Brooke Burke co-hosted the show from season 10-17 before announcing she wouldn't be returning right before Season 18 premiered.
What else is new on dancing show?
The Atlanta Braves managed to pull themselves out of a potentially devastating 2-0 hole on Monday night.
Despite not recording a hit until the sixth inning when the team faced a 4-0 deficit, Atlanta defeated the Philadelphia Phillies in Game 2 of the National League Division Series, 5-4.
It was enough to draw the series score even as the two teams head north to Philadelphia.
Phillies pitcher Zack Wheeler was dominant, allowing just one hit and one (unearned) run through six innings before conceding a two-run home run to former Mets teammate Travis d'Arnaud in the seventh.
The Braves eventually managed to take the lead with two outs in the eighth inning when third baseman Austin Riley hit a two-run blast on a full count off of Jeff Hoffman, Philadelphia's third pitcher of the night.
Then, in the top of the ninth inning, with Bryce Harper standing on first base with one out, right fielder Nick Castellanos drilled a ball toward the gap in right-center field.
What happened next was one of the most stunning plays in recent postseason memory.
Braves vs. Phillies:Austin Riley's home run, Michael Harris' amazing catch rescues Braves in Game 2 of NLDS
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
Center fielder Michael Harris II tracked the ball perfectly, leaping against the wall to secure the fly ball on the warning track.
Harper had taken off and was rounding second base before having to turn back around to avoid getting doubled off.
Here's how it sounded on Braves Radio Network.
Here's how the play sounded on the Braves' Spanish-language radio broadcast.
Editor's note: Part one of a five-part USA TODAY series revealing why America hasn't solved its long struggle with Type 2 diabetes.
For chef Robin Ray, newly married with young stepchildren, the turning point came when a stabbing chest pain sent her rushing to the emergency room.
“I didn’t think you’d make it,” the doctor said.
The moments were turning points for all three to get serious about addressing their diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes, in which the body can’t properly regulate blood sugar, has become so common it’s almost considered inconsequential.
More than 1 in 10 Americans have the disease (though many don't know) and another nearly 4 in 10 are at risk for it.
In total, half of all adults and a quarter of teenagers have diabetes or pre-diabetes.
Its financial costs are astronomical.
The country spends more than $300 billion a year to address diabetes, accounting for $1 out of every $4 spent on health care.
And its personal tolls are even worse: heart attacks, amputations, blindness, kidney disease, double the risk of premature death.
It also causes what’s known as “diabetes distress,” the daily burdens and emotional toll of living with and managing a chronic ailment that can lead to regular dips in energy, foggy thinking and depression, and a sense of isolation.
The most frustrating aspect of Type 2 diabetes, experts say, is that it has long been largely preventable and controllable.
“We have made tremendous gains in understanding diabetes,” said Dr. Donald Berwick, a pediatrician and former administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Roughly 40% of people who died early in the coronavirus pandemic had Type 2 diabetes, a rate four times higher than people without the disease.
Even when elevated blood sugar levels are below the threshold for type 2 diabetes, the risk for heart disease jumps 30% to 50% compared with people with normal blood sugar levels.
(Type 1 diabetes, which accounts for 5% to 10% of diabetes, is caused by the immune system and is unrelated to diet or lifestyle.)
America’s failure to address Type 2 diabetes highlights larger problems with our food and medical systems, Berwick and other experts said.
A soda costs less than a bottle of water, a double cheeseburger and fries less than a carton of blueberries.
Patients wait months for medical appointments only to see the back of a white coat for the short time they’re allotted.
Treating disease costs society far more than preventing it but typically provides more profit for insurance companies, hospitals and the pharmaceutical industry.
The USA TODAY Health team spoke with scores of health care providers, researchers, community leaders and patients for this five-part series to understand why Type 2 diabetes continues to worsen in America despite known solutions.
The answer isn't simple.
It involves systemic problems facing everyone in society, not just those with diabetes: a food system designed to sell products; a medical system in which cutting off a leg is less expensive than saving it; the high cost of healthy living and the fact that breaking habits takes a lot more than just personal willpower.
This first story looks at what it takes for people to cope with or overcome the disease.
Then, we explore one community in a David vs. Goliath battle against a food system that fails to prioritize people's health.
More in series:Diabetes runs deep in rural Mississippi.
Locals have taken to growing their own solutions.
We next travel to Colorado, which has the lowest level of diabetes in the nation.
Yet even in this state, where hiking trails and gorgeous views abound, economic and other disparities make it easier for some people to avoid diabetes than others.
More in series:A diabetes disparity: Why Colorado's healthy lifestyle brand isn't shared by all
It's tough to manage a chronic illness in the face of high medical costs, scattered care and caregiver frustration and burnout, so we highlight that next.
More in series:The steep cost of Type 2: When diabetes dragged her down, she chose to fight
Finally, we explore solutions, addressing why it will take a combination of education, medication, medical devices and improved food access to solve this national problem.
More in series:Solutions exist to end the Type 2 diabetes dilemma but too few get the help they need
But it will take "sensible action" from across many sectors, including health care, science, nutrition, business, public health and politics to change the financial and other incentives that drive so many Americans toward sickness instead of health.
"If we do it incrementally or don't do it at all, we're all going to be toast in 50 years from diet-related illnesses and a depleted environment."
There’s no question personal responsibility plays a role in fighting diabetes.
They’ve reduced their dependence on daily medication and hope to have saved themselves the horrors of more amputations, blindness and dialysis.
They’ve extended their lives and improved the quality of that time.
But like many medical problems, the challenges of diabetes go well beyond individual responsibility and blame.
Agarwal recently led a series of studies in the journal The Lancet that looked at diabetes rates around the world.
Poverty, the studies showed, was a major driver of diabetes, along with racism and unequal access to healthy food and high-quality medical care.
Personal stories illustrate how these structural issues play out in the lives of so many Americans.
 “I’m healthy because of privilege – not diet, not exercise, not determination,” he said.
“It’s going to be all right after a while, as long as I keep this spirit,” he said.
Ray’s love for food began when she was 8 years old, watching Julia Child on TV.
During family gatherings, she would run around taking everyone’s dinner order.
Then she’d scurry back to the kitchen with a notepad full of scribbles.
Throughout her life, she made fried chicken, pork chops, baked mac and cheese, collard greens, and even a whole roasted chicken filled with wild rice and two sticks of butter – everything that made her soul sing.
In her world, food was home.
Food was family.
Food was love.
But that was some pretty tough love.
In 2002, Ray was diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes.
Her father, grandmother, aunts and uncles all had diabetes.
She knew what it meant.
“For you to tell me I can’t have ice blue raspberry Kool-Aid was like you shut down my world,” Ray said.
She didn't dwell on the diagnosis and continued with life.
Her culinary career took her to Italy, where she learned and fell even more in love with food.
She returned to St. Louis, got married and became a mom to her husband’s two children ‒ “beautiful bonus babies,” as she described them.
Through the years, she continued to express love through cooking and eating.
In 2015, a stabbing chest pain sent her to the emergency room.
Doctors assured Ray she hadn’t had a heart attack, but they warned that her life was on the line.
At 5-foot-2, she weighed 334 pounds and had an A1C, a measure of average blood sugar of 11%, well above the 6.5% cutoff to be considered diabetic.
Her diabetes – and her diet – were out of control.
She and her primary care doctor decided she would pursue weight loss surgery.
But she also decided to use her culinary prowess to transform her diet.
She reconfigured favorite foods, substituting healthier ingredients: Collard greens cooked in smoked fats or ham hocks turned into a kale, turnip and rutabaga recipe flavored with natural chicken broth fat, oils and seasonings.
She fostered her feelings into new recipes and brought them to North Sarah Food Hub, which partnered with Barnes-Jewish Hospital to make packaged, pre-made meals for St. Louis residents with diabetes and limited access to fresh food.
“I became excited about food again, and food became a joy.”
It isn’t always easy, of course.
Ray admits to an occasional cookie craving.
But now she takes the time to think about how her body processes that cookie and whether it’s worthwhile.
She hopes her cooking can help other people make the same transformation she did.
Her staff at North Sarah helps her create new recipes for others.
She wants to provide nourishment that allows people to avoid illness and medicine.
The lifetime risk of developing Type 2 diabetes if a parent has it is 40%.
If both parents have it, the risk jumps to 70%.
He knew he was at risk, but he pushed his luck, he said, by eating poorly during the pandemic and falling out of his exercise routine.
With the luxury of working from home, walking to the kitchen and bathroom was often the extent of his daily activity.
On Feb. 14, 2022 – Valentine’s Day – he went to an urgent care clinic, concerned his breathing trouble meant he had bronchitis.
His blood pressure measured 210 over 110, well above normal levels that top out at 120 over 80.
A chest X-ray showed fluid filling his lungs, leading to congestive heart failure.
The clinic sent him straight to a local emergency room, where he was diagnosed with a blockage of the left descending artery – a clogged artery made worse by diabetes.
If he had waited any longer, he would have had a massive heart attack, his doctor later told him.
After his release from the hospital, he went to the drugstore to fill his new prescriptions.
The pharmacist told him she couldn’t fill one because it would cost $1,000.
He’d have to wait until his insurance approved it.
“Please fill it,” he said.
She stressed the cost.
“Fill it,” he pleaded, putting the charge on his credit card.
Medication helped him lose 70 pounds in three months.
When his local drugstore ran out of the weight-loss drug, he easily drove to another pharmacy and then another to find what he needed.
His 100 hours of high-quality cardiac rehabilitation were fully covered by insurance.
He could devote all his energy to getting well because he didn’t have to focus on how to afford his care.
When they finally show up in the emergency room, “because they will,” they will cost the system far more, he said.
On the day Haynes stepped on a rusty nail in 2019, he walked all day as the nail pierced the sole of his sneaker and then his foot.
By the time he took off his shoe that night, his foot was infected.
He landed in the hospital for two months as doctors and nurses tried, mostly unsuccessfully, to get the infection and Haynes’ blood sugar under control.
By the time he was released, he knew enough about Type 2 diabetes to realize his daily blood sugar levels – typically in the mid-400s – were four times above what he had been told to shoot for.
But nothing he did or ate seemed to make a difference.
He had long since traded ribs for salads, beer for water.
His wife, Angela, barely noticed when James started wearing multiple pairs of socks, pouring powder on his feet and buying bigger shoes.
His feet tingled a lot, he said, but he was coping with it.
James ended up in the emergency room again, dehydrated and in need of antibiotics.
The doctor amputated the baby toe on his right foot, leaving a large open wound.
“I didn't like that we're not going to try to save anything, we're just going to start cutting.”
James was fading.
Antibiotics left him looking sickly, his voice so weak Angela could barely hear him.
“I felt like I was watching my husband slowly dying,” she said.
She thought it would take months to get James in to see the heart disease specialist, but the office called and asked if they could come the next day.
“We started looking forward to these visits because there was always hope,” Angela Haynes said, though she felt guilty they were taking up so much of the important doctor’s time.
Haynes had blockages in blood vessels on both legs.
Once he got the blood flowing again, Haynes began to feel better.
His flesh returned to its normal color.
The wound started healing at last.
Walking became easier.
Then disaster struck again.
On July 2, 2022, Haynes caught COVID-19.
"Everything went downhill after that," he said.
During his 13-day illness, the bacteria in his foot raged out of control.
Every week, a surgeon would come to the door of his hospital room and before even stepping all the way in ask Haynes whether he had decided to get his leg amputated.
I was born with this.
He was worried about how he’d get around, how he’d be able to work to support his family if he had only one leg.
No one took the time to explain why they thought the leg needed to come off or how he’d cope without it, Haynes said.
In late November, he was finally sent home in a wheelchair.
Back at the hospital, Haynes was told his foot was broken, essentially beyond repair.
He agreed to a below-the-knee amputation.
Released right before Christmas, he spent the next three weeks in bed wondering how he’d manage the rest of his life.
Finally, it looked as if his luck might be turning around.
With the leg gone, his diabetes improved.
His blood sugar dropped into the 120s or one-teens.
His blurry vision cleared up.
During his long hospital stay, he befriended nurses and learned about a program for people who needed prostheses.
The man who ran it called early in the year and said he had received a donated leg.
If it fit Haynes, he could have it while waiting for insurance to pay for a personalized one.
Miraculously, it did.
Haynes spent the next six months teaching himself to walk again.
The donor leg was heavy and uncomfortable.
He wasn't mobile enough to hold down a job.
One late spring night, picking up dinner at a nearby restaurant, he headed to the bathroom for a pit stop.
A sink had been leaking all day and Haynes slipped in the puddle, falling backward.
He's still recovering from the resulting wrist surgery.
He and Angela are living – barely – off her part-time salary as a secretary and a church organist.
Haynes has tried "at least three or four times" to receive government assistance, but they keep losing his paperwork, or not believing he's disabled, though he once checked himself out of the hospital and arrived at an appointment in his wheelchair to prove he didn't have a leg.
Still, he clings to his faith and the positive attitude he has long used to cheer up himself and others.
These are his secret weapons against diabetes and everything else life throws his way.
"I try to put a smile on other people's faces," he said.
"It keeps my day going."
This story is part of a reporting fellowship sponsored by the Association of Health Care Journalists and supported by the Commonwealth Fund.
Our goal remains the same: Provide book lovers with the best, most accurate snapshot of what people are reading by showing which titles are selling.
It is a master list, unbound by genre and format, of what’s selling broadly across the U.S.
Her novel "It Starts With Us" claimed the No.
1 spot in its first week, her highest debut ever, selling more than 800,000 copies on its first day of sales.
It was her fourth book to hit No.
1 in 2022.
The USA TODAY list is a ranking of the top-selling titles each week from a broad range of businesses including major chains, independent bookstores and online retailers.
It reflects combined sales of titles in print and electronic format, if available.
Our data team weighs and compiles those numbers to generate the week's 150 top-selling titles.
The rankings reflect sales from the previous Monday through Sunday.
The full list will publish online at 6 a.m. Wednesdays, with the top 50 titles publishing in print Thursdays.
The list, which began in 1993, went on hiatus in December.
It is the longest-running USA TODAY data journalism project.
In our continued commitment to bring readers more books coverage, USA TODAY is also excited to announce a new content partnership with The Novel Neighbor, an independently owned and operated bookstore in St. Louis.
They are expert booksellers and passionate readers who are deeply connected to what their community is reading.
With the partnership will come regular profiles of independent bookstores across the country, highlighting the important role of these businesses in their local communities.
Novel Neighbor will also be sharing expert book recommendations and fun takes on book trends.
We can't wait to see what you've been reading!
ANCHORAGE, Alaska ― The infamous Sinaloa Cartel, once headed by notorious kingpin "El Chapo," and others in Mexico are targeting Alaska with drug pipelines, driving up the overdose death toll.
It's difficult to reach much of the remote state, so there are fewer criminal networks competing for customers, but that means drug traffickers can triple or quadruple their price and net much larger profits.
Deadly fentanyl and other illegal narcotics continue saturating the urban centers of Anchorage, as well as Juneau to the east and Fairbanks to the north.
From those main hubs, shipments are dispersed far and wide, stretching from tiny islands off the southern coast all the way up to the Arctic region, according to state and federal police.
"What keeps me up at night is the fact that fentanyl is killing our small, most vulnerable communities," he said.
"The opioid crisis is attacking us, and we don't have enough personnel to effectively combat it."
Alaska suffered the nation's largest percent increase in overdose deaths in 2021, with a 75% spike from the previous year, adding to the nation's estimated death toll of nearly 107,000, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The CDC reported Alaska's overdose death rate jumped in one year from 20.2 to 35.6 per 100,000 residents.
About 76% of the 253 fatal overdoses in Alaska in 2021 involved synthetic narcotics, including fentanyl, according to a report by the Governor's Advisory Council on Opioid Remediation.
The Louisville Courier Journal, part of the USA TODAY Network, reviewed several drug cases and spent nearly two weeks in parts of Alaska, talking with grieving parents, residents in addiction recovery, Alaska Native advocates, health officials, defense attorneys, as well as local, state and federal law enforcement.
Fishermen, hikers, hunters and cruise ship enthusiasts are drawn to the snow dusted mountains, the blue tinted glaciers, fjords, glassy glacier lakes and salmon-rich waters in the nation's largest state.
But its vastness and landscape make it hard to patrol.
"The opioid crisis has hit hard, and it's hit close to me," said Cornelius Sims, a lieutenant with the Alaska State Troopers and supervisor of a statewide drug task force.
I have lost close friends.
"I've seen very vibrant, positive, outgoing individuals from good upbringings go from that to living on the streets homeless, doing whatever they can to survive."
During the past few years, fentanyl began to permeate Alaska, and many customers started seeking it out, Waddle said.
In Alaska, and across the nation, it's now most commonly peddled in fake prescription pills that mimic the appearance of legitimate medication for pain or other conditions.
Alaska has about 734,000 residents spread out over a land mass that's two and a half times the size of Texas and larger than America's next three largest states ― Texas, California and Montana ― combined.
And there are hundreds of small villages only accessible by small planes.
For many, snowmobiles replace cars during the winter.
The further drug dealers have to travel, the more they charge.
Traffickers have taken the extra steps needed to get their product to the tiny, out-of-the-way town of Whittier, 60 miles southeast of Anchorage and near the popular Portage Glacier.
Most of Whittier's 270 residents live across from the harbor under one roof, in a 14-story pastel-colored building, also home to the police department, library, church, convenience store and post office.
It previously served as an Army barracks.
It takes about 80 minutes to drive there from Anchorage on Seward Highway, as long as a moose doesn't wander into the road and stop traffic.
But drivers have to plan their visit, paying a $13 toll to access the tunnel leading into town and waiting until half past each hour for a turn using the one-lane tunnel.
You can leave the city only at the top of each hour, because tunnel traffic alternates directions and is shared by cars and a passenger train.
The extra effort exemplifies the determination of greedy drug dealers.
Jorge Cardenas and his crew blanketed the area with meth and introduced customers to fentanyl.
Since drug trends in Alaska tend to lag behind the Lower 48, or contiguous U.S., by a few years, police say this was one of the first cases of its kind in Alaska.
Cardenas admitted creating what he called "gunpowder heroin" by lacing heroin with fentanyl, now the top drug killing Americans.
He took advantage of customers who didn't realize the dangers of fentanyl, and his network expanded to Juneau and Anchorage.
In Alaska, most drug shipments first arrive in the major hub of Anchorage, the state's largest city with more than 287,000 residents, nearly 40% of the Alaska's population.
One major drug pipeline sent heroin, meth and cocaine from Mexico into Arizona and then onward to Anchorage.
In a recent case still in court, alleged kingpin Miguel Baez Guevara is charged with targeting Alaska with a pipeline for years while hiding out in Sonora, a northwest Mexican state bordered by Arizona.
Federal agents were looking for Guevara, who maintains his innocence and is awaiting trial, on a separate 2014 drug case out of Arizona when he fled across the border.
More:A healing culture: Alaska Natives use tradition to battle influx of drugs, addiction
He is charged with heading the drug ring to Alaska without ever stepping foot in the state.
Mexican immigration officials found and arrested Guevara, a U.S. citizen, in 2021 and deported him to America.
"Guevara made it known he was associated with the Sinaloa Cartel and there were serious and violent repercussions for couriers who stole narcotics or provided information to law enforcement," according to a 2021 news release by federal prosecutors in Alaska.
The drug ring used Facebook, WhatsApp and other messaging apps to recruit Alaska residents, mainly women, to work as couriers — reasoning they wouldn't look as suspicious as men from another country.
The couriers were paid in cash or in drugs to fly to Mexico to pick up shipments and take them back to their home state.
On the plane, the women traveled in small groups and took orders from a group leader.
She told them how to dress, not to drink alcohol and to stay by her side, so they didn't draw attention, according to a transcript of her 2018 sentencing hearing that sent her off to prison for 10 years.
"She was helping command other people and bringing more people into the scheme," prosecutors told the judge during Martinez's sentencing, according to the transcript, comparing the drug ring's business model to a pyramid scheme.
"Higher up-level people rely on addicts and then those addicts rely on getting other people hooked on narcotics."
Once the couriers arrived with the shipments, a drug ring supervisor stationed in Alaska met them to pay them and collect the narcotics.
Drug dealers in Alaska would then contact Guevara, who coordinated the drug deals from Mexico, prosecutors allege.
The majority of the fentanyl smuggled into Alaska is coming from Mexican cartels, according to the FBI.
"They're transported across the southern border from Mexico to major urban centers on the West Coast — Los Angeles, Seattle, Phoenix and Las Vegas," Waddle said.
From those cities, some drugs are mailed in packages sent to Alaska.
Others are loaded onto cargo ships alongside produce and other goods.
And many shipments are smuggled by couriers, who hide drugs on their bodies or in backpacks, purses or suitcases.
After drugs arrive in Anchorage, some shipments are driven to towns and others are smuggled on ferries and small planes bound for remote areas.
Agents say they worry if they don't intercept shipments in Anchorage, there's less of a chance the drugs will be detected as they spread out across the state.
Alaska's land mass is so vast, it could stretch from Montana to Florida, but it doesn't have counties or sheriffs and only some areas have local police.
That means state troopers are the primary law enforcement presence for much of the state and may end up patrolling an area the size of Rhode Island alone, giving an edge to cartel associates wanting to avoid detection.
"We're seeing addiction in villages with less than 500 people in them and as far up as Barrow," said Sims, head of the statewide drug enforcement unit.
"Opioids can do catastrophic damage in those communities," Waddle said.
"In those communities, people work together to survive," especially during harsh winters.
If five or six residents become addicted to drugs and aren't able to help hunt, fish and provide for the community, it creates a disparate impact, the FBI agent said.
Alaska's capital, Juneau, is accessible only by plane or boat, and has become the drug hub for the state's southeast region.
Each day, throngs of tourists load onto enormous cruise ships, on planes and ferries to visit glaciers, fjords, national parks, mountains and lakes — while drug traffickers also exploit these transportation methods to drop off their products.
Once drugs arrive in Juneau, some go to local customers.
Other shipments are destined for one of the many coastal islands and must be sent on small plane, passenger ferry, cargo ship or boat.
Investigators have had some seizures of as much as 20,000 pills laced with fentanyl, he said.
Nationwide, about 42% of pills tested for fentanyl contain a potentially lethal dose, according to data from the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration.
Investigators say drugs have reached the Aleutian Islands, which are sprinkled south of mainland Russia and mainland Alaska and mark a dividing line between the Bering Sea and the Pacific Ocean.
In an unusual case, a beach visitor found a large container of about a kilo of cocaine in December 2020 that washed up on Cannon Beach, between Anchorage and Juneau.
"We're not sure if it came in on a boat that capsized or did a plane bring it and drop it and something happened?"
It's also possible drug traffickers on a boat became worried about being detected by the U.S. Coast Guard or other investigators and dumped it on purpose, he said.
Investigators are also concerned about drugs hidden on small planes.
Driving around Anchorage, you can spot planes parked in backyards.
Drugs can be smuggled on these small airplanes, with or without the pilot's knowledge.
There typically isn't any screening of the cargo or passengers, because smaller airports don't have TSA checkpoints and police on standby.
Sims, the Alaska state trooper, said anytime he boards a plane, he automatically watches other passengers, wondering what they might be bringing into his home state.
Her 30-year-old stepson, Gabe Johnston, who once worked in Alaska's seafood processing industry, died last year from a fentanyl overdose.
She also has convinced some boat captains to carry waterproof kits on boats.
"Gabe loved water, to fish and to hunt," said his father, Gary Johnston.
"He was a good kid, just made some poor choices."
Johnston said he has seen his son's texts soon before his death, including ones where Gabe asked for reassurance from the drug dealer that the pills he bought weren't laced with fentanyl.
The dealer, who may or may not have known the truth, claimed they were safe.
The rescue kits include fentanyl testing strips, which can be used by those struggling with addiction to screen for fentanyl, as well as educational materials.
And she's not slowing down.
"We went from the fishing industry to hotel industries to the ferry system to cruise ships and (gold) mines," she said.
She's convinced several employers, some of whom hire up to 500 seasonal employees at a time, to discuss the kits during orientation.
He ultimately died of cancer, but his wife overdosed and died in Washington in February on the day of the funeral.
Dr. Corey Cox, a Kentucky native who went to medical school in Louisville, oversees the treatment programs and said a third center will open within weeks on the more isolated Prince of Wales Island.
"The people most impacted by addiction could live in a village," Cox said.
"We're trying to figure out how to bring these services to every little area."
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration offers a free and confidential 24-hour national hotline 800-662-4357 providing information on treatment options.
In Alaska, you can learn how to get the life-saving kits by sending an email to projectGabe@alaska.gov.
A list of other resources in others states is available at the National Harm Reduction Coalition website, offering information and a "naloxone finder."
As Israel continued to press its assault on Gaza after Hamas infiltrated by land, sea and air over the weekend, killing and capturing over 1,000 Israelis, the spotlight has focused on the militant group.
Israel's leaders have vowed retaliation, and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Hamas "will pay an unprecedented price."
Hamas' political wing has controlled the Gaza Strip for over a decade, but the group is most known for its many suicide bombings and other attacks on Israel amid the ongoing Israeli-Palestinian conflict that has lasted decades.
It's considered a terrorist group by the United States and other nations.
Here's what to know about Hamas:
Latest updates:Israel regains control over Gaza Strip border; rocket attacks intensify
Hamas receives financial, material and logistical support from Iran.
In 2006, Hamas won parliamentary elections, and in 2007 the group violently seized control of the Gaza Strip from the Palestinian Authority, which was controlled by the rival Fatah movement that governs the West Bank.
There have been no elections since.
The U.S. State Department designated Hamas a terrorist group in 1997.
Several other nations also consider it a terrorist organization.
The group calls for establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel and believes in the use of violence to carry out the destruction of Israel.
Up to 1,000 Hamas fighters stormed across the Israeli border by land and sea beginning at daybreak Saturday in an attack that caught Israel's military off guard.
Hamas leaders say they were pushed to attack because of an Israeli crackdown on militants in the West Bank, continued construction of settlements − which the international community considers to be illegal − thousands of prisoners being held in Israeli jails and Israel's ongoing blockade of Gaza.
Israeli security services routinely raid the compound.
“Today the people are regaining their revolution.”
Israel estimates the group has about 30,000 fighters and an arsenal of rockets and unmanned drones.
A day after Hamas launched its attack, Hezbollah also fired dozens of rockets and shells at three Israeli positions in disputed area along the country's border with Syria's Golan Heights, occupied by Israel.
Hezbollah is a Lebanese political and militant group that's been around since the early 1980s, funded and backed by Iran and spreading Tehran's influence in the Middle East.
Like Hamas, Hezbollah is designated a terrorist group by the United States and opposes Israel, but Hamas pales in comparison to Hezbollah in terms of its terrorist capabilities.
The Shiite Muslim militia has also attacked Israel with rockets in the past.
Contributing: John Bacon, USA TODAY; The Associated Press
WASHINGTON - President Joe Biden is set to give his first major speech Tuesday following Hamas' brutal massacre in Israel in a display of U.S. support for Israel as war erupts in the Middle East.
Biden will speak from the White House State Dining Room at 1 p.m.
More than 1,000 Israelis and at least 11 Americans were killed when Hamas militants crashed through the Israeli border along the Gaza Strip and launched a surprise invasion.
Israel has responded with attacks on Gaza that intensified with more bombings Tuesday.
An estimated 100 to 150 people in Israel were kidnapped by Hamas militants and are being held captive in Gaza.
That includes some Americans.
Hamas leaders have warned they will execute hostages if Israel does not cease airstrikes on Gaza without warnings.
On Tuesday morning, Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris spoke with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu about "coordinated efforts with partners and allies" to defend Israel, the White House said.
The attack is another major foreign policy test for Biden who is already struggling to keep assistance flowing to Ukraine.
It jeopardizes the administration’s efforts to help Israel and Saudi Arabia formalize relations, one of the ways Biden had hoped would stabilize the Middle East and allow attention to be focused on the growing challenge of China.
The administration has responded that the money, which has not yet been released, can only be spent for humanitarian purposes.
Hamas was founded in 1987 during the first Palestinian uprising against Israeli occupation of Gaza and the West Bank.
The group’s charter calls for establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel.
The political wing of Hamas was born in later years.
Hamas' political wing has controlled Gaza since winning elections in 2006, which prompted Israel to enforce a blockade on Gaza.
It was founded by a Palestinian activist connected to the Muslim Brotherhood, a transnational Islamist organization with ties to Egypt.
The militant organization is committed to the destruction of Israel and has been designated a terrorist group by the U.S., the EU and various nations.
The group has vowed to annihilate Israel and has been responsible for many suicide bombings and other deadly attacks on civilians and Israeli soldiers.
Over the years, Hamas received backing from Arab countries, such as Qatar and Turkey.
Recently, it’s moved closer to Iran and its allies.
Hamas has said it attacked Israel in response to mounting Palestinian suffering under Israeli occupation and Israel's and Egypt's 16-year blockade of Gaza that has decimated Gaza's economy.
Israel has made peace deals with Arab counties in recent years but not made concessions in its long conflict with the Palestinians.
The U.S. has tried to reach a deal between Israel and Saudi Arabia, a bitter rival of Hamas’ Iranian backers.
Meanwhile, Israel’s new far-right government was working to cement Israeli settlements in the West Bank despite Palestinian opposition.
Hamas leaders say an Israeli crackdown on militants in the West Bank, continued construction of settlements − which the international community has deemed illegal − thousands of prisoners in Israeli jails, and its ongoing blockade of Gaza pushed it to attack.
Hamas' surprise sea, land and air attack resulted in the largest one-day killing of Jews since the Holocaust.
The attack began with thousands of rockets fired from inside the Gaza Strip into Israel early Saturday.
About an hour later, Hamas gunmen crossed the Israeli border at different locations and began attacking residential areas and military bases.
An unknown number were taken hostage.
Contributing: Associated Press
Reach Joey Garrison on X, formerly known as Twitter, @joeygarrison.
Three days after conflict broke out between Hamas militants and Israel, the toll has risen to approximately 1,000 missing or killed Israelis, 1,500 dead militants, and at least 11 deceased Americans.
President Joe Biden has said that some U.S. citizens remain unaccounted for, and estimates show that 130 or more people were kidnapped by Hamas, with at least one American-Israeli among them.
The FBI has issued a statement assuring that, while there is no specific threat to the U.S., the agency is working with partners in Israel to find impacted Americans there.
"Reports of deceased, injured or missing Americans are being treated with the utmost urgency and aggressively investigated," the statement posted on X reads.
As airlines halt flights to and from the country and The State Department issues travel advisories for the region, several elected officials have said that their constituents are reaching out for help getting out.
At least five American groups traveling to Israel have found themselves stuck in a violent and destructive dispute.
Here are those groups, their shelter plans and how they've planned to make it home.
They started their trip in Tel Aviv on Friday, but moved to the northern part of the country when the war broke out, AL.com reported.
"Good morning and welcome to morning prayer this Sunday morning in beautiful Galilee," Dyson said in a Facebook live video posted Sunday.
He has been providing updates about the group in the daily prayer videos.
The group had three previously-booked flights cancelled, and as of Tuesday morning, he said that some members were able to start traveling home.
The group is spreading out their journey home across several days and routes.
"We will certainly have a story to tell when we get back," Dyson said.
"But we will get back."
Eleven people belonging to the Shades Mountain Baptist Church are also stuck in Israel, AL.com reported.
A pastor at the church called for prayer Sunday morning, saying they are safe but hoping they return soon.
Shade Mountain Baptist Church did not immediately return USA TODAY's request for comment.
"I am in communication with our Deputy Chief who informed me that though the delegation is close to the Gaza Strip, they are sheltering in a safe location and every effort is underway for their safe return to New York," the Facebook post on Saturday read.
The New York Times reported that they were in Ashdod, and they spent Saturday taking cover in bomb shelters.
They were able to leave Sunday via a connecting flight through Dubai.
What it would mean for US and Middle East security
A group of 12 travelers from First Baptist Church in Knoxville, Tennessee, went to Israel to follow the historical footsteps of Jesus, and now is exploring alternative ways to get out of a country that has become a war zone.
While the group might be able to depart on its scheduled flight Oct. 21, armed conflict with Hamas could render its travel plans impossible.
"We are exploring options for alternative travel in the event that we realize even where we are is unsafe," Senior Pastor Brent McDougal told Knox News, part of the USA TODAY Network, on Monday, Oct. 9, from Jerusalem, where he said the group was safe.
The group, which arrived in Tel Aviv on Oct. 6, is scheduled to fly out of the city but might seek options for a flight from another country or leave sooner if violence reaches Jerusalem.
For now, they are enclosed in the Old City section of Jerusalem, where sacred sites like the Western Wall and the Dome of the Rock mosque rest within ancient walls.
More:Thousands across US gather for vigils, protests over Israel-Hamas war: 'Broken the hearts of many people'
"I know they heard sirens, I know there was a lot of concern," Morning Star Church member Trevor Wolfe told KSDK.
Pastor Mike Schreiner has been releasing video updates from abroad on Facebook.
Initially the group planned to fly out of Jerusalem Sunday, but they took a bus across the border to Jordan after their flights were canceled.
They hope to be safe from the conflict in Jordan and will take varied flight paths back to the U.S., according to KSDK.
LAS VEGAS – The Green Bay Packers aren’t a talentless team.
They probably have as much or more talent than two of the three teams that have beaten them this year.
But, boy, are they a bad team.
Their offense is a mess.
Their defense can be pretty good but only to a point.
They are affected any time one of their starters can’t play because of injury.
And they have too many players who just do what they’re told and not whatever it takes to be a difference-maker.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
They also celebrated the end of a years-long battle against Greater Albany Public School District.
Their excitement to be a teen attending a Corvallis high school is a stark difference from their emotions as an Albany elementary school student.
Indigenous land acknowledgments are everywhere.
After taking hold on college campuses, they are recited with growing frequency at schools, sporting events and church services.
They are added as signatures at the end of emails.
They are being posted on the websites of museums, libraries, and other institutions as the era of racial reckoning and social justice that has followed the emergence of the Black Lives Matter movement and the killing of George Floyd continues to evolve.
Meet the 2024 Toyota Grand Highlander.
Bigger and better than the Highlander three-row midsize SUV that’s a mainstay of Toyota’s lineup, the Grand Highlander is evidence you can never be too rich or have too much legroom.
NFL power rankings entering Week 6 of the 2023 season (previous rank in parentheses):
49ers (1): What else is there to say about a team that's been in the top spot since the season started?
S.F.’s +99 point differential is already 20 better than the next team.
Probably have the best defense (though that can be settled at Cleveland on Sunday).
Might have the best offense.
Stars on basically every unit.
And second-year QB Brock Purdy continues to effectively play mistake-free football, his league-leading 123.1 passer rating testament to that.
Eagles (3): They're 5-0 in successive seasons for the first time.
Next up, the Jets – a team Philadelphia has never lost to in 12 previous meetings.
Feels safe to slot the reigning NFC champs at 6-0 and look ahead to their Week 7 date with Miami.
Sunday, Montgomery became the first Detroit rusher to top 100 yards in consecutive games since … Kevin Jones in 2004.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Weird as this sounds, Milano might be the more valuable player to Buffalo's defense.
Dolphins (7): How fast is Miami?
Per Next Gen Stats, the Fins have produced the five top speeds among all plays this season and seven of the top nine.
Jaguars (14): The first team to play multiple international games in a season is now the first to win multiple – both coming against teams with winning records.
Stay in Europe, Jags – it seems inevitable, and you're apparently better for it.
Cowboys (4): Good thing they're not part of the NFC West … even if it would make more sense geographically.
In its two defeats (to Arizona and San Francisco), Dallas has lost by a collective 70-26.
Steelers (12): They've gained the third-fewest yards in the league and surrendered the third most, the delta more than 600 yards.
But 11 takeaways, 17 sacks and just enough clutch plays from QB Kenny Pickett can mask such warts … and propel you to the top of the AFC North.
Ravens (8): It's been an uneven start, to say the least, but it's also unusual to play four of five away from home so early in the season – and Baltimore's three-game roadie winds to a conclusion Sunday in London.
Rams (9): Sure, they're 2-3, but they've hung tough against the league's top teams, San Francisco and Philadelphia.
Seahawks (10): Coming off their bye, they're currently not scheduled to face a team with a winning record until November.
Time to make serious hay toward a playoff berth.
Buccaneers (16): This marks three times in four years that QB Baker Mayfield has won three of his first four starts.
His only 4-1 beginning led to a deep playoff run in Cleveland.
Saints (20): Great sidebar to Sunday's 34-0 runaway in New England.
Pretty cool story amid the NFL's annual "Crucial Catch" campaign for cancer screening.
Falcons (18): If you know anything about the NFL, and running backs in particular, best to appreciate their genius while you can.
Texans (11): No matter Sunday's outcome, this will be their best six-game start since 2019.
But it would help if Houston would run the ball better after cracking 90 yards just once so far this season.
Chargers (22): Did you know WR Keenan Allen owns the NFL record for most games – three – with at least 15 receptions?
With wingman Mike Williams down for the count, wouldn't be a shock if Allen extends that mark before this year is out.
Bengals (26): They'll only be on the road two more times before December, so maybe the comforts of home are good for QB Joe Burrow's calf and team focus with a brutal upcoming schedule (Seattle, San Francisco, Buffalo) for a Cincinnati club that may finally otherwise be turning the corner.
Raiders (28): If they're going to salvage their season and use Monday's win as a catapult, now is the time.
The Silver and Black face three one-win teams (Patriots, Bears, Giants) over the next four weeks.
Packers (19): No worse way to go into a bye week than off a terrible loss.
But Green Bay's next three opponents (Broncos, Vikings, Rams) have a combined four wins, so hopefully a good time for the Pack to get healthy figuratively and literally.
Vikings (25): Why is offensive balance often a virtue?
Consider one-win Minnesota, which has thrown more passes (204) than any team in the league while attempting the fewest runs (91).
Bears (32): The Justin Fields-to-DJ Moore Show has sparked Chicago's revival.
But look closer, and you'll also note a running game averaging better than 170 yards the past two weeks and some encouraging signs of life on defense at Washington.
Commanders (15): Only Denver has surrendered more points than Washington's 160.
Only Minnesota has turned it over more times than Washington's 10.
Some consolation for a team that hasn't run an offensive play with the lead yet and has now been outscored by a league-most 91 points.
Cardinals (27): No NFC team is blitzing less frequently – worth wondering if that's the right approach given the way Arizona's D has been torn up the past two weeks.
Patriots (23): If the dynasty wasn't already dead, then life support has officially been unplugged.
Panthers (31): The NFL's only winless team just turned it in its worst defensive performance (42 points allowed) of the season.
A trip to Miami.
Follow USA TODAY Sports' Nate Davis on X, formerly Twitter @ByNateDavis.
Week 5 in the NFL provided needed perspective.
In all, the slate didn't provide too many stunning outcomes or last-second twists.
Here's our full rundown of the biggest winners and losers from Week 5 in the NFL:
What's scary about the 5-0 49ers is not solely the manner in which they thoroughly dismantled the Dallas Cowboys in a 42-10 blowout on Sunday night, but rather that it all seemed a little ordinary.
That's life as the clearly best team in football after five weeks.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Still, let's not let one of the most sterling performances of the early season pass by without giving it proper recognition.
With the rest of the October schedule filled by teams at or below .500, it could be some time before we see a meaningful challenge for a group that has tied a franchise record with 15 consecutive wins.
Is it too late for them to offer to take either the Baltimore Ravens' or Tennessee Titans' spot in next week's London tilt to go for the triple?
In handling the Buffalo Bills in a 25-20 win after last week's victory over the Atlanta Falcons, the Jaguars became the first NFL team to play consecutive games abroad.
But there were plenty of things Sunday that Jacksonville can take back home to Duval County.
Trevor Lawrence pushed past some miscues to establish the electric connection with Calvin Ridley (seven catches, 122 yards) that fans had been hoping to see since this summer.
And the defense kept Josh Allen off balance with consistent pressure via the blitz.
With a manageable schedule before the Week 9 bye, the Jaguars have a chance to create some distance in the AFC South race and set up a favorable outlook for playoff seeding.
Netting one offensive touchdown against what is far and away the league's worst defense is nothing to brag about, but Sunday was about far more than the stats for Hackett and the New York Jets.
No need to hold back anymore, however, after Sunday's 31-21 win over Denver.
But Hackett can now let the result – as well as the Jets' players and social media team – do all the talking for him.
This week, the second-year signal-caller was far more catalyst than caretaker in a last-second 21-19 comeback win against the Houston Texans.
Long-awaited connections with his top targets in tight end Kyle Pitts (seven catches, 87 yards) and wide receiver Drake London (six catches, 78 yards) finally materialized.
Maybe dispatching the Arizona Cardinals 34-20 in a get-right game doesn't completely undo the myriad setbacks the team suffered in its first four games, but the Bengals appear to be on a much steadier course now.
Burrow finally looked fluid and comfortable, with much of his mobility seemingly having returned after the quarterback was hampered by a calf injury since the start of the season.
And just one week after he explained in frustration that he's "always (expletive) open," Chase exploded for 15 catches, 192 yards and three touchdowns.
The squeaky receiver gets the targets.
For all the histrionics about Cincinnati's start, the Bengals now stand at 2-3 with their star players seemingly back in a good place.
There's still work to be done, but there's no reason to write this team off.
One of the more disappointing developments of September was the steadily building training camp buzz around Pickens – the Pittsburgh Steelers' ultra-promising second-year receiver – fading into a dull hum amid persistent woes plaguing his entire offense.
For one week, at least, fans got a glimpse of the dynamic downfield threat that Pickens can be.
Trailing by four with just over two minutes remaining against the Baltimore Ravens, Steelers quarterback Kenny Pickett found the 6-3, 200-pound target on a back-shoulder throw for a 21-yard gain.
Two plays later, Pickens dusted Ravens cornerback Marlon Humphrey – who was playing in his first game back after August foot surgery – for a 41-yard go-ahead touchdown in a 17-10 triumph.
It's probably not the kind of play that the Steelers faithful can routinely expect from oft-criticized offensive coordinator Matt Canada.
But incorporating Pickens more can only help invigorate what has been a languishing attack.
On Sunday, he got a reminder of what it's like to be on the other side of that dynamic.
It's not clear if the Cowboys could have done much differently to have had a semblance of a chance in Sunday night's catastrophic outing against the 49ers.
What is apparent: As both as a coach and a play-caller, McCarthy proved to be no match for Kyle Shanahan.
In what was clearly designed to be a statement game for the Cowboys after the 49ers ended their playoff hopes in the past two seasons, Dallas was outclassed in almost every facet.
What McCarthy can muster might be enough to beat up on the bottom and middle tiers of the NFC, but any notion of the Cowboys beating the 49ers – and potentially the Philadelphia Eagles – on the road in January seems like a distant dream.
That kind of carelessness is no doubt maddening to a coach who hammers fundamentals and sound ball security.
But this pairing is looking more tenuous with each week, and Jones might need to find mentorship elsewhere to get his career back on track.
Lamar Jackson unraveled late in the fourth quarter with an interception that paved the way for Pittsburgh's comeback and a fumble that deflated any hopes for Baltimore's own rally.
And prior to all that, a blocked punt for a safety helped spark a Steelers team that had been stagnant.
The slip-up could prove costly in the long run.
The Ravens had a chance to begin pulling away from the pack in the AFC North, but instead they fell into a first-place tie with Pittsburgh.
Whatever mojo they had from last week's statement win over the Miami Dolphins must not have made it through customs for the overseas showdown with the Jaguars.
The offense was imbalanced and error-prone.
The defense was trampled for 29 first downs and 196 rushing yards.
Most worrisome, however, were the mounting injuries.
If the Bills don't shore things up, this could be a harbinger of the franchise's fate against the AFC's contender class.
There's still no reason to sound the alarm on a No.
1 pick who's just four starts into his professional career.
Still, after the Detroit Lions' 42-24 win over the Carolina Panthers, it's difficult to watch Young operate in this offense without wincing.
The second of Young's two interceptions, however, was the real cause for concern, as cornerback Jerry Jacobs baited the typically discerning signal-caller into the kind of throw he avoided throughout his college career.
The signs are troubling in Carolina, as there's scant support from the offensive line or running game, and the coaching staff seems to be doing Young few favors.
While this season appears to be a write-off and one that should solely be measured by Young's development, substantial change might still be required at some point.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
“So, I guess that counts.”
It was that kind of night for the 49ers (5-0), who remained perfect with their most complete game of the season.
While they handled the fundamentals with authority, they were also able to spice it up with the trick play that has been in the playbook for the better part of two years.
The 49ers ran the play during walk-through practices on Wednesday, Friday and again on Saturday.
It worked like this: McCaffrey took a handoff toward right tackle, then tossed the football to Samuel, circling back on a reverse.
Of course, the style points for the 49ers came with plenty of substance as they dismantled Dallas in myriad ways.
And you thought the gap between these teams was tight?
Take the quarterbacking.
No, it’s not all on Prescott.
His running game was feeble.
Dallas’ defense couldn’t slow down the 49ers offense.
And it was not the night for the Cowboys (3-2) to get into a shootout, unable to even get a first down until the second quarter (they finished with eight).
Prescott had three interceptions (14-of-24, 153 yards, 1 TD, 51.6 rating) and was sacked three times.
Surely, the 49ers defense had much to do with Prescott’s troubles.
No one exemplified that quite like linebacker Fred Warner.
In leading the 49ers with eight tackles (5 solo), Warner notched a sack, forced a fumble with a timely punch-out of the football from the arms of Tony Pollard and intercepted a deflected pass.
Before leaving, Warner maintained that there is no such thing as luck when it comes to big-time performances.
By that, he wasn’t dismissing the breaks that teams can capitalize on.
Instead, he preached that preparation and skill provide impetus to the breaks.
He demonstrated that with his knack on the turnovers.
That’s striking when considering how many 49ers defenders remain from the 2019 team that advanced to the Super Bowl.
In any event, there was the sense that they haven’t clicked yet this season after being the NFL’s stingiest defense last season.
The latest effort, though, marked a major step.
In allowing just the eight first downs and four turnovers, the 49ers controlled Dallas with a 4-for-11 clip on third downs.
And the domination on both sides of the ball was reflected with San Francisco’s 37 minutes of possession.
When did Warner feel it would be that type of night?
I’ve been a part of a lot of good teams since I’ve been here, but the way the offense is playing is unlike anything I’ve seen.
“That right there lets me know as long as the defense is doing our job, we’re always going to have a chance.”
Like a chance for a special season.
The 32 things we learned from Week 5 of the 2023 NFL season:
The Chicago Bears legend wasn’t the league’s first great linebacker, nor is he universally regarded as the best to man the position 50 years after his final appearance as a player.
He exemplified the Bears.
He exemplified Chicago at large.
And he exemplified the NFL in his prime.
(And I enjoyed his second phase as an entertainer, watching him in the TV series “Blue Thunder” as a kid.)
Rest easy, sir.
Pittsburgh’s offense had yet another spotty showing in Sunday’s 17-10 victory, but Pickett – playing despite on a battered knee – put the Steelers ahead for good with a 41-yard touchdown pass to WR George Pickens with 77 seconds left.
The number of losses Ravens QB Lamar Jackson has in four career starts against Pittsburgh, Sunday’s performance including a pair of turnovers – one a killer interception in the end zone that the Steelers leveraged into their game-winning drive in what was likely a fatal 14-point swing.
Fourth-quarter miscues remain a stain on Jackson's otherwise glittering pro résumé.
Josh Allen > Josh Allen.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Zach Wilson > Russell Wilson.
The Denver Broncos veteran quarterback outplayed the New York Jets’ third-year enigma on the stat sheet but not well enough to get the win in a game both clubs, each starting the day 1-3, needed to remain on AFC playoff life support.
Nathaniel Hackett > Sean Payton.
The former Denver coach (and presently Jets OC) came out on the winning side against the current one, who derided Hackett this summer to USA TODAY Sports for doing one of the “worst coaching jobs in the history of the NFL.”
Injured Jets QB Aaron Rodgers, who defended Hackett during training camp, had looked forward to this matchup but could only contribute digitally.
Jets CB Bryce Hall scored the game-clinching TD on a 39-yard scoop-and-score after Russell Wilson was stripped in the final minute.
We've had a terrible game of the year in successive weeks, 49ers-Cowboys following Bills-Dolphins down the chute.
New England Patriots QB Mac Jones threw his fourth career pick-six at Gillette Stadium … matching the number Tom Brady ever threw in the building.
New England has lost its past two games by a collective score of 72-3.
The number of plays the Patriots ran on third down\.
They converted one for a first down.
New England never even reached the red zone.
The number of sacks New York Giants QB Daniel Jones absorbed over the past two games.
No wonder his neck hurts.
After hanging another 524 yards on the Giants in Sunday’s 31-16 victory, the Miami Dolphins’ top-ranked offense now has 2,568 – most ever in NFL history through five games.
The number of penalties in Sunday’s Bills-Jaguars game in London.
Way to market the game abroad, fellas.
The number of points, minimum, the NFC North-leading Detroit Lions have scored in their past 14 games, a team record.
Welcome back to Indianapolis Colts RB Jonathan Taylor, who gained 34 yards on seven touches after his 2023 debut was delayed by a healing ankle and money matters.
But congratulations on your new contract – one that could stabilize your positional market.
Welcome back to Los Angeles Rams WR Cooper Kupp, who had eight catches for 118 yards after missing the first four weeks with a hamstring injury.
And the Bills sure are likely to need him given the way their defense is being decimated by injuries, notably the one LB Matt Milano (knee) suffered Sunday.
Houston Texans rookie QB C.J.
The Giants haven’t run an offensive play with the lead all season.
Flagging another artificial surface?
The number of NFL teams – all of them save the Chiefs – K.C.
Follow USA TODAY Sports' Nate Davis on X, formerly Twitter @ByNateDavis.
The forums are scheduled to take place Oct. 10-15.
Voters who attend will have a chance to directly ask candidates the questions on their mind and receive in-person responses.
All times are Eastern.
The forums are free and open to the public on a first-come, first-serve basis.
At the start of the forums, candidates make their brief opening remarks before proceeding to answer questions from the audience and engage in a meaningful dialogue about various issues.
WASHINGTON — From fiery debates over controversial issues to promises for swing state voters, high-profile factors typically sway the results of a presidential election.
But sometimes, these factors come in the form of a state-level race a year out from Election Day.
The judge they elect could shape the 2024 presidential election.
In recent years, lawsuits over voting issues and allegations of election fraud have rocked Pennsylvania.
After the 2020 election, former President Donald Trump’s campaign filed a lawsuit alleging Philadelphia officials violated state law while ballots were being tallied, which the Pennsylvania Supreme Court dismissed.
Contentious debates around Act 77, Pennsylvania’s mail-in-voting law, have also landed at the state’s Supreme Court.
But if arguments over ballots, polling places and other voting questions emerge in the 2024 presidential election, whoever is elected to the state's Supreme Court this year could be crucial as these fights play out in Pennsylvania.
Here's how this state-level race could have major implications for the 2024 race for the White House.
He pointed to the high court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade last year, ending the constitutional right for women to have an abortion, as well as rulings on the First Amendment and LGBTQ rights.
If Trump loses the 2024 race, the former president may bring allegations of election fraud to the Pennsylvania court.
She pointed to her time as a federal prosecutor representing victims of crime.
And, though she hasn’t ruled on election litigation, she has served as a member of the board of elections in Montgomery County.
She has previously criticized Act 77, Pennsylvania's mail-in voting law.
Earlier this year, she told a Republican forum that "Not much I can say, but I can tell you that Act 77 has been very bad for our Commonwealth," the Associated Press reported.
However, she argued that there was inconsistency with the Pennsylvania State Supreme Court's rulings on undated and incorrectly dated ballots.
Pennsylvania is known to be a swing state in presidential elections, but the state’s Supreme Court race could also be a close battle as voters weigh both candidates.
He “will preserve the right of everybody to vote, and the right of everybody to have unfettered access to vote and not have to face obstacles.”
“I think it's important to everyone, no matter which side of the aisle you're on as a candidate, voting integrity is huge, and it's an important issue,” Nestor said.
But the race could chip away at the court's Democratic majority, especially if justices split on issues in the future.
J.J. Abbott, executive director of Commonwealth Communications, who was a press secretary to former Pennsylvania Democratic Governor Tom Wolf, said that some cases are nuanced, and Democrats could take opposing viewpoints.
In cases where the courts have deadlocked, the results of this election could have big implications.
He added that if the 2023 race did result in a narrower 4-3 Democratic majority, future elections could flip the majority on the court, resulting in potential challenges to Act 77.
WASHINGTON — Presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy Jr. announced he is dropping his Democratic bid for president and re-entering the 2024 race for the White House as an independent.
Kennedy, an heir to the storied political family, said Monday he will no longer be running as a Democratic candidate, instead opting to pursue an independent bid for president.
"And that's not all − I'm here to join you in making a new Declaration of Independence for our entire nation."
Kennedy during his speech on Monday criticized swaths of the economy and American political system, saying his campaign will declare independence from corporations, Wall Street, technology and pharmaceutical companies, military contractors and the "mercenary media."
He also called the traditional two-party system in the United States "rigged" for voters.
Kennedy said he didn't make the decision to run as an independent lightly, saying that it's painful for him to let go of his family's longtime party.
"I've come here today to declare our independence from the tyranny of corruption, which robs us of affordable lives, our belief in the future and our respect for each other," he said.
"But to do that, I must first declare my own independence, independence from the Democratic Party and from all other political parties."
Kennedy, the son of former Sen. Robert F. Kennedy and nephew of former President John F. Kennedy, both assassinated in the 1960s, has campaigned on a platform of fighting for the "liberties guaranteed by the Constitution."
Kennedy's sister, Kerry Kennedy, called her brother's announcement "deeply saddening" in a post on X, formerly Twitter.
She added "we denounce his candidacy and believe it to be perilous for our country" and tagged her siblings: Rory Kennedy, Joe Kennedy and Kathleen Kennedy Townsend.
"The decision of our brother Bobby to run as a third party candidate against Joe Biden is dangerous to our country," she wrote.
"Bobby might share the same name as our father, but he does not share the same values, vision or judgment."
Kennedy has had to defend many of his own claims, specifically around debunked views that vaccines are linked to autism.
Vaccines do not cause autism, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National Institutes of Health.
Kennedy referenced the unsuccessful campaigns of prior independent candidates, but argued that his would be different.
"This time it's going to be different because this time the independent is going to win," he said.
"I'm happy to say that the old political alignments are dissolving," he said.
"The right and the left have become all mixed up anyhow," he said.
He also claimed that if he wins the White House on an independent ticket, he'll be "independent" of political forces other than voters.
For example, he vowed that he would pursue foreign policy focused on peace and diplomacy because he will be independent of military contractors, the private companies that do business with U.S. officials.
Kennedy's departure from the Democratic Party could shake things up in the race between President Joe Biden and former President Donald Trump.
Kennedy polled at 14%, according to the survey.
When Kennedy was running as a Democratic candidate, skeptics said his platform crossed the political spectrum, ranging from that of a “Kennedy Democrat” to issues that resonate with the right and could potentially pull voters away from Trump.
The now-independent candidate struggled to label himself when USA TODAY asked him where he falls on the political spectrum earlier this year.
“I think the party definitions are so topsy-turvy right now, I wouldn’t know how to describe myself,” he told USA TODAY.
And Kennedy has made an effort to reach to the right.
He is scheduled to speak at the Conservative Political Action Conference in Las Vegas later this month, alongside other Republican figures.
Kennedy told USA TODAY earlier this year part of his campaign strategy is to reach all supporters − even those registered to the opposite party.
He found endorsements and airtime with celebrities including Comedian Rob Schneider, NFL quarterback Aaron Rodgers, actress Alicia Silverstone, former Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey and the ultra-conservative InfoWars host Alex Jones.
Joe Rogan, a talk show host who has been critical of the government's handling of the COVID-19 pandemic and vaccines and hosted Kennedy on his show to discuss vaccines.
Kennedy in June participated with Elon Musk in a Twitter Space.
Support for a third party presidential candidate has increased, according to an Oct. 4 Gallup poll, which found 63% of U.S. adults agree that a third major party is needed and the Republican and Democratic parties do "such a poor job" representing Americans.
It marks a 7-point increase from one year ago.
Some Trump allies are also supporting Kennedy.
That includes former Fox News host Tucker Carlson, who dedicated an episode of his Twitter show to Kennedy.
Steve Bannon, a former senior aide in Trump's White House, applauded Kennedy on his War Room podcast in April.
More:'Raised to argue': Robert F. Kennedy Jr. says his 2024 campaign is 'largely misunderstood'
Voters who attend will have a chance to directly ask candidates the questions on their mind and receive in-depth responses.
The forums are free and open to the public on a first-come, first-serve basis.
At the start of the forums, candidates make their brief opening remarks before proceeding to answer questions from the audience and engage in a meaningful dialogue about various issues.
Former Arkansas Gov.
Asa Hutchinson's forum will be held on Tuesday evening.
Under Ronald Reagan, he served as a U.S. attorney for the Western District of Arkansas and joined the U.S. House where he would serve three terms.
Former South Carolina Gov.
Nikki Haley will address attendees on Thursday night.
From 2011 to 2017, Haley served as governor before stepping down and becoming the United Nations ambassador during the Trump administration.
She announced her presidential campaign in February, citing her record of economic growth as governor and deep knowledge of world affairs garnered during her time as UN ambassador.
Noting that Republicans have “lost the popular vote in seven out of the last eight presidential elections,” Haley declared: “That has to change.”
But that shouldn’t come as a surprise.
North Dakota Gov.
Doug Burgum will meet with voters on the morning of Friday, Oct. 13 at 10 a.m.
On the campaign trail, former Vice President Mike Pence, 64, has acknowledged he’s “known well but not well known.” He’ll do his best to change that when he meets with voters on Friday, Oct. 13 at 3 p.m.
In 2013, he became governor of Indiana.
We can defend our nation and secure our borders, we can revive our economy and put our nation back on a path to a balanced federal budget.
Seniors on Social Security were thrown a major bone at the start of 2023, when their benefits rose 8.7%.
That cost-of-living adjustment, or COLA, was the largest one to arrive in decades, and it was spurred by the rampant inflation that plagued consumers throughout 2022.
At this point, Social Security recipients are really eager to know what 2024's COLA will look like.
And they won't have to sit tight too much longer.
On Oct. 12, the Bureau of Labor Statistics is scheduled to release September's Consumer Price Index (CPI).
That report will include data from the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W), a subset of the CPI.
What you need to know:Medicare open enrollment for 2024 is coming soon.
Here's when it is and how to prepare.
Once that information comes in, the Social Security Administration (SSA) will be able to calculate a COLA for 2024.
It typically makes that announcement right away, which means that come Oct. 12, Social Security recipients should be in the know.
But whether they end up happy with next year's COLA is a different story.
Let's get one thing out of the way – 2024's Social Security COLA won't come close to the raise seniors received at the start of 2023.
At this point, 2024 COLA estimates are generally coming in within the 3% to 3.5% range.
Historically speaking, that's actually not so low for a COLA.
Rather, it's that seniors' most recent point of comparison is 8.7%, so a raise in the 3% range is apt to seem stingy, even if it's not.
That's apt to be a source of relief for seniors who get the bulk of their retirement income from Social Security.
No matter what 2024's Social Security COLA ends up being, seniors should be aware that a hike in Medicare Part B premiums has the potential to whittle that raise down.
Seniors who are enrolled in Medicare and Social Security at the same time have their Part B premiums deducted from their benefits automatically.
So if Part B gets a lot more expensive, seniors will see even less from their 2024 COLA.
In 2023, the cost of Medicare Part B actually went down.
That's not expected to happen for 2024.
In fact, estimates from earlier this year had the cost of Medicare Part B rising from $164.90 (the standard monthly premium now) to $174.80 next year.
So all told, seniors will need to wait on not just an announcement from the SSA on next year's COLA, but also for an update on Medicare premium costs.
All told, Oct. 12 is apt to be a big day for anyone who collects Social Security.
In addition to a 2024 COLA announcement, the SSA will put out a fact sheet on other changes to the program, like what the wage cap looks like and what the earnings test limit will entail for Social Security recipients who work and collect benefits at the same time.
So clearly, it's a good day to read or listen to the news and be on the lookout for important information.
The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy.
The Motley Fool is a USA TODAY content partner offering financial news, analysis and commentary designed to help people take control of their financial lives.
Its content is produced independently of USA TODAY.
Offer from the Motley Fool:The $21,756 Social Security bonus most retirees completely overlook If you're like most Americans, you're a few years (or more) behind on your retirement savings.
But a handful of little-known "Social Security secrets" could help ensure a boost in your retirement income.
For example: one easy trick could pay you as much as $21,756 more... each year!
Once you learn how to maximize your Social Security benefits, we think you could retire confidently with the peace of mind we're all after.
Simply click here to discover how to learn more about these strategies.
Time’s up for millions of Americans: The final deadline to file your 2022 taxes is approaching quickly.
Millions of people file every year for an automatic tax-filing extension beyond the original April deadline.
By mid-May, more than 142 million taxpayers had filed returns, according to the IRS.
But the agency expected about 168 million returns, which means more than 25 million taxpayers were waiting beyond the April 18 deadline to file.
Now, there's no more procrastinating.
The final deadline to file your tax return is Monday, Oct. 16.
If you don’t meet it, expect to start accumulating hefty penalties.
The late-filing penalty “can be 10 times as costly as the penalty for not paying,” the IRS said.
The failure-to-file penalty depends on how late your filing is and how much you owe, and the clock started on the original due date of April 18, not the Oct. 16 extension deadline.
Interest is also charged on penalties, meaning your balance will continue to balloon until it’s paid in full.
The interest rate for an individual's unpaid taxes is 7%, compounded daily.
The monthly late-filing penalty is generally 5% and the late-payment penalty is normally 0.5%.
Both max out at 25%, the IRS said.
Even if you owe money you can’t pay, file anyway.
Most people can set up a payment plan on IRS.gov to pay off their balance over time.
Some may opt to get a loan or pay by credit card to resolve a tax debt, the IRS said.
If you owe both federal and state taxes, try to pay off your state tax debt first.
“Some states have private collection agencies you’ll have to deal with if you don’t pay your taxes.”
State penalties for late filings and payments are also generally higher than IRS ones, he added.
Some may have even filed for a tax extension, hoping for clarification from the IRS on how to handle potential crypto losses from the scandal.
What happens if you're late paying:Delaying on taxes?
Here's what happens if you don't pay on time.
Those with an address on record with the IRS covered by Federal Emergency Management Agency disaster declarations and those returning from a combat zone may have additional time to file.
◾ Taxpayers affected by flooding in Illinois and Alaska have until Oct. 31 to file.
◾ Those affected by flooding in Vermont have until Nov. 15 to file.
Those people have until Feb. 24 to file various individual and business tax returns.
Taxpayers potentially affected by recent storms should visit the disaster relief page on IRS.gov for the latest information.
◾ Members of the military and others serving in a combat zone typically have 180 days after they leave the combat zone to file returns and pay any taxes due.
If your taxes are due, file no matter what.
You can reach her at mjlee@usatoday.com and subscribe to our free Daily Money newsletter for personal finance tips and business news every Monday through Friday morning.
Nearly 4,300 autoworkers in Canada went on strike against General Motors early Tuesday.
It is the first strike of an automaker in Canada since 1996 and comes after the union reached a tentative agreement with Ford Motor Co., which the workforce ratified on Sept. 24.
The affected facilities are GM's Oshawa Assembly Complex and CCA Stamped Products, St. Catharines Propulsion Plant and GM's Woodstock Distribution Center, all in Ontario.
See UAW strike:See the picket lines as UAW strike launched, targeting big three Detroit automakers
It was the first pension improvement in 15 years with our Ford members.
The Ford agreement includes a 15% increase in wages over the contract term and employees in a defined contribution retirement plan hired on or after Nov. 7, 2016, would be enrolled in a new pension plan in 2025 that would include monthly pensions for workers and surviving spouses.
Other improvements include an increase in the monthly benefit for those workers in a pension plan.
"We’re negotiating and will stick with it until we get a deal our members will support," Payne said.
It's expanded the strike twice since that time to include all 38 of GM and Stellantis parts distribution centers and then to Ford's Chicago Assembly and GM's Lansing Delta Township Assembly plants on Sept 29.
About 25,000 UAW autoworker members are on strike of the 150,000 in the United States.
Follow her on Twitter @jlareauan.
Become a subscriber.
The coveted Nobel Prizes are announced annually, and the most recent installment is here.
With over 400 winners, the United States is the country with the most Nobel Prize winners.
The Nobel Prize is a set of awards given each year to those who “conferred the greatest benefit to humankind,” Nobel Prize founder Alfred Nobel said.
Nobel was an inventor, entrepreneur, scientist and businessman as well as a writer.
When Nobel died, he left most of his fortune to establish these prizes, reflecting each of his interests.
These categories are physics, chemistry, physiology or medicine, literature and peace.
The nomination process for Nobel Prizes begins in September each year, with thousands of academics, scientists, past winners and parliamentary members submitting candidates.
According to the Nobel Prize organization, the nominators “are chosen in such a way that as many countries and universities as possible are represented over time.”
Nobel specified in his will that Swedish institutions would be responsible for selecting the winners of the Nobel Prizes and the Norwegian Parliament was to select the winner of the Nobel Peace Prize.
He also asked the ceremony for the Nobel Peace Prize be held in Norway.
Today, Nobel Day is celebrated by presenting the Nobel Prizes on December 10, the day Nobel died.
The other Nobel Prizes are awarded in Stockholm, Sweden, as requested in Nobel’s will.
The only exception to the annual affair was during World War I and II, when the prizes were not handed out.
There are also a few examples of specific Nobel Prizes not being awarded, like in 1972 when the Nobel Peace Prize was not given, the committee not providing a reason for the departure.
Nobel Prizes 2023:Two Penn scientists awarded for work with mRNA, COVID-19 vaccines
All categories were honored this year and announced in October 2023.
Up to three people or institutions can split the award.
Here's who won:
Nobel Prize money comes from Nobel, who wanted his wealth to be invested into a fund for the prizes.
The interest on that money is used for the prizes today.
While some of the Nobel Prize’s archived winners are known more for their contribution than their fame, there are some well-known household names awarded over the century.
Four U.S. Presidents and one Vice President have been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize:
Other notable laureates, according to the Nobel Prize archives:
Only two Nobel Prize laureates have ever declined the prize.
French playwright Jean-Paul Sartre had a reputation for declining all official honors, and kept up that tradition with the 1964 Nobel Prize in Literature.
The pair were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1973, but Tho declined, saying he was not in a position to accept it.
Adolf Hitler forbade three German Nobel Prize laureates from accepting the Nobel Prize, and Boris Pasternak, awarded the 1958 Nobel Prize in Literature, was coerced by Soviet Union authorities to decline.
Who was Winston Churchill?
USA TODAY is exploring the questions you and others ask every day.
From "How long should you boil hot dogs?"
Head to our Just Curious section to see what else we can answer for you.
Whether you win a couple bucks or take home the top prize, the lottery can be an enticing game.
And with a recent winning ticket being worth $754.6 million, that's all the more reason to want to play.
These five numbers will be between one and 69.
This number will be between one and 26.
You could also choose to have the lottery machine randomly select your numbers for you.
For an extra dollar, you may choose to "power play," which multiplies all non-grand prize winnings by a factor of 2, 3, 4, 5 or 10.
But if you are looking to hit the jackpot, you need more than one match.
Here is a guide to winnings:
These winnings can be multiplied by the "power play" number, if applicable, which is randomly chosen before each drawing.
You could also pay an extra $1 for the "power play," a multiplier that increases your payout for non-jackpot prizes.
What to know if you win the jackpot
Tickets can be purchased in-person at gas stations, convenience stores and grocery stores.
Some airport terminals may also sell lottery tickets.
Must be 18+, 21+ in AZ and 19+ in NE.
Not affiliated with any State Lottery.
Visit jackpocket.com/tos for full terms and conditions.
What's that pest flitting around in your home?
It could be a fly.
The order Diptera classifies insects that have one pair of wings, according to Smithsonian.
Over 110,000 fly species have been described, but there may be more buzzing about.
Flies can be a nuisance if not kept under control.
If you're experiencing an insect infestation and want to know how long flies live before you call for help, read on.
A female housefly will lay its eggs near a food source.
Each batch can include 75 to 120 eggs.
It can take just seven to eight hours for housefly eggs to hatch depending on the temperature.
Once they hatch, the eggs become larvae, also referred to as maggots.
Then they will enter the pupal stage before maturing into adults.
The pupal stage lasts about one week.
Once they reach adulthood, a housefly's lifespan varies.
The average lifespan of a housefly is around one month.
Fruit flies, however, live longer than houseflies.
During its lifespan, a female fruit fly can lay up to 500 eggs.
If your pest problem still persists, you may need to call a removal company for assistance.
The best way to get rid of flies is to prevent them.
Regularly clean your home, especially trash receptacles.
It's also important to keep sink drains clean.
USA TODAY is exploring the questions you and others ask every day.
From "How to get rid of sweat bees?"
− we're striving to find answers to the most common questions you ask every day.
Head to our Just Curious section to see what else we can answer for you.
As we get a good look at this season’s rookies, here’s what you need to know about the youngest players.
Gregory “GG” Jackson II is the youngest player in the NBA.
The 6-foot-9 forward played for South Carolina in 2022 and was the No.
Jackson will be the only 18-year-old in the league when the season resumes on Oct. 24.
He will turn 19 on December 17.
Here are the top 10 youngest NBA players entering the 2023-2024 league:
This year, Dallas high school student Dink Pate, 17, graduated early to join the NBA G League, making him the youngest known U.S.-born player to do so.
He turned 19 on November 18, 2022.
According to the NBA 2022-2023 roster survey, the average age entering last year’s season was 26.01 years old.
The youngest team was Oklahoma City Thunder, with the average player age being 23.14 years old.
NBA Summer League:Top-five picks Scoot Henderson, Amen Thompson exit with injuries
After the 2005 draft, the NBA instituted the “one-and-done” rule, which states that players must either be 19 years old or have played at least one year at a college or university.
LeBron James will start this season – his 21st – as the oldest player in the league.
James was born on Dec. 30, 1984, making him 38 years old as of July 2023.
The Milwaukee Bucks entered the 2022-2023 season as the oldest NBA team, with players’ ages averaging 29.47 years, last year’s roster survey reported.
After the Bucks was Miami Heat at an average of 28.13 years.
USA TODAY is exploring the questions you and others ask every day.
From "What is a two-way contract?"
We're striving to find answers to the most common questions you ask every day.
Head to our Just Curious section to see what else we can answer for you.
In the end, President Joe Biden's immigration strategy turned out to be nothing more than just a grab bag out of former President Donald Trump’s “build the border wall” stunts.
Nobody is buying Biden’s explanation that he must build about 20 miles of border wall in Texas because money appropriated for that purpose must be spent by year’s end.
There’s always a choice.
Biden instead elected to placate critics assailing him over asylum-seekers who have flooded the U.S.-Mexico border and the millions permitted onto American soil since the beginning of his presidency.
Biden’s border wall won’t work to keep migrants out or to placate critics.
“They are a cheaply-conceived – yet exorbitantly expensive – political stunt that does nothing to address a deeply complex humanitarian issue.”
The president himself reiterated the point yet went ahead with it.
Because he’s in the middle of a reelection campaign and immigration – and his inability to handle it – are his biggest liability.
At least 3.6 million migrants have entered the United States under temporary or conditional status in the past three years, according to The Arizona Republic.
The demand to help those migrants and the countless others crossing illegally are overwhelming Democratic-strong enclaves that initially welcomed them – like New York, Chicago and Massachusetts.
Immigration comments demonize crisis:New York Mayor Eric Adam's anti-migrant rhetoric makes him sound like Ron DeSantis
Democratic leaders from those states and elsewhere are clamoring Biden for financial help to meet the demand for services.
At the same time, congressional Republicans stand ready to shut the federal government down over border security that includes resuming building the wall, reports The Wall Street Journal.
This is such a hot mess for Biden that he dared to waive 26 federal laws, including the Clean Air, the Safe Drinking Water and the Endangered Species acts.
This angered environmentalists, who surely won’t forget it when they go the ballot box next year.
US immigration population:No, America is not seeing an unprecedented surge in immigration.
New Census data prove it.
What exactly is Biden’s immigration strategy?
He went from “there will not be another foot of wall constructed” to let’s build it.
He went from promising to restore America’s commitment to humane immigration policies to a series of confusing directives, among them maintaining some of Trump’s harsh restrictions such as "Remain in Mexico," making it harder for asylum-seekers to qualify and swiftly deporting them.
Nothing has worked.
And millions of migrants face legal limbo because immigration courts are overwhelmed and can’t adjudicate cases quickly.
What can Biden do then?
Vanessa Cárdenas of America’s Voice, which champions reforms to help immigrants gain legal status and citizenship, has good ideas.
First, she said in a statement, Biden needs to level with the American people over his options to deal with complex immigration.
Get immigrants to work to fill worker shortage, provide safe and orderly legal pathways to take pressure off the border, more public and private initiatives to get people signed up for work permits and a fair adjudication of their asylum claims.
Finally, greater coordination between federal and local agencies to address housing and shelter shortages.
At this point, though, it is anybody’s guess what Biden will do next on border security and the massive wave of people seeking refuge in the United States.
What we know for sure is that Biden broke his campaign promise of “there will not be another foot of wall constructed” and failing to set up a humane and orderly immigration process.
Reach her at elvia.diaz@arizonarepublic.com or follow her on X (formerly Twitter): @elviadiaz1
Until Saturday, I considered the Israeli city in which I live to be relatively safe.
We’re located in the center of the country, about 45 miles from Gaza and the southern Israeli communities that are frequent targets of Hamas rocket fire.
During wartime, when Hamas fires rockets our way, we have about 90 seconds from when the air raid siren sounds until a possible strike, should the incoming rockets fail to be intercepted by Israel’s Iron Dome anti-missile defense system.
That’s compared with 10 or 20 seconds in the south.
Even during wartime, most of Hamas’ rockets are aimed beyond us, toward Tel Aviv.
We know whenever the Tel Aviv area is getting bombed because one of the Iron Dome batteries that intercepts those projectiles is located close enough to our home that our windows rattle and shake from the booms.
When we heard the terrible news on Saturday about the invasion of Israeli towns by Hamas terrorists from Gaza, we were horrified even as we counted our blessings that we live elsewhere.
Hamas attacks in Israel are heinous:Hamas took advantage of divisions in Israel to start a horrific war targeting civilians
Yet our home actually is quite close to a significant seam line: the so-called Green Line boundary between Israel and the West Bank, which marked the Israel-Jordan border until the 1967 Six Day War.
Today the de facto border in our area is a barbed-wire fence that runs just inside the West Bank, separating us from the territory’s 3 million Palestinians.
The fence, which in many places elsewhere along its route is a concrete security barrier, was constructed in the early 2000s ostensibly to keep Israelis safe from terrorists originating in the West Bank.
But in my neighborhood, it takes some willful blindness to rely on this illusion of safety.
That’s because the fence is full of holes and gaps – some large enough for a person to crawl through, others big enough for a truck.
On my frequent bicycle rides in the area, I often encounter Palestinians who have slipped through these gaps as part of their daily commute to jobs in Israel in fields such as agriculture and construction.
I know that for the most part they’re just trying to make a living, and we’ve exchanged limited, mutually respectful greetings.
I’ve always figured that the Israeli authorities are aware of these gaps (an army patrol road runs along the fence) and assumed that they were taking the requisite precautions to keep us safe from potential terrorists.
Now, after the events on Saturday – when Hamas terrorists infiltrated the Gaza border fence by land, sea and air, killing hundreds of Israeli civilians, taking control of army installations and vehicles, and kidnapping an unknown number of Israelis back to Gaza – those assumptions feel naive and dangerous.
Perhaps residents of the Israeli towns near Gaza, separated from the coastal enclave’s 2 million Palestinians by their own border fence, relied on the same mistaken assumption: that Israel’s leaders were making sure they were safe.
The stunning success with which Hamas attacked Israelis this weekend laid bare countless Israeli failures, from the government to the military to the intelligence services.
Above all, it revealed the failure of Israeli imagination.
It turns out border defenses are easily penetrated when Israelis are complacent.
Assailants armed with explosives, bulldozers and weaponized pickups were enough to overwhelm Israel’s thinly stretched and unprepared forces near Gaza.
These attacks have left me shocked and saddened.
I’m deeply worried about the coming days and weeks, especially for the many soldiers I know going into combat and the unknown number of Israelis now being held captive by Hamas.
I’m also newly concerned for my own family’s safety.
This invasion is a wake-up call that terrible scenarios I might have dismissed as implausible actually could happen – especially if we’re not prepared for the worst.
And we can’t assume that Israel is prepared.
We cannot rely on our leaders.
US needs strong leadership to support our allies.
This is the nightmare scenario that Israelis near Gaza woke up to Saturday, and the one that all Israelis are realizing as we bolt our doors, stay off the streets, check in on relatives and friends, and mourn the dead.
I don’t have a gun in my home.
I’ve never felt I needed one.
I have four children.
Since Saturday, my three younger children have slept there.
After the harsh realities of this weekend, however, I’m starting to understand it’s not enough.
We must prepare for other, once-unthinkable scenarios.
For example, that a terrorist can show up at our front door just as they did down south.
That terrorists in the West Bank could sneak through the porous security fence to try to reproduce here what happened in southern Israel.
Can I even trust that the Israeli government is handling the threat of a nuclear Iran adequately?
My faith in the myth of Israeli security has been shattered.
Sunday night, I took what few weapons I have – an ax, a baseball bat, a saw – and placed them strategically around my home.
We have a garden apartment, so I feel like I need to consider a possible infiltration from our yard, as far-fetched as that scenario might have seemed just a couple of days ago.
I know my measly weapons are no match for a terrorist armed with a gun.
But they’re all I’ve got.
As we begin to grasp the enormity of what is happening, the atmosphere in Israel is one of overwhelming sadness and despair over the unbearable losses but also of newfound determination and solidarity.
In cities and towns around the country, people are mobilizing to help out with the war effort – buying and collecting supplies to send to soldiers who likely won't be home for a while, hosting families displaced from the fighting and, in so many cases, donning army uniforms and reporting for duty.
It's a bright spot amid some very difficult days behind us and ahead.
He works for the Jewish Telegraphic Agency and can be followed on Facebook or Instagram.
To the surprise of many, Utah became the first state in the nation last year to unanimously support making free period products available in all K-12 school bathrooms, followed a year later by providing free period products in all state buildings.
The celebration was marked by Lt. Gov.
Deidre Henderson, a former state senator, standing before the news media and a sea of pink-clad supporters, announcing that the white pants she sported that day were a reminder of the number of Senate votes she had missed during her career at the Capitol because of a lack of access to period products.
For the state that boasts the strongest economy – including employment, growth and education – legislative outcomes of issues impacting women have rarely, if ever, garnered unanimous support.
In fact, Utah also finds itself ranked 50 out of 50 for women’s equality.
These extremes beg for policy over politics.
In 2019, after years of all-male legislative committees tossing out the idea of ending the "tampon tax" without debate, I sat in the office of a state representative, burning to explain the critical need to create policy around menstruation.
Nervous, I described how any issue that involuntarily affects 50% of the population for four to seven days a month, for 40 years in the span of a life, was by nature a key factor in outcomes of education, privacy, public health and the economy.
I locked eyes with him and added that because of the spontaneous nature of periods, it would be by the grace of God that I’d make it through the meeting without leaving my own personal mark on his couch.
He became an avid supporter.
From that moment on, period policy became a movement unlike others – one that put policy above politics.
And because of that, the movement looked different.
It did not look like the polished lobbyists or political strategists of the Capitol.
It looked like dads at rallies, supporting their daughters who wanted to be a part of something bigger than themselves.
It looked like women with strollers and kids realizing just how much their voices echoed in those marble halls.
Like philanthropists understanding that investing in policy meant dollars reaching every corner of a state.
Like teenagers wanting social change and Wednesday-workout groups giving their extra time for good.
It looked like hijabs, high-tops and hipsters.
There was no distinction among parties.
No one-sided political ideology that blocked passage or made ridiculous demands.
And a thirst for thoughtful, economically and equitably sound change.
Since that time, the nonprofit I lead, The Policy Project, has been able to identify other overlooked needs in our community.
We secured statewide funding for more than 60 teen resource centers in high schools focused on providing services for students experiencing homelessness and other mental and physical hardships to meet their basic needs.
This includes laundry, food pantries, showers and toiletries, family advocate workers and mental health support.
Utah is first in the nation to do this.
There is so much more good to be done.
Our plan for 2024: child sexual abuse prevention.
And the idea is spreading.
We are now helping tackle issues with partners in Idaho, Oregon, New Mexico and as far east as Alabama.
The Policy Project is establishing a track record of generating unanimous support in the legislature and creating a blueprint that other states can use to navigate beyond political and territorial lines to accomplish public and societal good.
Our mission is straightforward – remove barriers to opportunity by going upstream – creating solution-based policy at all levels of society, recognizing that issues are not right or left.
Issues are human.
We have discovered that in an environment where the majority is exhausted by the margins of the political spectrum, there is a deep hunger for something that feels like progress.
Like we’re using the extreme access to wealth, education and opportunity to move the needle for everyone in society.
That if we, as citizens, create that demand for healthy, moderate policy, our politicians will have to respond.
Policy trumps politics.
Emily Bell McCormick is the founder of The Policy Project, a U.S. nonprofit that creates movements in order to forward healthy, long-term policy at a state and national level.
The horrendous terrorist attack against Israel this weekend by Hamas terrorists underscores the vital need for strong leaders in the United States who will stand by our allies.
That is all the more important given the presidential election next year.
Who will lead the United States matters more than ever given the turmoil around the world.
This is Israel’s equivalent of our 9/11 (and is even more devastating given Israel’s much smaller population), with more than 700 killed and thousands injured.
At least 11 Americans were killed in the Hamas attack.
If you haven’t watched some of the many awful videos of these terrorists wreaking havoc on civilians, including women, children and the elderly, you should.
More than 100 civilians and soldiers were taken hostage, and who knows what their fate will be.
It’s easy to say “stand with Israel,” but there’s good reason to question what many of our politicians actually mean by saying these words.
Hamas' heinous attack on Israel:Hamas took advantage of divisions in Israel to start a horrific war targeting civilians
For instance, President Joe Biden erred in his initial response to the attack.
The Biden administration’s Office of Palestinian Affairs called on Israel “to refrain from violence and retaliatory attacks.” It later deleted that post.
Biden later expressed his support for Israel, but it should have come from him right away.
The president is already getting serious backlash given the timing of this attack, for good reason.
It was just weeks ago that the Biden administration unfroze $6 billion in Iranian assets in exchange for American hostages.
The White House claims that the money can go only toward humanitarian means.
All money is fungible.
The Wall Street Journal reported that Iran is behind these attacks, as a hater of Israel and a backer of Hamas.
Hamas terrorists have outright credited Iran for its assistance.
Others such as Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York have called for an “immediate ceasefire and de-escalation,” indicating they don’t support Israel’s justified efforts in rooting out the terrorists from Gaza.
It is abhorrent.
My heart is with all those impacted.
Hours later, when the polling probably started to look bad, she followed up with a more direct post.
This attack happened just after Republicans created unnecessary chaos by ousting House Speaker Kevin McCarthy last week.
The House is effectively without a GOP leader in charge, at a time when leadership is a must.
Florida Rep. Matt Gaetz, in organizing the coup, has essentially turned the House over to the Democratic minority leader, whose caucus is full of folks who don’t fully support Israel.
Americans also should pay close attention to how Republican presidential candidates handle their response.
As some in the GOP are bowing to populist demands that America isolate itself from involvement in Ukraine, it's of utmost importance that Republicans nominate a candidate who understands what's at stake in Israel.
Why not Nikki Haley?
Over the weekend, both former Vice President Mike Pence and former South Carolina Gov.
Nikki Haley, also a former U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, came out strongly against the Hamas terrorists.
Haley is absolutely correct in saying the United States should see the attack as not just against Israel, but also against American interests.
There was no equivocation in her response to the terrorists, in telling Israel to “finish them.”
Meanwhile, former President Donald Trump reacted in part by calling out “hummus” at a campaign event.
It’s true that America faces many of its own challenges now, including a border that is way too open, even to those who might wish us harm.
That is not an excuse to abandon our allies when they need us most.
If the United States shows weakness or careless disregard – or elects officials who do – it will be to our country’s peril.
Ingrid Jacques is a columnist at USA TODAY.
Contact her at ijacques@usatoday.com or on X, formerly Twitter: @Ingrid_Jacques
Every time he goes on social media, Aziz Abu Sarah feels sick to his stomach.
The Palestinian man has Jewish friends who've lost family members.
Friends taken hostage.
"We need to see the nuances."
Social media, however, often renders nuance obsolete.
Misinformation and propaganda about the Israel-Hamas conflict – which has resulted in more than 900 Israelis and upwards of 680 Palestinians dead, just days into a new war – fills social media feeds and shows no signs of slowing.
Some posts mention the death toll on only one side.
Some ignore the civilians taken hostage.
Some fail to mention Israel's occupation of Gaza.
Some don't account for why Jewish people around the world grow afraid.
These posts often come from those far away from the conflict, like in the U.S., who feel like they have to say something for the sake of seeming involved.
But declaring support for one "side" over the other and listing out-of-context information about Israelis and Palestinians may hurt more than help your cause.
Infographic social media posts trying to detail a topic as fraught, as frustrating, as long-lasting as the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will always lack critical details due to social media's bite-size commentary nature.
Experts warn you should seek greater context before sharing anything.
It's perfectly acceptable – and even preferred – for you to stay quiet if you don't know enough about what you're talking about.
"Not everything is black and white," Abu Sarah says.
Abu Sarah worries the propaganda and misinformation could be result in deadly consequences, for those in the Middle East and elsewhere.
"People will read it, get angry and do things."
The latest:Israel regains control over Gaza Strip border; rocket attacks intensify
Websites like Instagram and X, formerly known as Twitter, speak in soundbites, not dissertations.
The sites have historically faced difficulty combating antisemitic and Islamophobic posts.
Plus, "we know that algorithms can trend toward feeding people polarizing and extremist content to keep them clicking," says Sarah Parkinson, assistant professor of political science and international studies at Johns Hopkins University.
"The lack of moderation makes it easy for individuals and organizations to harass people into silence."
Social media infographics, of course, can be helpful resources in educating those completely uninformed.
But the boundaries are not clear.
Jacobs says some of the posts he's seen have hurt.
"I, every day, would not only defend but really strongly defend the rights of Palestinians to have dignity and human rights," Jacobs says.
Many argue that the decades of violence against Palestinians under Israeli occupation warrants mentioning to better contextualize the attack on Israel.
He wants to see instances like these illustrated more on social media, which is often too simplified: "It's not all big explosions, and fires and rockets and tanks and this kind of thing," he adds.
How to cope:The videos out of Israel, Gaza are graphic, but some can't look away
So if social media infographic posting and re-posting isn't the right answer, what is?
"My advice to people is always to read a broad spectrum of media outlets, including media from the region, and to understand what it is that they’re reading," Parkinson says.
Verify that what you’re reading a credible outlet or source.
That doesn't mean social media is useless, either.
Abu Sarah suggests following those who have different points of view.
If you decide to post something, don't expect everyone to agree with you.
When you stop thinking of the other "side" as human, you've lost.
Abu Sarah adds: "If you think one side is a pure evil and one side is pure good, you're missing the story."
'The fear is real':Menorahs mean more this Hanukkah amid rising antisemitism
Americans can't seem to get enough beef.
From juicy burgers to tender steaks, many of us line up at fast food restaurants, dine in at steak houses, or crowd around the grill at backyard barbecues.
For the companies providing those cuts and patties, business is good – to the tune of nearly $500 billion, according to one market analysis.
Experts weigh in on the raw truths of consuming red meat.
In general, it's meat that is red when raw, usually coming from non-bird or non-fish sources.
Such meats have that distinct color because they contain more myoglobin than chicken or fish.
The amount of myoglobin in animal muscles determines the color of the meat, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
As with any part of a healthy diet, red meat provides only some nutrients.
Indeed, red meat is one of the main dietary sources of vitamin B12 in particular.
Red meat also contains modest amounts of the mineral selenium and the vitamin niacin.
Lack of protein, he says, "can make it harder to maintain muscle mass and metabolism and to have good immune resilience."
"An ounce of meat has about 7 grams of protein," he explains.
That means a single 6-ounce steak has 42 grams of protein – already approaching the daily intake of protein the CDC recommends.
It's also worth noting that there are many other sources of protein beyond red meat that include beans, eggs, cheese, Greek yogurt and other animal meat.
Yikes:Carnivore, lion diets called life-changing online.
Consuming red meat, then, is not essential to a healthy diet, and may even pose some health risks if consumed too frequently.
General recommendations are to have red meat no more than once per week.
Mayo Clinic notes that leaner cuts of beef can be part of a healthy diet and suggests sticking to ones like top sirloin and top or bottom round roasts.
Some of the most concerning red meats include ham, bacon and salami.
Significant consumption thereof has been linked to Type 2 diabetes and heart disease.
Another thing to consider when indulging in red meat is the other foods one is already consuming.
He explains that's because high-carb diets raise levels of insulin and blood sugar.
What's more, the World Health Organization has classified red meat as a group 2A carcinogen.
"Generally, the less red meat you eat, the better."
Heads up:What is the healthiest meat to eat?
Expert tips to cook a nutrient-rich plate.
The videos are graphic.
Cable news airs them, but often with a warning.
“There are images that I want you to see now, and I have to warn you that what you are about to see is disturbing,” CNN anchor Becky Anderson says before sharing a clip.
Female Israeli hostages being paraded through the streets, one being taken away on a motorbike by terrorists, begging for her life.
An Israeli mother and her two children being held by terrorists in an unknown location.
In Gaza, buildings are reduced to rubble and images of sobbing Palestinian children are going viral.
Much of the crisis is unfolding on social media, with TikToks from around the country showing the horrors − the wounded, the bloody, the destruction on both sides of the conflict.
“The proximity is real – it’s families, it’s friends,” he explains.
The holiday marks the end of the reading of the Torah and a return to the beginning.
Still, it wasn’t until he got on his phone he was able to “appreciate the scope and level of brutality” of a story that is largely unfolding in videos.
Ryan Brown, on the other hand, has had all weekend to digest what's happening.
He woke up on Saturday morning to a phone filled with notifications from his family and friends, alerting him to the situation in Israel.
Brown has many friends in Israel and lived in the country for several months on two separate occasions.
He has visited more than a dozen times.
The 30-year-old gets a lot of his news from his social media feed, but it's hard-to-watch.
“It’s jarring to see the videos and the abuse of human rights of women and grandparents and children and the mass killings.”
But it’s important we see what’s going on, Brown says.
Aziz Abu Sarah, author of "Crossing Boundaries: A Traveler’s Guide to World Peace," understands the complications around viewing disturbing images and videos.
"On one hand, I want people to understand and to be shocked, but unfortunately, the way those images are now used isn't to get to us to understand the horrors of war, and the need to come to our sanity and figure out how to stop the killing, and instead is to mobilize more people and mobilize more anger," says Abu Sarah, who is Palestinian.
Yet it is important for people to see what is happening "particularly when it comes to the harms civilians suffer and the effects of collective punishment," says Sarah Parkinson, assistant professor of political science and international studies at Johns Hopkins University.
'A sense of fear':Sen. Cory Booker says he is shaken, angered, heartbroken after taking cover in bomb shelter in Israel
So how should people balance their desire to get the news, the whole story, with their mental health as videos display things they can't unsee?
Experts say it’s important to be mindful of your mental health when your feed shows graphic content.
"It's a really fine line, between, taking care of yourself and protecting yourself from witnessing just this depraved violence and this evil," says Rabbi Elaine Glickman, assistant executive director of Women’s Rabbinic Network.
"And yet, the importance of not looking away and the importance of bearing witness."
"If it was a group of Israeli soldiers, if you're pro-Palestinian, and they went inside a Palestinian village and did what Hamas did, how would you feel?"
Abu Sarah adds.
"Would you be also saying 'oh, this is totally fine.'
And then vice versa.
And take care to be sure you do not grow numb to what you see.
"The repeated posting of graphic images can lead to desensitization and dehumanization, where people become numb to what they are watching, stop seeing victims as individuals who have lives and families and stop caring," Parkinson explains.
It's OK to take a break from social media, too − even if you're a news junkie.
"Many people who live this violence every day, or who have lived it in the past, stay offline during times like these given how traumatizing viewing these images can be," Parkinson says.
Paris is riddled with bedbugs, according to dozens of videos online that show the critters looking for their next host on buses, trains, hotels and more.
Now, some people are documenting their own bedbug battles after traveling from Paris, sparking fear of impending infestations in other cities and countries.
The bedbug hype is enough to get your skin crawling but understanding the difference between real and perceived fears, preferably long before an actual threat emerges, could save you from unnecessary anxiety.
The trick, entomologists say, is to not only be mindful of how the Paris bedbug news can affect you mentally but also understand the nature of what’s happening in the City of Love (spoiler alert: it’s pretty normal).
It’s normal to feel nervous about a potential bedbug infestation in the U.S. as major events like Paris Fashion Week make headlines.
The good news, experts say, is that what’s happening in Paris isn’t unprecedented – and that an outbreak in the U.S. is unlikely.
Social media videos are sensationalizing the bugs’ normal behavior, she said, especially as the city prepares for the 2024 Olympics.
Instead, resistance to pesticides, increased international travel and changing pest control practices are to blame for the general uptick in bedbugs worldwide, experts say.
Anticipating a bedbug attack could be just as stressful as actually experiencing one, particularly if you have a phobia of bugs (entomophobia), experts say.
People in the midst of an actual infestation experience similar and sometimes more serious emotional and behavioral upheaval.
Learning about where bedbugs come from, how to tell if a hotel or your bed has them and what to do if you find the critters, can ease your worries about a potential infestation, experts say.
How to identify and control bed bugs:Bedbugs are blood-sucking pests.
Here's how to identify and control the tiny invaders.
In some cases, guidance from a mental health practitioner may be necessary.
Notify a therapist or other professional that you’re dealing with bedbugs or worried about a future problem; they’ll give you tips to control stress and anxiety.
Fortunately, bedbugs aren’t known to spread disease, so the bites themselves are relatively harmless, besides some irritation and a possible allergic reaction.
Consider, too, whether you or a loved one might be at risk of a bedbug problem, Goddard said.
People who live in lower income neighborhoods, for example, might not be able to afford professional pest control and are more likely to face long-term issues; people with certain cognitive or intellectual disorders may not be capable of keeping up with best practices to avoid or eliminate bedbugs; and anyone who moves around a lot, sleeping in beds shared by others also face greater risks.
Will Ferrell knows how to throw a party!
The "Barbie" star and comedian stole the show at parents weekend at the University of Southern California during a tailgate party ahead of the school's big football game against the University of Arizona Wildcats.
Ferrell, whose eldest son Magnus is a sophomore at USC, took a page from his 2003 film "Old School" in returning to his alma mater.
Instead of an attempt to relive his glory days, the actor took center stage as DJ at a Sigma Alpha Mu fraternity party.
In videos shared to social media, Ferrell had a crowd of hundreds of college students dancing to Survivor's "Eye of the Tiger" and Jay-Z and Kanye West's collaboration "(Expletive) in Paris," the latter of which includes a snippet from his movie "Blades of Glory."
The "Strays" actor was all business in a backwards USC cap, sunglasses, a zip-up sweatshirt and headphones while he worked a turntable.
In addition to Ferrell's son Magnus attending USC, the actor is a 1990 graduate of the university with a bachelor's degree in sports information.
Ferrell has been back to his alma mater several times since graduation, most notably in 2017 when he delivered the commencement speech and received an honorary doctorate degree.
Ferrell recounted all the times during his four years at USC when he subconsciously prepared for life as a comedian and trusted his intuition despite getting a degree aimed at sports broadcasting.
For many of you who maybe don’t have it all figured out, it’s okay.
"Enjoy the process of your search without succumbing to the pressure of the result."
Ferrell ended with words of encouragement.
'Strays' review:Will Ferrell's hilarious dog movie puts raunchy spin on 'Homeward Bound'
NEW YORK – Hey, old friend.
Originally directed by Hal Prince, with a marvelous score by Stephen Sondheim, the decades-spanning musical follows the rupture of a friendship but is told in reverse.
The story begins in 1976 with the bitter falling-out between three middle-aged chums and eventually ends in 1957 with their starry-eyed first meeting in college.
The show's 1981 production featured a mostly teenage cast and was roundly rejected by critics for its muddled design and backward structure.
Audiences were similarly unmoved, and the musical shuttered just 16 performances after opening night.
Some of Friedman’s most obvious fixes are cosmetic.
The original production was made to resemble a high school gymnasium, and actors wore plain T-shirts with their characters’ names splashed across their chests.
The revival cast is also age-appropriate, allowing them to more effectively run the gamut from youthful optimism to the wistfulness and cynicism of adulthood.
But some of the most vital shifts are in the story itself.
The show’s central conflict revolves around Frank and Charley, who co-wrote the songs for a wildly successful yet frivolous Broadway musical.
Charley wants to leverage their newfound fortune to finally get their longtime passion project off the ground, while Frank is content to follow the dollar signs to Hollywood and beyond.
While past “Merrily” productions may have painted Frank as a mere sellout, Friedman recognizes that it isn’t so black and white.
Here, we more clearly understand the financial burden of Frank’s messy divorce, and that the romanticized life of a struggling artist is no longer prudent with a young son at home.
“Why is it old friends don’t want old friends to change?” Frank sings in the perceptive “Growing Up,” suggesting that he hasn’t abandoned his dreams but simply “readjusted” them.
Mendez is a hilarious knockout as the acerbic Mary, bringing powerhouse vocals and aching vulnerability to showstoppers “Now You Know” and “Not a Day Goes By.”
He deftly zips through the spiky tongue-twister that is “Franklin Shepard, Inc.,” and his gentle rendition of the show’s signature tune, “Good Thing Going,” is a quiet stunner.
“Merrily” is the latest in a flood of Sondheim revivals, following the legendary composer’s death in 2021 at 91.
Since then, “Company,” “Into the Woods,” “Assassins” and “Sweeney Todd” have all graced New York stages to varying degrees of success, while an unfinished Sondheim musical, “Here We Are,” is playing a limited run off-Broadway.
Booze, brawls and broken sharks:The shocking true story behind the making of 'Jaws'
Part of what makes the show so overwhelmingly emotional is that it transports us back to a more idealistic age: when possibilities seemed endless, friends were forever, and hopes weren’t yet dashed by life’s realities.
"It's our time, breathe it in," Frank sings at the end of the show, as he readies to take on the world with Charley and Mary by his side.
The same could be said of "Merrily," which four decades later, finally feels right on time.
People who had tickets to the band's show at Chase Field were eligible for a refund and given a presale code to purchase tickets at the new venue.
Many fans, however voiced their frustration with Chase Field for double-booking and the new process to go to the concert.
"Stadium’s staff didn’t believe the team would make it to the playoffs," one fan commented.
Another added: "The AZ Diamondbacks executive office are at fault for this snafu— should have never happened."
Very conveniently they postponed then ‘canceled’ the show.
Moved it to a smaller place.
But refund does not come till sometime later.
Tickets for the new location went on sale Sunday, Oct. 8, at ticketmaster.com.
The Seattle vocalist scored a four-chair turn with her bluesy tone and piano-driven rendition of “Can’t Find My Way Home” by Blind Faith.
“You’re my dream ‘Voice’ girl to work with.”
“But everything felt completely under your control.”
The victory prompted McEntire to express regret for not using her block button on the self-proclaimed “four-chair king.”
“I was going to wait, but John is on a roll,” McEntire said afterward.
“We’ve got to block John.”
Here’s what else went down on Monday’s episode.
“You completely made it your own.”
Vocal prowess aside, Legend praised Womack for her sincere emotional delivery.
“I was just feeling the drama and the energy you were emitting from the stage.”
Legend clearly made a soul connection with Womack, as she chose to join Team Legend.
“She has such a powerful, unique voice,” Legend said of Womack.
“You can tell she feels a sense of purpose being on the stage, and I want to help her fulfill her purpose.”
Going against Team Legend comes with some bad karma.
However, Legend found himself in a tough spot when McEntire hit her block button, preventing Legend from pitching to the Tennessee vocalist.
“Most of the time she’s a benevolent queen, but every once in a while she’ll do some ruthless, cold-blooded (and) dirty things,” Legend said.
“If Reba messes up and there’s a steal opportunity, I will be first in line.”
So, the lesson is don’t block me.
The New York-based singer, who hails from the European country Georgia, brought the house down and earned a four-chair turn with her powerful performance of “I See Red” by Everybody Loves an Outlaw.
“It was fantastic to witness,” he told Iris.
“You gave us a soulful rock performance.”
“But the four-chair prince is here now.”
Season points projections for the NHL are always difficult because of unexpected occurrences.
Last season, the Boston Bruins leaped from a 2021-22 wild card spot to the best record in league history.
The New Jersey Devils and second-year Seattle Kraken made the playoffs with improvements of 40 points or more.
Meanwhile, the Columbus Blue Jackets cratered after a ridiculous run of injuries.
This season is also tough to predict because seven of the eight teams in the Atlantic Division have the potential to make the playoffs.
Here is our prediction on how NHL teams will finish this season (explainers are below the graphic):
NFL power rankings entering Week 6 of the 2023 season (previous rank in parentheses):
49ers (1): What else is there to say about a team that's been in the top spot since the season started?
S.F.’s +99 point differential is already 20 better than the next team.
Probably have the best defense (though that can be settled at Cleveland on Sunday).
Might have the best offense.
Stars on basically every unit.
And second-year QB Brock Purdy continues to effectively play mistake-free football, his league-leading 123.1 passer rating testament to that.
Eagles (3): They're 5-0 in successive seasons for the first time.
Next up, the Jets – a team Philadelphia has never lost to in 12 previous meetings.
Feels safe to slot the reigning NFC champs at 6-0 and look ahead to their Week 7 date with Miami.
Sunday, Montgomery became the first Detroit rusher to top 100 yards in consecutive games since … Kevin Jones in 2004.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Weird as this sounds, Milano might be the more valuable player to Buffalo's defense.
Dolphins (7): How fast is Miami?
Per Next Gen Stats, the Fins have produced the five top speeds among all plays this season and seven of the top nine.
Jaguars (14): The first team to play multiple international games in a season is now the first to win multiple – both coming against teams with winning records.
Stay in Europe, Jags – it seems inevitable, and you're apparently better for it.
Cowboys (4): Good thing they're not part of the NFC West … even if it would make more sense geographically.
In its two defeats (to Arizona and San Francisco), Dallas has lost by a collective 70-26.
Steelers (12): They've gained the third-fewest yards in the league and surrendered the third most, the delta more than 600 yards.
But 11 takeaways, 17 sacks and just enough clutch plays from QB Kenny Pickett can mask such warts … and propel you to the top of the AFC North.
Ravens (8): It's been an uneven start, to say the least, but it's also unusual to play four of five away from home so early in the season – and Baltimore's three-game roadie winds to a conclusion Sunday in London.
Rams (9): Sure, they're 2-3, but they've hung tough against the league's top teams, San Francisco and Philadelphia.
Seahawks (10): Coming off their bye, they're currently not scheduled to face a team with a winning record until November.
Time to make serious hay toward a playoff berth.
Buccaneers (16): This marks three times in four years that QB Baker Mayfield has won three of his first four starts.
His only 4-1 beginning led to a deep playoff run in Cleveland.
Saints (20): Great sidebar to Sunday's 34-0 runaway in New England.
Pretty cool story amid the NFL's annual "Crucial Catch" campaign for cancer screening.
Falcons (18): If you know anything about the NFL, and running backs in particular, best to appreciate their genius while you can.
Texans (11): No matter Sunday's outcome, this will be their best six-game start since 2019.
But it would help if Houston would run the ball better after cracking 90 yards just once so far this season.
Chargers (22): Did you know WR Keenan Allen owns the NFL record for most games – three – with at least 15 receptions?
With wingman Mike Williams down for the count, wouldn't be a shock if Allen extends that mark before this year is out.
Bengals (26): They'll only be on the road two more times before December, so maybe the comforts of home are good for QB Joe Burrow's calf and team focus with a brutal upcoming schedule (Seattle, San Francisco, Buffalo) for a Cincinnati club that may finally otherwise be turning the corner.
Raiders (28): If they're going to salvage their season and use Monday's win as a catapult, now is the time.
The Silver and Black face three one-win teams (Patriots, Bears, Giants) over the next four weeks.
Packers (19): No worse way to go into a bye week than off a terrible loss.
But Green Bay's next three opponents (Broncos, Vikings, Rams) have a combined four wins, so hopefully a good time for the Pack to get healthy figuratively and literally.
Vikings (25): Why is offensive balance often a virtue?
Consider one-win Minnesota, which has thrown more passes (204) than any team in the league while attempting the fewest runs (91).
Bears (32): The Justin Fields-to-DJ Moore Show has sparked Chicago's revival.
But look closer, and you'll also note a running game averaging better than 170 yards the past two weeks and some encouraging signs of life on defense at Washington.
Commanders (15): Only Denver has surrendered more points than Washington's 160.
Only Minnesota has turned it over more times than Washington's 10.
Some consolation for a team that hasn't run an offensive play with the lead yet and has now been outscored by a league-most 91 points.
Cardinals (27): No NFC team is blitzing less frequently – worth wondering if that's the right approach given the way Arizona's D has been torn up the past two weeks.
Patriots (23): If the dynasty wasn't already dead, then life support has officially been unplugged.
Panthers (31): The NFL's only winless team just turned it in its worst defensive performance (42 points allowed) of the season.
A trip to Miami.
Follow USA TODAY Sports' Nate Davis on X, formerly Twitter @ByNateDavis.
Just when it seemed like Texas was back and a run at the College Football Playoff seemed in the offing, an impressive win by Oklahoma has changed the outlook of this week's bowl projections.
It might seem a simple plug-in for the Sooners to keep the Big 12 with representation in the field, however that's not the major adjustment this week.
It's Washington that is moving up to the semifinals ahead of a showdown with Oregon, another potential contender for the vacancy created by the Longhorns.
The Huskies with the nation's top offense and home field have the slight edge to get the win Saturday.
The advantage any potential champion from the Pac-12 has on the Big 12 is the strength of the league is significantly superior.
Unless Oklahoma runs the table, it'd be expected that a one-loss team from the Pac-12 would get through, though that projection certainly could change with eight more weeks of games remaining.
Texas would have a decent argument if it can run through the rest of its game and beat an unblemished Sooners team in the Big 12 title.
The Longhorns slip into the New Year's Six for now and are appropriately matched with Oregon.
Oklahoma jumps up to the NY6 and a meeting with Ohio State.
Reminder: Some conferences may not fulfill their bowl allotment.
Asterisks denote a replacement pick.
James Madison is eligible for a bowl if there are not enough six-win teams to fill all the spots.
If that's the case, the Dolphins could opt to put him on injured reserve, which would mean he'd be out a minimum of four games.
He also has a pair of receiving touchdowns in just four games.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Passengers on a British Airways flight from Barcelona to London were met by ambulances on the tarmac at Heathrow Airport on Sunday after travelers reported feeling unwell due to fumes in the cabin.
Social media posts show travelers standing around with emergency vehicles and British Airways shuttle buses at the airport.
Fume incidents are not unheard-of in aviation, though they are rare and can sometimes be a health hazard.
Travelers, and especially flight crews, can experience long-term adverse health impacts if certain toxins are released into the cabin, though the substances involved in the British Airways incident were not ultimately found to be hazardous.
Cruising Altitude:Yes, you could inhale toxic fumes during your flight.
Here's what to know.
Advocates in the U.S. and abroad are pushing for tighter standards around aircraft cabin air quality, and are encouraging the installation of monitoring equipment on commercial aircraft.
Currently, no such standards or requirements exist in the U.S.
You can reach him at zwichter@usatoday.com
Cruise lines are adjusting operations amid the Israel-Hamas war – in some cases suspending calls altogether.
Norwegian Cruise Line, Princess Cruises, Holland America Line and other brands have notified guests of itinerary changes for sailings in the region amid other disruptions to travel, including flights.
Airlines have issued waivers to passengers and the U.S. State Department has advisories in place for the region, encouraging travelers to exercise increased caution when visiting Israel and the West Bank and warning against travel to Gaza.
Here’s what cruise passengers should know.
The ship will arrive early to planned stops in Limassol, Cyprus on Tuesday and Rhodes, Greece, on Wednesday, giving guests more time to explore.
The ship’s 28-day cruise from Rome to Athens had featured the line’s last stop in Israel for the year.
▶ Princess Cruises: Princess is not stopping in Israel at this time and is adjusting Island Princess’s “Mediterranean and Israel” sailings in November accordingly, a spokesperson said in an email.
“As soon as the itineraries have been updated we will send notifications to affected guests and their travel agents,” the spokesperson said.
▶ Norwegian Cruise Line: The line’s Norwegian Gem ship skipped a planned visit to Ashdod on Sunday, spending the day at sea instead, according to a spokesperson for the line.
The ship continued to Limassol as scheduled Monday.
The ship, which is on a weeklong round-trip sailing from Athens, will spend a day at sea Thursday.
“We are closely monitoring the situation in Israel,” the spokesperson said.
All guests and crew members were safe and accounted for, a spokesperson for the line said.
The line is also "in the process of reviewing itinerary options" for its Marina ship's Nov. 1 cruise, which is set to spend two days in Israel, the spokesperson said.
▶ Regent Seven Seas Cruises: “Due to the current escalated situation, we have decided the most prudent course of action is to amend Seven Seas Voyager’s October 3 and October 15, 2023, itineraries and replace the previously scheduled calls to Israel,” a spokesperson for the line said in an email.
The ship will skip its planned stop in Haifa on Oct. 14 and 15, instead sailing to Istanbul.
The Oct. 15 sailing will begin in Istanbul rather than Haifa and sail directly to Cairo.
You can reach him at ndiller@usatoday.com.
Editor's note: This story was originally published on July 9, 2022.
TEL AVIV, Israel – Before I hit the bike path for a long sightseeing excursion in this international hotspot, dressing down in muted colors, a nondescript baseball cap and a relatively cheap watch and shoes was as second nature to me as applying sunscreen.
As a longtime national security journalist who has traveled to some of the world’s grittiest corners, I learned long ago to make sure I’m that person who doesn’t stick out in a crowd and become a target for thieves, terrorists, or kidnappers – whether I’m on an assignment or a family vacation.
I learned about this valuable safety tip during many “Hostile Environment Training” courses I’ve taken over the decades, including some I helped design for young journalists flying off to destinations overseas.
Live updates:Israel orders 'complete siege' of Gaza; at least 9 Americans killed
Learn more: Best travel insurance
'We have to be on guard a lot':Why safety comes first for so many LGBTQ travelers
I was already thinking of brushing up on my travel safety tips when preparing to come to Tel Aviv when I happened upon a new CIA web posting with advice from its officers on how to travel safely and with confidence.
I found the CIA's best practices, culled from the experience of its officers in the field, are exceptionally helpful, easy to adopt and especially relevant to Americans in these fraught times.
Here’s how to think like a spy on the ground overseas, with some annotation based on my travels as anything but an American James Bond:
▶ CIA tip: Make a paper and digital copy of your passport.
While traveling abroad, it might literally be your ticket home if problems arise.
If a hotel desk clerk asks to hold on to your passport, see if they’ll accept the paper copy.
While you’re at it, write down some important phone numbers on the hard copy, including emergency contacts and the local U.S. embassy just in case.
Josh's tip: Email yourself the digital copy in case your phone goes missing along with your passport.
▶ CIA tip: Register with your embassy.
Think of it as establishing communications with your home base.
This enables embassy staff to contact you if there’s an emergency or unfolding crisis.
U.S. citizens can also sign up with the State Department’s Smart Traveler Enrollment Program.
▶ CIA tip: Learn some local lingo.
Josh's tip: My go-to essentials include “thank you,” “please,” “hello,” “goodbye,” “yes/no,” “help,” “bathroom” and “police.” In worst-case scenarios, yelling out “no cash” helps if you believe you might be getting robbed, and “medic” and “hospital” if someone is hurt.
▶ CIA tip: Know your destination.
Bone up not just on travel books but also try to get a sense of the place and the geopolitical issues at play there.
The CIA World Factbook is very helpful and publicly available for basic information.
The CIA's World Factbook team also has created special travel briefings for many countries.
Josh's tip: Look up the State Department Travel Advisories for your destination, though they often tend to be overly scary and alarmist.
▶ CIA tip: Scout out local transportation.
Upon arrival, ask an airport official or travelers’ aide how much it should cost to catch a public shuttle or taxi to your hotel.
Check online sites too.
Be sure to negotiate the taxi price before loading your baggage and getting inside.
Only use cabs from the official queue – or ride-hailing services from official apps – that are clearly marked and have a functioning meter and the driver’s ID displayed inside.
Josh's tip: Ask ahead of time if they take credit cards or American currency.
Even better, stock up on the local currency, preferably at an ATM where you can use a credit card that gets you a better rate than the money changers at the airport.
▶ Josh's tip: Keep all your luggage close.
This is especially the case when getting to and from your hotel.
Bags can disappear at the luggage carousel, the taxi stand, hotel lobby, or any number of other places.
Story continues below.
▶ CIA tip: Know your escape route from your hotel room too.
Familiarize yourself with emergency evacuation plans.
And do a run-through to determine how many doors there are between your room and the nearest stairwell.
Could you find it in the dark?
While holding your breath in a smoky haze?
▶ CIA tip: Use the elevator, unless it’s an emergency.
Using the stairs may be great for exercise, but crimes frequently occur in isolated stairwells.
▶ CIA tip: Try to reserve a room on a middle floor.
Josh's tip: If you’re in a particularly strife-torn locale, consider a room in the back of the hotel if you’re worried about car bombs or terrorist attacks.
And just know that in some hotspots, bad actors will target hotel restaurants and other places where tourists congregate.
▶ CIA tip: Lock it up.
Automatic locks on hotel room doors can often be forced open, and the chains cut.
Use the deadbolt if there is one.
Better yet, invest in a cheap and easily portable rubber doorstop; they work amazingly well.
▶ CIA tip: Beware of unsolicited knocks.
Don’t open your hotel door unless you know or can verify who’s on the other side.
Don’t be shy about calling the front desk to confirm.
▶ CIA tip: Lock it down.
Whether renting a car or taking a taxi, lock the doors and keep the windows rolled up if you sense any danger – or crowds.
Carjackers and snatch-and-grab thieves often prey on simple mistakes like an open door or window.
▶ Josh's tip: When using Uber, Lyft and many other ride-hailing apps, make sure you are getting into the correct car.
If something feels wrong, don’t get in.
▶ CIA tip: Stay alert.
CIA officers (the real term for overseas spies, not agents) are trained to be highly attuned to their surroundings to constantly maintain situational awareness.
Use all five senses to pay attention to what’s happening around you, and you’ll not only spot telltale signs if something is amiss but retain more of your destination’s unique atmosphere.
Josh's tip: You don’t always need to sit with your back to the wall like Jason Bourne but being able to see the entrances – and know the exits – is important if you need to get out quick.
▶ CIA tip: Be mindful when drinking adult beverages.
Spies might swill martinis in the movies, but alcohol impairs alertness and judgment and could put you at risk, especially in an unfamiliar country.
Learn the local customs and restrictions on alcohol consumption and follow them closely.
Josh's tip: Make sure you can see your drinks being poured and transported to you to make sure no one is adding any intoxicants.
Avoid using or purchasing recreational drugs even if locals insist they’re safe and legal.
▶ CIA tip: Walk the walk.
Your confident demeanor on the street is often the best deterrent against criminals.
Don’t attract attention by looking confused, lost, or distracted.
Avoid poring over maps and phone apps in busy areas.
And don’t be flashy.
Flaunting extravagant watches and other personal items or cash will attract thieves and opportunists.
▶ CIA tip: Plan your route and reroute as necessary.
Whether traveling by foot, car, or public or private transit, prepare in advance.
Don’t walk alone at night, stick to well-lit areas that aren’t too isolated if you can and know the number of the local authorities just in case.
Avoid crowd commotion, as it could mean escalating danger or even a distraction designed to help someone target you.
The city was on edge a bit due to a recent wave of terrorist attacks, but I thoroughly enjoyed my time chatting up the locals and sampling their food and drink knowing I was doing everything I could to stay safe.
U.S. airlines have suspended flights to and from Tel Aviv amid the ongoing conflict between Israel and Palestinian militants.
American Airlines, Delta Air Lines and United Airlines have also issued travel waivers allowing passengers scheduled to fly to and from Israel to rebook.
United’s waiver also covers flights to and from Amman, Jordan.
“We continue to monitor the situation with safety and security top of mind and will adjust our operation as needed,” American said in a statement.
Delta said it is suspending operations to and from Israel through Oct. 31.
"Our hearts are with those who are impacted as our people work to find safe alternatives for customers trying to depart TLV," a statement from the airline said.
"Delta will continue to explore options for customers to safely exit TLV via seats that become available on our partner airlines."
Delta noted that flights to and from Tel Aviv on partner airlines like Virgin Atlantic should remain available and bookable on its website.
It also noted some flights through Oct. 17 may inaccurately show up as operating on some platforms but emphasized that those flights are canceled.
United Airlines said its flights will remain suspended "until conditions allow them to resume."
If your flight was canceled by a U.S. airline, you are entitled to a full refund even if you bought a nonrefundable ticket, according to Department of Transportation regulations.
The State Department has also issued travel advisories for the region, urging increased caution for American citizens headed to Israel and the West Bank, and suggesting not to travel to Gaza.
The Federal Aviation Administration posted a notice to pilots in the region.
"Flight crews should remain in contact with air traffic control at all times while operating within the (region)."
Many European and Asian airlines also suspended service to Tel Aviv.
Israel’s national carrier, El Al, continues operating flights.
Air France said it suspended services to Tel Aviv “until further notice” after coordinating with French and Israeli authorities.
Germany’s Lufthansa, which suspended flights to and from Tel Aviv until Saturday, said Monday that the decision regarding its planes and those of its subsidiaries was made “due to the still unclear developing security situation in Israel and after an intensive analysis of the situation.”
The Lufthansa Group includes Austrian Airlines, Swiss and Brussels Airlines as well as Lufthansa itself.
Hong Kong’s main carrier, Cathay Pacific Airways, said that “in view of the latest situation in Israel,” it was canceling its Tel Aviv flights scheduled for Tuesday and Thursday.
Virgin Atlantic canceled its service between London’s Heathrow Airport to Tel Aviv on Monday and Tuesday, as well as the return flight from Tel Aviv to London on Wednesday.
Budget airline Wizz Air, which flies to Israel from Abu Dhabi and more than two dozen European airports, said it was canceling all flights to and from Tel Aviv “until further notice.”
British Airways said it’s planning to continue operating flights to Israel “over the coming days with adjusted departure times.”
You can reach him at zwichter@usatoday.com
UPDATE: This story has been updated with news that within hours of publication of USA TODAY's investigation, MSU suspended Coach Mel Tucker without pay.
Two years ago, one of the nation’s star college football coaches and a prominent rape survivor teamed up to fight the culture of sexual violence in sports.
Their partnership should have been a force for good.
Instead, it has devolved into scandal, with the activist accusing the coach of the same misconduct that both of them preached against.
Accusing him is Brenda Tracy, a rape survivor who has made educating athletes about sexual violence her life’s work.
Over eight months, they developed a professional relationship centered on her advocacy work.
Tucker invited Tracy to campus three times – twice to speak to his players and staff and once to be recognized as an honorary captain at the team's spring football game.
But their relationship was upended during a phone call on April 28, 2022, Tracy says in a complaint she filed with the university’s Title IX office in December that remains under investigation.
According to her complaint, Tracy sat frozen for several minutes while Tucker made sexual comments about her and masturbated.
His violation, she said, reopened 25-year-old wounds from her rape by four men – two Oregon State University football players, a junior college player and a high school recruit.
“The idea that someone could know me and say they understand my trauma but then re-inflict that trauma on me is so disgusting to me, it’s hard for me to even wrap my mind around it,” she told USA TODAY.
“It’s like he sought me out just to betray me.”
In his statements to the Title IX investigator, Tucker acknowledged masturbating on the call but said Tracy grossly mischaracterized the episode.
According to him, they had consensual “phone sex.”
Michigan State hired an outside Title IX attorney to investigate the complaint.
She finished her investigation in July.
A formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated the school’s policy banning sexual harassment and exploitation is scheduled for Oct. 5 and 6, during the Spartans’ bye week.
The stakes are high for everyone.
Tracy says Tucker is following through on a threat to ruin her career and reputation by painting her as a woman who mixes professional and personal relationships and files false reports.
She fears he will undo her legacy.
Tucker, who signed one of the most lucrative contracts in college sports history two years ago, could lose out on the roughly $80 million he is owed if Michigan State fires him for cause, which would be a stunning fall from the elite ranks of college coaches.
Reached by USA TODAY on his cellphone Saturday night, Tucker hung up after a reporter mentioned the case.
Hours after USA TODAY published its investigation, the university suspended Tucker without pay, pending a resolution of the Title IX case.
“This step, suspending Mel Tucker without pay, is … necessary and appropriate for today's circumstances,” Interim President Teresa Woodruff said at a Sunday evening press conference.
“These actions are not taken lightly.”
USA TODAY typically does not identify people who allege sexual harassment.
Tracy agreed to be identified and shared more than 1,200 pages of case documents.
Title IX, the federal law banning sex discrimination in education, requires schools to investigate allegations of sexual harassment that took place in the context of a school program or activity.
Such claims are inherently difficult to adjudicate because of many of the factors at issue in this case: a lack of eyewitnesses and recordings, the passage of time and the thorniness of litigating consent.
Adding to the uncertainty, the institution tasked with sorting out the facts is perhaps best known for missing repeated opportunities to stop one of the most prolific sexual abusers in American history.
Gymnastics and campus physician accused of sexually assaulting more than 300 female athletes under the guise of medical treatments.
He has been sentenced to a minimum of 100 years in prison.
Amid its efforts to rebuild trust among students, employees, alumni and the East Lansing community, Michigan State's leaders must now decide whether the face of its prestigious football program is guilty of sexually harassing one of the country’s most influential advocates against gender-based violence.
For some, how the university navigates the crisis will send a clear message about its commitment to progress.
“This goes beyond coach Tucker and Brenda Tracy,” said Jennifer Gomez, a Boston University professor who researches the effects of interpersonal trauma and violence.
“What happens here has the potential to be very healing or very harmful for lots and lots and lots of other people.”
Tracy and Tucker met in August 2021 during her first visit to Michigan State, after a mutual acquaintance introduced them.
Standing before a packed auditorium in the Spartans’ football operations building, Tracy told a gut-wrenching story of turning her pain into purpose two decades after filing a police report saying she had been gang-raped as a 24-year-old mother of two.
At the end, she challenged the “good men” in the room to use their privilege and influence to educate themselves and call out bad behavior.
By then she had delivered versions of the speech more than 100 times to at least 40,000 athletes and coaches.
Michigan State paid her a $10,000 speaking fee.
Tucker was in his second season as head coach.
A former University of Wisconsin-Madison defensive back, he had spent two decades coaching defenses for 10 college and NFL teams before landing the top job at the University of Colorado in late 2018.
Michigan State lured him away a year later by doubling his salary.
Mel Tucker's career at Michigan State: A timeline
Tucker and Tracy “hit it off” immediately, they would both later tell the Title IX investigator.
They bonded over their love of Jordan sneakers, shelves of which lined Tucker’s office walls.
Tucker had been moved by her speech, and she had been a big hit with players, he told the investigator.
They discussed her coming back to campus in the future.
Tracy left East Lansing feeling she had found a champion in Tucker, she told the investigator.
He seemed engaged with her cause, leading his players in signing her pledge to, among other things, obtain “ongoing, affirmative consent” before engaging in sexual acts with another person.
During that time, the two also talked on the phone at least 27 times, Tracy’s phone bills show – an average of once every two weeks for a half hour.
They often spoke at night to accommodate their work schedules, they said.
They chatted about their jobs and eventually more personal matters, such as their families, mental health and daily lives.
In November, Michigan State signed him to an unprecedented 10-year, $95 million deal that came fully guaranteed, even if it fired him for poor performance.
The only way he could lose out on the money, the contract said, was if he materially breached it, was convicted of a crime or engaged in “conduct which, in the University’s reasonable judgment, would tend to bring public disrespect, contempt or ridicule on the University.”
It was around then that Tucker, who had been married for more than two decades, started becoming interested in Tracy romantically, they both told the investigator.
Whether Tracy reciprocated is where their accounts diverge.
Tucker told the investigator that he and Tracy developed a romantic connection and talked openly about it.
They frequently made flirtatious comments about each other’s looks and bodies, Tucker said.
Tracy told him she wanted a “sugar daddy” who would pay her a monthly amount to be his girlfriend, he said, and that she would be “all over” him if he wasn’t married.
Tucker said they had acknowledged their mutual desire for a romance but agreed it would be “too messy” because of his marriage and the physical distance between them.
By contrast, Tracy told the investigator that Tucker’s romantic interest in her was entirely one-sided.
She said she came to feel he was less interested in her cause than in her.
Tucker messaged her photos of herself that he had found on her Instagram page, making comments such as, “This is the one,” or complimenting her eyes, Tracy said.
Once, Tucker called Tracy via FaceTime.
He was in bed, shirtless.
He talked about his unhappy marriage, describing himself as “more or less single.” Then, during a Nov. 9, 2021, call, she said he asked her, “If I wasn’t a football coach and if I wasn’t married, would you date me?”
Tracy said she responded that she would not because they worked together – one of several times she recalled trying to set boundaries.
She said she made clear to Tucker on a Dec. 1 call that they would only be friends, and he seemed to agree.
Then, after the spring game, Tucker called her four times, phone records show.
Tracy said he repeatedly asked her to meet him alone, without her assistant, and even suggested slipping into her hotel through a back door so no one would see him.
She said no.
Twelve days later came the call.
Tracy was in her home office in Oregon.
Tucker, who was in a hotel in Florida, called her at 12:39 a.m. EST, phone records show.
The call lasted 36 minutes.
According to Tucker, he became aroused when Tracy made a comment about needing to hit the gym more to look better without clothes on.
“Unequivocally, there’s no doubt about it,” Tucker told the investigator, case documents show.
“She was the one who said we’ll do it.”
Tracy denies all of that.
The call started off normal, she said.
But when she sent Tucker a photo of them together from the spring game, she said he responded by commenting on her buttocks and calling himself an “ass man.”
She remembered Tucker’s voice getting deeper and weirder as he continued talking about her buttocks.
She asked him what he was doing, and he said he had a “hard dick” and was touching himself.
“You’re touching yourself?” Tracy asked, according to the investigation report.
Tucker responded, “Yes.”
Tracy said she thought to herself, "Oh my god, this is happening, and I can’t stop it."
Eventually she said something along the lines of, “If you do this, I don’t ever want to hear about it, we are only friends, that’s it.”
When he finished, Tracy said, Tucker told her, “Thank you, good night, sweetheart.” She responded, “Yeah,” and he hung up.
Then she sat at her desk for a while, staring at her phone and crying.
Three months passed between the call and the next time Tracy and Tucker spoke.
At first, Tracy tried to pretend to herself that nothing had happened.
Tucker, however, was not responding to her text messages.
And he abruptly canceled her in-person training, planned for July 25, three days before it was supposed to take place.
A team staffer told her they had double-booked, but Tracy believed she knew the real reason.
When Tracy finally got Tucker on the phone about a week later, he was angry, she said, accusing her and her assistant of gossiping about his marital problems.
Tracy recalled that Tucker made comments such as, “I can’t trust you,” “If you say anything about this, I’ll hear about it,” and “I’ll be fine, it’s you that I am worried about.” She viewed it as a threat to destroy her reputation if she spoke out about him.
Tucker at one point told her he had done nothing wrong.
According to Tracy, she started to say, “Well, something…” referring to his masturbation, and Tucker interrupted, saying, “But nothing happened.”
Tucker recalled the Aug. 2 phone call much differently.
He told the investigator that Tracy apologized to him for discussing his marriage with her assistant, and he accepted.
Although they ended the call on good terms and discussed postponing her visit until next year, Tucker said he had lost trust in Tracy.
The training was never rescheduled, and they never spoke again.
Tracy initially stayed quiet about Tucker for the sake of her career, she said.
Ultimately, she decided that if she let it slide, she wouldn’t be the person she claimed to be – the one who encourages people to speak up about sexual misconduct and hold others accountable.
She filed her complaint in December – eight months after the call.
In dry and bureaucratic language, the record of that complaint begins: “The specific allegations of prohibited conduct against Respondent are as follows …” A notification was delivered to Tucker the following day.
Tucker was “absolutely shocked,” he would tell the university’s investigator.
In subsequent correspondence, he and his attorney suggested Tracy’s motive: She held a vendetta against Spartans athletics because of its history of sexual misconduct scandals and falsely accused him for financial gain.
“To say that I have learned from this situation is an understatement,” Tucker wrote in a letter to the investigator on March 22.
“I will never again allow myself to be duped by kindness.”
A former Indiana sex crimes prosecutor who now heads a private practice, she also previously worked in the Title IX offices at Michigan State and the University of Michigan.
Jacqueline Swanson, Tracy’s attorney who is also her friend, turned over a copy of the notes she took from their conversation on a yellow legal pad.
She shared a screenshot of a Dec. 2 text message in which Tracy told her she had just spoken with Tucker, who had agreed they could only be friends.
“I’m glad it didn’t get weird,” Tracy wrote.
Tracy provided phone bills and emails that corroborated her timeline of events and showed Tucker had been calling her from his personal cellphone.
Tracy said no.
In January, they sent a 12-page letter to the school arguing it lacked jurisdiction to investigate Tucker's “purely personal” relationship with Tracy.
“How far does MSU intend to go in policing the private conduct of its employees, and how does it expect its 20,000+ employees to react when they find out that they no longer have private lives outside the reach of their employer?”
Michigan State was not persuaded.
The alleged conduct would be covered by school policy, it concluded, because it took place in the context of Tracy’s work as a vendor for the school and affected their ongoing business relationship.
The case would go forward.
Tucker sat down for his interview on March 22.
He said he wanted to be transparent and set the record straight.
For instance, Tucker claimed he had made the phone sex call from home in East Lansing – not in a Florida hotel.
He had just returned from a trip to Florida, he said, where he had been doing charity work unrelated to his employment with the school.
An expense report Tucker submitted to Michigan State for his hotel and meal costs showed the trip's purpose was “administrative” and did not involve any personal travel.
The costs were paid by the Spartan Fund, the athletic department’s fundraising arm; he had flown to Florida on a donor’s private plane.
The information, Tucker said, made him question how Tracy “goes about her business.”
“I’m perplexed that Mel Tucker would respond to a complaint of sexual harassment by involving me or ESPN.”
Tucker did not identify any witnesses who could support his version of events, including his associate, whom he said he had promised anonymity.
That same associate, Tucker said, told him that Alvarado, Tracy’s assistant, had been gossiping about his marriage – a claim Alvarado denied.
Along the way, she had learned that one potentially rich source of evidence was missing: Both Tracy and Tucker had deleted their text messages with each other.
Tucker would tell her that he deletes his messages regularly because he receives so many; Tracy said she did so in a panic after their last phone call, feeling she needed to cut all ties with him.
At the hearing, planned for October, both sides will have the opportunity to present evidence and make arguments.
Another outside Title IX attorney hired by the school will then decide whether the evidence shows that Tucker likely violated school rules.
Among the witnesses who will be missing from Tracy’s witness list is her assistant and best friend, Alvarado.
She died in a car accident in June.
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
It was a private event thrown by the school to promote its migrant student services program, which provides financial aid and support to farmworkers seeking college degrees.
After the April 28, 2022, tour, disclosed in records obtained by USA TODAY this week, Tucker met with community leaders and alumni.
That night, Tucker would make the now-infamous phone call from his hotel room in nearby Naples, during which he is accused of masturbating and making unwanted sexual comments to Brenda Tracy, a prominent rape survivor and activist he had hired to speak to his team about sexual violence.
Yet, when Tucker met with the university’s outside investigator in March for his interview in the sexual harassment case against him, he insisted the trip was not work-related – a claim the investigator would disprove in her report.
It’s just one example of Tucker failing to keep his story straight at the most consequential moment of his career.
With his job, reputation and the roughly $80 million left on his contract at stake, Tucker repeatedly made false statements to the investigator and misled her about basic facts, such as his location during the phone call and the date it occurred, a USA TODAY review of more than 1,200 pages of case documents found.
Michigan State suspended Tucker without pay on Sept. 10, hours after Tracy went public for the first time with her story in USA TODAY.
On Monday, the school informed Tucker it plans to fire him for cause based on the conduct he had admitted to and the embarrassment he had caused the school.
Investigation:Michigan State football coach Mel Tucker accused of sexually harassing rape survivor
Although Tucker denied sexually harassing Tracy, he acknowledged masturbating on the call, saying he and Tracy had been in a romantic relationship and had consensual “phone sex.” Tracy said Tucker’s romantic interest in her was completely one-sided and that she had tried to set boundaries multiple times during their yearlong business partnership.
Per his contract, Tucker has until Tuesday to make a case for keeping his job.
Regardless, a formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated school policies against sexual harassment and exploitation is expected to proceed on Oct. 5 and 6.
He accused the school of conducting a “sham” hearing and having “ulterior motives.” Yet even in these written statements, the central details of his story changed entirely.
Tucker, who previously hung up on a reporter who called him on his cellphone asking about the case, did not respond to a message seeking comment for this story.
Tracy declined to comment for this story.
“Very often you’re weighing credibility based on little bits and pieces of information.”
“I believe a fact finder could assess these pieces of evidence about credibility and make a determination that Brenda is more credible than Mel,” she said.
“In my experience, a clear sign of a lack of credibility is generally taken very seriously.”
The school had informed him of Tracy’s complaint on Dec. 22, the day after she filed it.
Tucker was the only holdout.
Rather than tell his side of the story right away, Tucker and his attorney spent three months trying to stop the investigation, case documents show.
They wrote legal arguments urging Michigan State to drop the case and twice approached Tracy’s attorney proposing a settlement agreement.
Tracy said no, and the school pressed forward.
Only a handful of text messages remained; he and Tracy both told the investigator they had deleted their texts with each other in the months after the April 2022 phone call.
In his interview, which lasted 3 ½ hours, Tucker questioned whether Tracy had mixed up the date of the call.
He said he recalled being at his home in East Lansing when it occurred, but his own records showed that he had been in Florida on April 28, attending a charity function that was “absolutely not a University-sponsored event.”
His seven-page account told a different story – that he had called her while he was “alone in a hotel room.”
But by then she knew what he told her in the interview was untrue: she had already obtained records proving he had not been home in East Lansing.
An expense report he had submitted to the university for reimbursement of his hotel and meals shows Tucker flew to Naples, Florida, to attend a golf fundraiser hosted by The Greg H. Montgomery Jr. Foundation for Ultimate Growth, which raises awareness for suicide prevention.
It showed he stayed at the Hilton from April 27 to 29, that the trip’s purpose was “administrative” and that it did not involve personal travel.
He had flown there on a donor’s private plane.
The event was titled “Working to make dreams a reality,” according to an agenda obtained from the university by USA TODAY through a public records request.
The agenda features Tucker’s name prominently.
Tucker posted photos from the tour on his Twitter account.
That Tucker was on a university-sponsored work trip during the incident was a contributing factor in the university’s determination that it had jurisdiction to investigate, the investigation report shows.
Tucker’s lists of calls and text messages also were missing an important detail: They did not show any communication with Tracy on April 28.
He acknowledged in the interview, however, that he had not reviewed the lists before submitting them and that they may have been incomplete.
Tucker and Tracy did not speak in the three months after the April 28 call.
Meanwhile, their assistants were planning Tracy’s third visit to campus – an in-person training with coaches and players scheduled for July 25.
Tucker canceled that training three days before, the investigation report shows.
When Tracy spoke to him by phone on Aug. 2 seeking to find out why, she would tell the investigator in her interview that Tucker insinuated he would harm her career if she spoke about his conduct.
He never rescheduled her visit, and they never spoke again.
The cancellation became a key focus of the investigator – one of a series of alleged incidents that taken together would meet the definition of sexual harassment, which can include pressuring someone into engaging in sexual behavior for an employment benefit and threatening that rejecting such behavior will carry a negative consequence.
Tucker tried to distance himself from the cancellation in a public statement on Sept. 11, the day after Michigan State suspended him without pay.
“I never cancelled any presentation,” he wrote.
But that statement contradicts what he told the investigator.
Such timing would not make sense, he added, because most of his new players would not yet be on campus.
Tucker also told the investigator why he canceled the visit, blaming it on a scheduling conflict.
He said he had recently hired a mental conditioning coach, Ben Newman, who needed to implement his new program on short notice.
There was limited time in fall camp, Tucker said, and he didn’t want to “overwhelm” the players.
He said he decided to yield the time to Newman.
He had been meeting with them weekly since June 6, the records showed but held no meetings between July 15 and July 28.
One of Tucker’s assistants, who is a witness in the case, also told the investigator that Tucker asked him via text message to cancel it.
He said he was never instructed to reschedule.
Tucker confronted Tracy about the alleged gossiping during the Aug. 2 phone call, they both told the investigator.
Tracy said he berated and bullied her, repeatedly saying he could not trust her.
She said she told him she did not know what he was talking about.
During the Aug. 2 call, Tracy said she pressed Tucker to identify his source – the associate.
In her report, she wrote that he said he had “given (his) word that (he) wouldn’t divulge their name.”
Tucker never revealed the associate’s name to the investigator, nor did he identify anyone who could support his version of events.
In his Sept. 11 public statement, however, he lamented that the hearing would not afford him the opportunity to “offer any substantive evidence of innocence.”
It was not the only claim he attributed to his anonymous associate.
It turned out to be yet another falsehood.
“Neither the organization nor Tracy is or has been the target of any investigative reporting.”
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
Contributing: USA TODAY reporter Steve Berkowitz.
The bullets came in plywood crates.
Any given box was about the size of a small microwave oven.
The printed label stuck to each one demonstrated a militaristic brevity.
“CARTRIDGES FOR WEAPONS, INERT PROJECTILE,” next to a bright yellow hazmat sticker, “EXPLOSIVES.”
Inside the boxes: drab green steel cans of .50-caliber ammunition.
Each round was giant, more than 5 inches long, built to be fired from a gun so big it is typically bolted to a truck.
The bullets were clipped together in long strands for rapid, machine-gun fire.
By the time Bill Brown got to the boxes, they sat double-stacked eight high atop wooden pallets inside a Missouri warehouse.
The pallets went on, row after row.
Three million bullets in all.
It was enough ammunition to feed a single machine gun – if fired nonstop at its rated speed eight hours a day, seven days a week – for almost six months.
Brown’s job was to get it out of there and toward the Ukrainian front lines.
The faster, the better.
“War is bad,” Brown said.
There would be virtually no public record of this Ukrainian arms shipment.
As a weapons dealer, Brown’s company would deliver the bullets under a system known as a direct commercial sale.
Instead, it was part of a shadowy system of brokers, exporters, arms dealers and country-to-country transfers that has become one part of the race to meet demand on distant battlefields.
President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said the effort was delayed in part by the wait for more arms.
Most of America’s $44 billion in documented support to Ukraine came in the form of old U.S. military stock, donated directly by the federal government.
In general, commercial sales over $14 million, and sales of military-grade weaponry like mortars or missiles, require State Department approval and congressional notification.
But other aid comes via private sales.
More than 14,000 U.S. entities are registered to conduct defense trade activities.
Their deals are monitored by an alphabet soup of agencies including Departments of Homeland Security, Commerce, Defense and the Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
Trade secrecy clauses in federal law mean this flow of gear, weapons and ammunition is almost never revealed to the public.
Brown, who works for a small Nevada-based logistics company called Battle Born Munitions, provided USA TODAY with a rare look behind the curtain of these private sales.
Details about the shipment were verified by his employer and the European government that made the purchase.
State Department officials declined to answer questions about the specific shipment Brown described.
This March sale and the secret number of other shipments like it fuel Ukraine’s fight against a Russian invasion.
Those sales also release an unknown amount of weaponry into the world.
What becomes of that weaponry after it’s sold – and especially after it’s delivered – is difficult to track.
As Brown surveyed the warehouse in Missouri, a crew steered forklifts and skid lifts among the stacks of plain wooden boxes.
From high in the trusses, suspended lamp fixtures bathed the boxes in artificial daylight.
Brown lifted his camera and started snapping photos.
In just a few hours, he and his cargo would be boarding a jumbo jet.
From Ukraine:War crimes in Ukraine may be unprecedented.
So is the country's push for swift justice.
The bullets had once been bound for Saudi Arabia.
Lot number SMQ19K401L026 had rolled off the assembly line in 2019 at Lake City Army Ammunition Plant near Kansas City.
Lake City, owned by the government and run by a contractor, sprawls across nearly 4,000 acres of green Missouri farmland.
Roads curve past World War II-era bunkers known as igloos, spaced out amid the countryside – far enough apart that an explosion in one won’t trigger a chain reaction in the others.
Lake City has been pumping out ammunition almost without pause since 1941.
It is the largest small-arms manufacturing plant in the world.
And in 2019, Saudi Arabia was stocking up on weapons during the Trump administration, fueling the war in Yemen and other conflicts that drew criticism from congressional Democrats.
The plant manufactures .50-caliber ammunition on a rolling basis, for both military and commercial buyers.
That’s a testament to just what a legend the bullet – and the gun that shoots it – has become.
In 2019, the technology was already a century old.
The .50 caliber was the brainchild of American gunsmith John Browning during World War I.
Built to respond to German anti-tank rifles, the M2 was first tested in 1918, and it entered widespread service in 1923.
It earned the nickname “Ma Deuce” and has served in combat ever since, bolted to trucks, ships, planes and handheld stands on the battlefield.
The .50-caliber rounds – named for their diameter, about half an inch – can easily hit targets more than a mile away.
At closer ranges, they will blast through solid concrete or armored vehicles.
The gun can fire at a sustained rate of about 40 shots per minute.
Military setups use strings of “linked” ammunition to feed into machine guns.
Spaced out after every fourth bullet, so-called tracer rounds have small pyrotechnic charges that illuminate the line of fire, aiding in targeting.
The gun’s longevity and versatility made it popular for militaries the world over.
But this particular batch of bullets wouldn’t end up being sold to Saudi Arabia.
The Biden administration put a temporary freeze on sales to the Saudi government in 2021 as it reviewed weapons deals approved under Donald Trump.
Instead, Brown said, the bullets were sold to a U.S. ammunition provider, only to be held up again.
Ultimately, they were mothballed.
Then, in spring 2023, the bullets found a buyer, or actually two: first Battle Born; ultimately, the Netherlands.
The European country, a NATO ally, needed a big supply of ammunition.
It wouldn’t be keeping the bullets but giving them to Ukraine.
Its purchase, essentially a donation, would count toward the country’s required NATO contribution.
Brown had a line on exactly what they needed.
It was sitting in the warehouse in Missouri.
He arrived in March to personally oversee the shipment.
As he prepped for delivery, Brown dropped tiny black tracking devices onto several of the pallets.
Just $55 apiece, the units use GPS and cell signals to keep tabs on the load.
The idea was to ensure it wouldn’t fall into the wrong hands.
But packing up the bullets was just the beginning.
As with anything that’s deadly and made of metal, the shipping costs can be extreme.
Forty-five to 60 days on a ship?
Brown – or Chief Bill, as he prefers – is a no-nonsense 35-year veteran of the U.S. Army and former helicopter pilot.
He retired as a chief warrant officer and lives in Orlando.
Now 59, he still spends a lot of time on the road – 10 international trips this year.
He says his arms logistics work takes him to places most Americans would rather avoid – near the Syrian border or to unstable regions of Iraq.
He’ll travel halfway around the world, he quips, “have some soup, and go back to Warsaw to head home.” The trips aren’t really about the destinations.
They’re about the cargo.
On that spring day in Missouri, forklifts carefully loaded 107 pallets of the ammo onto 18 flatbed semitrailers.
They’d all make the eight-hour drive to O’Hare International Airport.
In Chicago, two Boeing 747-400s operated by National Airlines would be ready for the freight.
Four pallets each were stacked and shrink-wrapped to create “air pallets” or “cookie sheets” weighing 12,800 pounds.
Each plane could carry up to 17 of the pallets that ran the length of each plane secured by white cargo netting.
Flight records Brown provided show the two planes departed about seven hours apart, one in early afternoon, one after dark.
The flight would take nine hours.
Brown wasn’t going to the Netherlands, even though it was the buyer.
The planes were bound for Rzeszów, Poland.
The ancient city sits at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains in southeastern Poland.
It has a gleaming modern airport next to a major east-west freeway.
From there, it’s barely 60 miles to the border with Ukraine.
It was an expensive journey.
The trucking company’s bill for those 18 semis?
Chartering the two 747s?
But this shipment of .50-cal rounds was profitable for Battle Born Munitions, according to Brown.
The company purchased the 3 million rounds from Northrop Grumman at a bargain and resold them for more than double the price.
(In subsequent interviews, representatives at BBM disputed the specific totals Brown mentioned, saying the accurate figures were protected by “various commercial and government non-disclosure agreements.” They did not dispute the other specifics of the deal he provided.)
Retail prices for .50-caliber ammunition run roughly $5 per bullet.
At that rate, the whole shipment would have been worth $15 million.
The pricing might also be elastic.
The Dutch mark up the price of the bullets and count it toward their NATO contribution, pegged to a percentage of gross domestic product, Brown said.
The Netherlands has contributed about $15 billion to NATO this year, or about 1.7% of its GDP and just under the NATO mandate of 2%.
Representatives of the Dutch military confirmed the shipment to USA TODAY but declined to comment further about the pricing or details.
The war in Ukraine has only increased the demand for private deals.
The State Department signed off on more than $154 billion in commercial arms deals directly to foreign countries in 2022, a 48% increase from the previous year.
Direct commercial sales represent a modest portion of the contribution to Ukraine compared with the $44 billion donated by the U.S., but they still amounted to more than $600 million in sales from U.S. companies to the Ukrainian government last year alone.
That doesn’t include sales to other countries that also support Ukraine – sales like the one Brown described.
Jim Bartlett, an attorney with expertise in the specialized international arms transactions, said private U.S. businesses are playing a small but important role in the conflict.
“American companies are happy to export defense articles to foreign buyers approved by the U.S. State Department,” Bartlett said.
Those sales also come with risks.
Direct sales face fewer regulatory controls, oversight and enforcement, said Robert Nichols, an international military sales expert and attorney at the law firm Nichols Liu.
“You can imagine the range of characters involved in supplying a war effort,” Nichols said.
So far, the Department of Justice has indicted just a handful of arms brokers over deals related to the war in Ukraine.
They allegedly lied to Commerce Department agents and told them the parts were bound for Turkey.
Both pleaded not guilty to the charges this summer.
A State Department spokesman declined to provide details of enforcement actions but said, “The United States takes seriously our responsibility to protect American military and dual-use technologies and prevent their diversion, including through strong enforcement actions.”
NATO said it oversees allied arms deliveries, and that those arms generally reach Ukraine.
NATO itself technically only provides non-non-lethal aid, like fuel, medical supplies and generators.
Brown, of Battle Born, says he fields calls weekly from “clowns” without the proper licensing, whom he reports to the State Department for potential violations.
Some raise red flags when they approach him about transactions that include payment via diamonds or gold.
He prefers traditional wire transfers with approved sales partners since he knows government officials are watching.
He validates the contracts and checks certificates for the final users.
That’s part of why he traveled with the ammunition.
He would be meeting a Dutch military official for the official handoff.
“My job is to keep us all out of jail,” Brown said.
The two 747s touched down in Poland, one before the sun, the other in late morning.
Brown exchanged paperwork with a young Dutch military staffer who signed for the delivery, he said.
They traded military patches as souvenirs.
They snapped a photo together.
The bullets bought by the Netherlands would never touch Dutch soil.
U.S. aid:Billions from the US flows to Ukraine.
Here's where it comes from, and how it adds up
Despite playing a small role proportionately in the war, $600 million in direct commercial sales can buy a lot of small weaponry.
Put another way: It’s hard to sneak away an F-16 or a missile launcher the size of a tractor-trailer.
But a bunch of guns or a pallet of ammo?
Much easier to resell.
After Russia invaded Ukraine in 2014, the Small Arms Survey, a Swiss arms research project, estimated that within a year, battlefield seizures and other forms of diversion led to 300,000 small arms and light weapons going missing, including 100,000 in Crimea alone.
When small arms go missing, they can go missing into another country, maybe one led by a despot or even a terrorist organization.
The U.S. government says diversion of American donations has been widely absent so far in Ukraine.
That could be a combination of intensive “end-use-monitoring” programs and the reality of the battlefield, where supplies are rapidly put to use.
But even if not now, unused ammo could be resold someday.
“These are commodities with very long shelf lives.”
Florida-based Global Ordnance, another State Department-licensed exporter, is a competitor in the direct weapons sales business.
General counsel Bryan Van Brunt said the company has extensive protocols in place to track shipments and make sure the end-users are federally approved, though he declined to provide specifics about those systems.
Brown, with Battle Born Munitions, says the company employs a mix of simple and sophisticated tracking technology to ensure his shipments are tracked to end users.
The black GPS devices he dropped onto his cargo tracked the ammo all the way across the globe.
But that system only works as long as Brown is actually tracking.
“Technically, my role ends when I deliver it to NATO,” he said.
Sometime after the 747s touched down in Poland, along with signing the paperwork and snapping a selfie with the Dutch official, Brown found the tiny black GPS trackers and lifted them off the pallets.
Ukrainian trucks would arrive at the airport to pick up the ammunition.
They would point toward the border, and onward to Lviv, and some distant battlefield.
Brown would point in the opposite direction.
Just like one of his quips: Fly in, have soup, get home.
He headed toward Warsaw, with the GPS trackers in his bag.
Contact him at npenz@usatoday.com or @npenzenstadler, or on Signal at (720) 507-5273.
The geography professor didn’t hide his clown fetish or the fact that he sometimes indulged his urges by recruiting students as subjects.
He posted regularly about it on social media.
He submitted his resignation the same day their story was published.
His interactions with students and open discussion of his fetish happened in both mainstream and tailored digital spaces.
He popped into Facebook groups geared toward new students and niche forums on websites like Reddit.
He posted videos on YouTube.
Over the years, two students reported him to campus police; others complained online.
He left Kent State University after pleading no contest to something different: a theft charge that involved entering his peers’ offices without permission and taking a USB drive.
Nicholls State, for example, told USA TODAY Network reporters it does not routinely check social media for new hires.
The money was appealing but the interactions soured.
“I thought maybe they could prevent anything bad from happening since other girls would go with him.”
She said there was never any followup from campus police – or anyone else.
The two who expressed public concerns on social media told USA TODAY they never heard from their campus officials either.
She said she would pass along that reporters were trying to reach him.
He said his contract was not renewed because he was the target of a “grade inflation task force.”
She has seen the pattern often in her work maintaining a database of publicly documented sexual misconduct by faculty and staff.
As for grad students?
“I don’t on purpose,” she said, “because that’s information that almost never comes out.”
He was working toward his doctorate and researched fading businesses.
His work about shopping malls in the Rust Belt won several awards.
Like many graduate students, he also taught classes.
“I will literally pay you!”
What’s more, she figured out that he was a graduate student, a fact she said he didn’t disclose in his posts.
It arrived at midnight and contained no message, although writing on his shirt read: “I'm not a failure.”
“It’s definitely burned into my mind.”
He would send “get to know you” messages, the police report said, and then ask the student if she was “interested in having her face painted for one of his class projects.”
“She does not have any concerns for her safety, but just wanted this documented,” the police report read.
In July 2017, another student had retweeted a message from Kent State’s Twitter account that asked for Kent State love stories.
She said she tweeted to draw officials’ attention to it and moved on but now wishes she had reported it officially.
College campuses are supposed to offer students special protections from sexual harassment even when it falls short of criminal behavior.
Title IX, often associated with equity in women’s sports, also addresses “sex-based harassment, which encompasses sexual assault and other forms of sexual violence” at schools that receive federal funding.
Colleges infrequently and unevenly enforce the rule, however.
A 2022 USA TODAY investigation found just one of every 12,400 students was suspended in connection with sexual misconduct.
The student who shared her story online said the only response she received was from a graduate student in the geography department, who contacted her on Oct. 1, 2018.
In an email, he wrote that he had seen her post and suspected he knew which faculty member had asked her about face painting.
“I brought it to the attention of some of our faculty because I was pretty sure I knew who it was, but they were certain it wasn’t that individual and that you probably just meant geology,” he wrote.
He went on to reference another student being “approached in (at least by just looking at your tweet) a much more aggressive way.” The grad student asked the undergraduate for more information, but, she told USA TODAY, she didn’t respond.
She said she started drafting a reply, but a year had passed.
She wanted to move on.
Kent State would not say whether any actions were taken after the students’ reports, but Eric Mansfield, a spokesman for the university, said the police department confirmed that the students who filed police reports were provided with “university resources, which would include other non-criminal avenues to pursue (Counseling Services, Title IX, Center for Sexual and Relationship Violence Services, etc.)
Mansfield also said that the university monitors social media but that colleges “can’t always see or track every mention on social media.”
A blotter item in the local newspaper shows police obtained an arrest warrant in connection with a third-degree felony burglary charge.
“Also, we do not comment on personnel matters.”
In more recent years, Buckley has become critical of the law and how schools interpret it.
He told the Columbus Dispatch in 2010 that “the law needs to be revamped.”
Survivors of sexual violence and students accuse universities of using the law to avoid negative media coverage.
Students with a history of bad behavior may jump from one school to another without the public ever knowing about their histories.
One case involved Brandon Austin, who was accused of sexual assault at Providence College in 2013 while on the school’s basketball team.
But Providence College initially said Austin was suspended for violating the school’s code of student conduct and declined to share further details with the Providence Journal, citing federal privacy laws.
Austin denied wrongdoing and was not charged with a crime.
Austin was able to transfer to the University of Oregon, where he was again accused of sexual assault, along with other players.
Police investigated the claims, and the local district attorney declined to press charges.
And it doesn’t apply when a student is “seeking or intending to enroll” at another college.
He blamed the overuse of the law on fear of being sued.
While most U.S. employers conduct background screening, according to trade group data, those inquiries typically focus on criminal history.
Social media receives far less attention even though that is where people are most likely to share their unguarded thoughts.
Undertaking a full review of a person’s social media presence is more difficult than just checking an applicant’s Facebook page.
Does an applicant have an account on X, formerly Twitter?
How about an account with Discord, an online platform frequented by gamers, where leaked Pentagon documents were recently shared?
Or what about a Telegram account, a messaging platform popular among white nationalists?
Further complicating things, it’s common on sites like Reddit for users to adopt usernames and describe experiences with little to no ties to reality.
A little digging, however, can turn up a lot of dirt.
His time as a student and instructor at Kent State is absent.
That is the same handle used on Reddit by someone with a special interest in face paint.
Other posts mention a “clown fetish.” In a forum titled “Creepy,” he wrote, “I convince pretty girls to let me paint their faces,” along with a photo with multiple women in white face paint.
That and other similar posts remained live for years until they were taken down after the Nicholls students published their story in late March.
USA TODAY Network reporters captured screenshots before they disappeared.
With dates in 2019, the posts feature a young woman wearing a Kent State T-shirt.
The material would have been available to administrators at Northern Illinois before the start of the fall 2019 semester.
Joe King, a spokesman for Northern Illinois, said departments hiring new graduate students are “not required to check social media or investigate a disciplinary history.” He added some departments may reach out to the graduate students’ former advisers.
But there are signs the behavior continued.
She said she declined to do it but was aware that other Northern Illinois students had participated.
She asked, had anyone complained?
Many students would find a reason to complain, as Nicholls State student journalist Sally-Anne Torres learned firsthand.
It started in January when one of her fellow reporters picked up an odd rumor: a professor was offering extra credit for students willing to paint their faces like clowns.
Initially, Torres dismissed it because it seemed too unusual and there weren’t a lot of leads to follow.
He blamed his departure on giving too many A’s.
That seemed suspicious to Torres.
“It wasn’t just this innocent thing that a lot of these girls thought it was,” Torres said.
Some, she said, were followed on Twitter by him while others opted into an extra credit assignment he offered.
The women told Torres he sometimes giggled and laughed as they painted their faces in his office.
It seemed unusual at the time, Price said, because his friend wasn’t in the class.
It became more concerning to him on reading the student newspaper’s report.
“I feel frankly disgusted and disappointed that Nicholls couldn’t do a proper background check on this professor, because this is unacceptable,” Price said.
Ramos learned that the person behind the account was likely a professor at the university.
She posted about the behavior in January 2022, but nothing came of it.
On March 27, the same day the student newspaper published its piece, Ramos posted screenshots of her discoveries on Twitter with the message, “Found a Nicholls state university professor on Reddit.”
“I wish the university had acted sooner because all this information was public on the internet,” she told USA TODAY.
No one from the university, she said, has ever reached out.
He can be reached at CCampo@gannett.com.
As Israel continued to press its assault on Gaza after Hamas infiltrated by land, sea and air over the weekend, killing and capturing over 1,000 Israelis, the spotlight has focused on the militant group.
Israel's leaders have vowed retaliation, and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Hamas "will pay an unprecedented price."
Hamas' political wing has controlled the Gaza Strip for over a decade, but the group is most known for its many suicide bombings and other attacks on Israel amid the ongoing Israeli-Palestinian conflict that has lasted decades.
It's considered a terrorist group by the United States and other nations.
Here's what to know about Hamas:
Latest updates:Israel regains control over Gaza Strip border; rocket attacks intensify
Hamas receives financial, material and logistical support from Iran.
In 2006, Hamas won parliamentary elections, and in 2007 the group violently seized control of the Gaza Strip from the Palestinian Authority, which was controlled by the rival Fatah movement that governs the West Bank.
There have been no elections since.
The U.S. State Department designated Hamas a terrorist group in 1997.
Several other nations also consider it a terrorist organization.
The group calls for establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel and believes in the use of violence to carry out the destruction of Israel.
Up to 1,000 Hamas fighters stormed across the Israeli border by land and sea beginning at daybreak Saturday in an attack that caught Israel's military off guard.
Hamas leaders say they were pushed to attack because of an Israeli crackdown on militants in the West Bank, continued construction of settlements − which the international community considers to be illegal − thousands of prisoners being held in Israeli jails and Israel's ongoing blockade of Gaza.
Israeli security services routinely raid the compound.
“Today the people are regaining their revolution.”
Israel estimates the group has about 30,000 fighters and an arsenal of rockets and unmanned drones.
A day after Hamas launched its attack, Hezbollah also fired dozens of rockets and shells at three Israeli positions in disputed area along the country's border with Syria's Golan Heights, occupied by Israel.
Hezbollah is a Lebanese political and militant group that's been around since the early 1980s, funded and backed by Iran and spreading Tehran's influence in the Middle East.
Like Hamas, Hezbollah is designated a terrorist group by the United States and opposes Israel, but Hamas pales in comparison to Hezbollah in terms of its terrorist capabilities.
The Shiite Muslim militia has also attacked Israel with rockets in the past.
Contributing: John Bacon, USA TODAY; The Associated Press
WASHINGTON - President Joe Biden is set to give his first major speech Tuesday following Hamas' brutal massacre in Israel in a display of U.S. support for Israel as war erupts in the Middle East.
Biden will speak from the White House State Dining Room at 1 p.m.
More than 1,000 Israelis and at least 11 Americans were killed when Hamas militants crashed through the Israeli border along the Gaza Strip and launched a surprise invasion.
Israel has responded with attacks on Gaza that intensified with more bombings Tuesday.
An estimated 100 to 150 people in Israel were kidnapped by Hamas militants and are being held captive in Gaza.
That includes some Americans.
Hamas leaders have warned they will execute hostages if Israel does not cease airstrikes on Gaza without warnings.
On Tuesday morning, Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris spoke with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu about "coordinated efforts with partners and allies" to defend Israel, the White House said.
The attack is another major foreign policy test for Biden who is already struggling to keep assistance flowing to Ukraine.
It jeopardizes the administration’s efforts to help Israel and Saudi Arabia formalize relations, one of the ways Biden had hoped would stabilize the Middle East and allow attention to be focused on the growing challenge of China.
The administration has responded that the money, which has not yet been released, can only be spent for humanitarian purposes.
Hamas was founded in 1987 during the first Palestinian uprising against Israeli occupation of Gaza and the West Bank.
The group’s charter calls for establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel.
The political wing of Hamas was born in later years.
Hamas' political wing has controlled Gaza since winning elections in 2006, which prompted Israel to enforce a blockade on Gaza.
It was founded by a Palestinian activist connected to the Muslim Brotherhood, a transnational Islamist organization with ties to Egypt.
The militant organization is committed to the destruction of Israel and has been designated a terrorist group by the U.S., the EU and various nations.
The group has vowed to annihilate Israel and has been responsible for many suicide bombings and other deadly attacks on civilians and Israeli soldiers.
Over the years, Hamas received backing from Arab countries, such as Qatar and Turkey.
Recently, it’s moved closer to Iran and its allies.
Hamas has said it attacked Israel in response to mounting Palestinian suffering under Israeli occupation and Israel's and Egypt's 16-year blockade of Gaza that has decimated Gaza's economy.
Israel has made peace deals with Arab counties in recent years but not made concessions in its long conflict with the Palestinians.
The U.S. has tried to reach a deal between Israel and Saudi Arabia, a bitter rival of Hamas’ Iranian backers.
Meanwhile, Israel’s new far-right government was working to cement Israeli settlements in the West Bank despite Palestinian opposition.
Hamas leaders say an Israeli crackdown on militants in the West Bank, continued construction of settlements − which the international community has deemed illegal − thousands of prisoners in Israeli jails, and its ongoing blockade of Gaza pushed it to attack.
Hamas' surprise sea, land and air attack resulted in the largest one-day killing of Jews since the Holocaust.
The attack began with thousands of rockets fired from inside the Gaza Strip into Israel early Saturday.
About an hour later, Hamas gunmen crossed the Israeli border at different locations and began attacking residential areas and military bases.
An unknown number were taken hostage.
Contributing: Associated Press
Reach Joey Garrison on X, formerly known as Twitter, @joeygarrison.
Florida's Department of Health agreed to a settlement requiring it to provide more detailed COVID-19 data, after a group sued in 2021 for the release of records during the state's COVID-19 surge.
The new data will detail vaccination counts, case counts and deaths.
It'll be aggregated weekly for the next three years, grouped by county, age group, gender and race.
The department provides more general COVID-19 data every two weeks.
The court did not order the state to display the data but the department decided to do so, he said.
The department will also have to pay $152,500 in legal fees.
"The DeSantis Administration settled in our favor because they knew what they did was wrong."
The governor's office referred a media request to the Florida Department of Health.
Williams, the department's press secretary, called Smith's news release a "political stunt" and its characterization strange, pointing to a line in the settlement agreement that reads it "is not and shall not in any way be construed as an admission by any Party of any wrongdoing or any violation of any law."
"It is unfortunate that we have continued to waste government resources arguing over the formatting of data with armchair epidemiologists who have zero training or expertise," Williams told the USA TODAY Network in an email.
"While some individuals may continue to grapple for political relevancy and disregard providing the public with the truth, we will continue serving Floridians by executing our core mission of protecting, promoting, and improving the health of all people in Florida. "
An Orange County Board member requested Smith gather data from the state Department of Health on pediatric hospitalizations and cases.
1 in pediatric cases.
The nonprofit watchdog organization Florida Center for Government Accountability made the same records request for all of Florida's 67 counties and the request was denied for the same reasons.
The watchdog group and Smith filed suit.
Several major news media companies, including the USA TODAY Network, joined the suit.
So did the First Amendment Foundation.
The department claimed in court that the requested records didn't exist, according to a press release.
But the department released the records in March following a state appellate court order.
The parties agreed to a settlement after the watchdog group informed the department that those records satisfied the public records requests made almost two years before, according to the release.
Michael Barfield, director of public access initiatives at the Florida Center for Government Accountability, said the department hid the records to validate a narrative the state was open for business.
The settlement comes during Gov.
Ron DeSantis' presidential campaign.
The Republican has used his COVID-19 record to try and gain more support in his White House bid.
He rose to conservative stardom early in the pandemic in large part due to his COVID-19 policies, such as penalizing mask and vaccine mandates.
His administration, at the same time, slow-walked or refused coronavirus-related public information requests, drawing controversy and lawsuits, such as those by Smith and the Florida Center for Government Accountability.
It should have never happened.
News sources joined lawsuit:USA TODAY Network, other Florida news organizations join public records lawsuit
How it started:Two months later, finding Florida COVID data by county can be frustrating — but possible
This reporting content is supported by a partnership with Freedom Forum and Journalism Funding Partners.
Three days after conflict broke out between Hamas militants and Israel, the toll has risen to approximately 1,000 missing or killed Israelis, 1,500 dead militants, and at least 11 deceased Americans.
President Joe Biden has said that some U.S. citizens remain unaccounted for, and estimates show that 130 or more people were kidnapped by Hamas, with at least one American-Israeli among them.
The FBI has issued a statement assuring that, while there is no specific threat to the U.S., the agency is working with partners in Israel to find impacted Americans there.
"Reports of deceased, injured or missing Americans are being treated with the utmost urgency and aggressively investigated," the statement posted on X reads.
As airlines halt flights to and from the country and The State Department issues travel advisories for the region, several elected officials have said that their constituents are reaching out for help getting out.
At least five American groups traveling to Israel have found themselves stuck in a violent and destructive dispute.
Here are those groups, their shelter plans and how they've planned to make it home.
They started their trip in Tel Aviv on Friday, but moved to the northern part of the country when the war broke out, AL.com reported.
"Good morning and welcome to morning prayer this Sunday morning in beautiful Galilee," Dyson said in a Facebook live video posted Sunday.
He has been providing updates about the group in the daily prayer videos.
The group had three previously-booked flights cancelled, and as of Tuesday morning, he said that some members were able to start traveling home.
The group is spreading out their journey home across several days and routes.
"We will certainly have a story to tell when we get back," Dyson said.
"But we will get back."
Eleven people belonging to the Shades Mountain Baptist Church are also stuck in Israel, AL.com reported.
A pastor at the church called for prayer Sunday morning, saying they are safe but hoping they return soon.
Shade Mountain Baptist Church did not immediately return USA TODAY's request for comment.
"I am in communication with our Deputy Chief who informed me that though the delegation is close to the Gaza Strip, they are sheltering in a safe location and every effort is underway for their safe return to New York," the Facebook post on Saturday read.
The New York Times reported that they were in Ashdod, and they spent Saturday taking cover in bomb shelters.
They were able to leave Sunday via a connecting flight through Dubai.
What it would mean for US and Middle East security
A group of 12 travelers from First Baptist Church in Knoxville, Tennessee, went to Israel to follow the historical footsteps of Jesus, and now is exploring alternative ways to get out of a country that has become a war zone.
While the group might be able to depart on its scheduled flight Oct. 21, armed conflict with Hamas could render its travel plans impossible.
"We are exploring options for alternative travel in the event that we realize even where we are is unsafe," Senior Pastor Brent McDougal told Knox News, part of the USA TODAY Network, on Monday, Oct. 9, from Jerusalem, where he said the group was safe.
The group, which arrived in Tel Aviv on Oct. 6, is scheduled to fly out of the city but might seek options for a flight from another country or leave sooner if violence reaches Jerusalem.
For now, they are enclosed in the Old City section of Jerusalem, where sacred sites like the Western Wall and the Dome of the Rock mosque rest within ancient walls.
More:Thousands across US gather for vigils, protests over Israel-Hamas war: 'Broken the hearts of many people'
"I know they heard sirens, I know there was a lot of concern," Morning Star Church member Trevor Wolfe told KSDK.
Pastor Mike Schreiner has been releasing video updates from abroad on Facebook.
Initially the group planned to fly out of Jerusalem Sunday, but they took a bus across the border to Jordan after their flights were canceled.
They hope to be safe from the conflict in Jordan and will take varied flight paths back to the U.S., according to KSDK.
If I have a choice between texting or a phone call to converse with someone, I choose a call most of the time.
It’s faster, easier, and I can do it safely while driving, walking, or folding laundry.
If someone calls and doesn’t leave me a voice message, I will likely assume they don’t need to talk with me.
According to the latest rules of smartphone etiquette − and my 22-year-old daughter − I’m doing it all wrong.
As new technology changes, so do the rules of engagement around it, and it’s harder than ever to keep up!
While common sense should dictate that it’s not polite to talk on our cell phones while we’re in a bathroom or use the speakerphone in a movie theater, clearly, some people missed that memo.
Doing either is considered baseline rude at best, but I witnessed both in the last week alone.
If some people are still so oblivious to the most obvious tech-related social faux pas, how are we supposed to pick up on the new stuff, like whether we should text someone before we call them or when to use the latest iOS 17 video voicemail feature?
When everyday situations change for the masses, such as more people using FaceTime and making videos in public places, there are social nuances that are simply more polite, sensitive, and respectful to others, she explained.
Before we go through specifics, though, it’s important to note that what works for close friends and family is not the same for business or professional relationships.
Also, age can play a role in what’s socially acceptable.
My 23-year-old production assistant recently told me it’s kind of rude to add a period even when I’m texting her.
It’s like I’m being passive-aggressive and not as sincere.
Many abbreviations are age-related or even depend on a person’s country of origin.
Context is key, but ever-evolving rules of modern-day etiquette are also good to know.
Here are some of the most important.
It adds extra work to respond, and isn’t that what voicemail’s for − especially now that iOS 17 shows a transcript of what the person is saying as they’re leaving a message − so you can decide if you want to pick up?
It’s OK to call first if you’re reaching out to friends or family or if it’s an emergency.
Responding to a call with an automated text response is fine, especially if you add a custom reply.
That happens to me a few times every day.
If I’m already on the phone, I often type in a speedy personal response, such as, ‘I’m on the phone now, but will call you back as soon as I’m off.’
When is the right time to leave a voicemail?
If you ask someone in their teens, 20s, or even 30s, they will likely say, “never.”
It’s also essential to leave your full name and callback number, even though it often appears on screens automatically.
Emergencies, important work messages, and emotions are often best handled via voice versus text.
“But for someone you don’t know as well, ask them how they prefer to communicate.”
Again, it’s fine if it’s someone close to you.
But as a general rule, no.
Arrange a video call first.
I recently went down an hours-long rabbit hole on this topic on both Reddit and Quora, and wow, does it make people mad when you FaceTime them without permission.
“It’s the same as walking into someone’s house uninvited,” wrote one person on a Reddit AITA subgroup.
Another new iOS 17 update lets you leave a video message when someone doesn’t answer your FaceTime call.
If you’re traveling and want to show something special to a loved one, show off a baby’s first steps to grandparents, or even your amazing new highlight to your BFF, it’s fine.
(As long as you’re following the etiquette rules of FaceTiming in public, which is next on this list.)
But most people who aren’t related to or in love with you don’t want a video message.
That goes tenfold for a NSFW video!
Too many updates?
Why you should do it now.
Best charging cable:In need of an iPhone 15 charging cable?
Here's how to find the best USB-C charger cord
The answer here depends on where you are and who’s around you.
Most people think it’s rude to FaceTime in a public place, especially without headphones on or when anyone else is in the background other than you.
It’s considered good form to keep a distance of at least 10 feet from the nearest person when you’re on your smartphone, especially if you’re using video of any kind.
Most of us tend to talk louder on cellphones than in real life, so talk quietly and be aware of your surroundings before you turn your video camera on, period.
Consider going somewhere else when your actions take away from other people’s enjoyment of any public space.
This includes blasting your music, playing video games, or watching videos without headphones or sound effects turned off.
Here are more smartphone manners that haven’t changed:
It’s (still) not okay to have your smartphone at the dinner table.
The only exception is if you’re expecting a life-or-death text or call.
In that case, let everyone around you know you might have to answer your phone.
Use your “inside voice,” and watch your language.
Cursing might be the new “hello” for some people, but experts, it’s still considered poor manners in most public situations.
It’s also best to keep business correspondence professional.
But don’t overdo it.
It happens all the time, too.
Parents check social media when their kids need attention.
Couples do it during “snuggle time.” I just did it a little while ago to my dog.
She was staring at me to go for a walk, and I was distracted by a hilarious TikTok video.
Not only are these behaviors rude, but studies show they break up relationships, cause crowd fights, and might even hurt people — and pets — you care about the most
The views and opinions expressed in this column are the author's and do not necessarily reflect those of USA TODAY.
This week Apple rushed out an emergency patch to fix a serious security flaw for iPhones and iPads.
The zero-day vulnerability which allows attackers to elevate privileges may have already been exploited, Apple said.
Apple patched the flaw in the iOS 17.0.3 and iPadOS 17.0.3 updates.
It did not provide additional details.
“This update provides important bug fixes, security updates and addresses an issue that may cause iPhone to run warmer than expected,” Apple said.
So what’s with all the Apple security updates?
Apple’s cat-and-mouse game with zero-day hackers seems to be picking up.
Should you worry about all of these iOS updates?
In general, yes.
The growing number of updates are a sign that Apple is working hard to keep our devices secure, he said.
There are steps we can all take to protect our devices from incursions.
No one gets excited about updating their phone.
First, you should make sure automatic updates are turned on.
Install updates as soon as you hear about them.
If you are at higher risk or are just concerned about security, use lockdown mode on your iPhone.
Of course, people need to update their phone.
“It radically increases the security of your device and makes it way more expensive for bad actors to hack into your stuff.”
Security Planner is a free guide from Consumer Reports that was originally developed and maintained by the Citizen Lab.
It provides information on identity theft and ransomware, plus tips on devices such as smart speakers, baby monitors, and smart TVs.
Turn on multifactor authentication on all accounts that offer it, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) recommends.
Use strong passwords that are long, random, and unique to each account, and use a password manager to generate them and to save them, says CISA, which is part of the Department of Homeland Security.
Think before you click, CISA says.
Be cautious with unsolicited emails or texts or calls asking for personal information.
Don't click on links or open attachments from unknown sources.
USA TODAY will be providing live coverage beginning at 1 p.m.
You can watch at the video at the top of the page or on USA TODAY's YouTube channel.
More than 1,600 Israelis and Palestinians have died since the conflict began, including at least 11 Americans, and thousands more injured.
Hamas has claimed to have taken more than 130 hostages, and Israel has ordered a siege on Gaza pledging to cut electricity, food and fuel to the impoverished home of more than 2 million Palestinians.
Biden has also condemned the Hamas attacks in an address, saying the U.S. stands with Israel, and his administration's support for Israel's security is "rock solid and unwavering."
Live updates:Israel regains control over Gaza Strip border; rocket attacks intensify
Good gourd, it's one giant pumpkin!
A 43-year-old Minnesota educator can now boast he's grown the heaviest pumpkin on earth.
From Candy Corn to Kit Kats:The most popular (and hated) Halloween candy by state
The grower told the news outlet he decided to give his seeds extra care as he grew them this year, adding extra fertilizer and watering them sometimes a dozen times a day.
Contributing: Associated Press
Reach her at nalund@usatoday.com and follow her on X @nataliealund.
Sometimes you’ve just got to go for what your heart desires.
That’s what a New York 8-year-old did when his dad was leaving for work.
After successfully flagging his dad down, his father got out of his truck, picked the boy up and the two shared an adorable, tight hug.
The moment was captured on the family’s doorbell camera and uploaded to TikTok.
It has amassed 1.5 million views and nearly 183,000 favorites since then.
The family says hugs are a huge part of their mornings.
“I probably have to give like five hugs a morning to each kid,” Tyler said.
Watch:Double proposal caught on camera at Disneyland's Sleeping Beauty Castle
Isaiah told USA TODAY Monday evening that he ran out to see his dad because he just wanted to.
“He forgot to give me a hug and I wanted one,” Isaiah said.
“Did he forget to give you a hug or did he forget to give you a tenth hug?” his mom, Hailey, laughed.
His younger brother Hudson does too.
Tyler, the boys’ father, said when he saw his son running out of the house, he knew he wanted another hug.
Once the sweet moment was over, something told him to check the family’s doorbell footage.
He was originally going to save the recording for himself but after watching it “a bunch of times,” he decided to share it on social media.
Tyler’s wife, Hailey, said the family is shocked by how many people have watched and commented on the video.
Moments like this are a reality check for many people, she said.
“It reminds people of what they have, what they used to have, what they wish they had, and for some reason, people really gravitated toward us,” she said.
“It was a good reminder for a lot of people to just slow down or appreciate when you still have these things or look back fondly on memories.”
His wife said it’s amazing that such a simple moment between a dad and son could inspire so many people.
A noble cause:Meet 10 activists under 17 years old honored for helping fight food insecurity
Their boys are growing so quickly and sometimes, they’re amazed by how much they’ve changed in just a year or so.
“It's crazy,” their mother said.
“You look back on a video from a year ago and now that they're a little older, you think ‘They haven't changed that much.’ But when you really look back at pictures and videos, you realize they have grown and changed so much.”
The boys like looking back at their old photos and videos.
The family often sits down to look at photos and reflect on memories they all share.
“The way our phones are now, with such nice cameras, we're really trying to take advantage of being able to take pictures and videos,” Tyler said.
“They're super creative kids,” their mom said.
The first and third-grade boys are very personable too, their mother said.
“No one would accuse them of being shy,” she laughed.
The boys have “huge imaginations,” their mother said.
Their house is full of their latest construction projects, their parents said.
Watch 74-year-old wow wedding guests in her surprise role as flower girl
In addition to the hug video that captured the hearts of millions online, the family also uploads other videos to TikTok and film content for their YouTube channel called The Activity Archives.
Tyler said the boys asked to make YouTube videos last year.
They get together with cousins and other family members to do activities outdoors such as ice fishing, magnet fishing and more.
The idea is to get parents to go outside with their kids, the boys' father said.
“We try to think of fun, different activities that we can do that may inspire parents to be like ‘Oh, we want to do that with our kids,’” Tyler said.
The family appreciates the kind words people have sent their way since their TikTok video went viral.
“It's reached so many people and so many people have felt it so deeply,” he said.
“So many kids have gotten extra hugs and I think that part, for me personally, is the part that I really enjoy the most about it…to know that we're spreading love that way.”
Wedding guests in St. Augustine, Florida, who might have been expecting a child to emerge, were treated to a sweet surprise when the doors opened.
Watch how this flower girl grandma makes her way down the aisle at her granddaughter's wedding.
Humankind is your go-to spot for good news!
Click here to submit your uplifting, cute, or inspiring video moments for us to feature.
Also, click here to subscribe to our newsletter bringing our top stories of the week straight to your inbox.
WASHINGTON – The Supreme Court is being asked to weigh a ban on “conversion therapy” − the practice of trying to change a person's sexual orientation or gender identity − in an appeal that tests the court's appetite for engaging this term in the legal battle between religion and LGBTQ+ rights.
Long discredited and already banned for minors in about half of U.S. states, the practice of using ''treatment'' to make a gay or lesbian person straight has reemerged as the Supreme Court has become more conservative and receptive to appeals dealing with religious freedom.
Opponents say the practice can involve electrical shocks and nausea-inducing drugs as well as psychoanalysis and counseling.
Brian Tingley, a licensed family counselor in Washington state, is challenging the state's ban on the practice for people under 18, claiming it violates his free speech and religious rights.
The law, he told the Supreme Court this year, "forbids him from speaking, treating his professional license as a license for government censorship."
Preview:The Supreme Court gets back to work.
Here are the cases to watch.
Opponents of the practice say states have banned it for minors because it increases the risk of depression and suicide for LGBTQ+ young people.
Washington's law doesn't apply to churches or religious groups, only to therapists who are licensed – and regulated – by the state.
"This is a dangerous practice," said Laurel Stine, chief policy officer for the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention.
"The Supreme Court has not taken up any of these challenges before, and we are confident that, if they do, we will win."
The justices were set to discuss the case privately Friday and could announce as soon as Tuesday whether they will decide it or allow a lower court ruling against Tingley to stand.
The court has declined to hear similar challenges in the past, leaving other state bans in place.
But those challenging the bans note that the Supreme Court also recently handed down a decision that appeared to strengthen First Amendment speech protections in the workplace.
As the Supreme Court has become more conservative in recent years, it has taken a keen interest in cases involving religious freedom.
Tingley argues that a 2018 decision by the Supreme Court involving anti-abortion pregnancy centers should weigh in his favor.
In that case, a 5-4 majority of the court’s conservatives said a California law that required the pregnancy centers to notify clients about publicly funded abortion and contraception services likely violated the First Amendment.
More:Supreme Court backs web developer who didn't want to create same-sex wedding sites
While California argued its law regulated "professional speech," such as what a therapist might say to a client during a session, the Supreme Court ruled it had never carved out a separate category of workplace speech subject to different First Amendment protections.
Then in 2020, a federal court of appeals in Atlanta relied on that Supreme Court decision to block enforcement of similar "conversion therapy" bans in parts of Florida.
Tingley is represented by the religious rights group Alliance Defending Freedom, which has filed several successful religious appeals at the Supreme Court in recent years.
"Washington's counseling censorship law violates freedom of speech and harms counselors and their clients."
A U.S. District court in Washington dismissed Tingley’s case in 2021.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the 9th Circuit sided against him last year.
Washington Attorney General Bob Ferguson, a Democrat, did not respond to a request for comment.
The case is Tingley v. Ferguson.
Religious groups and individuals have collected significant wins at the Supreme Court in recent years, expanding religious protections in the workplace, knocking down anti-discrimination laws intended to protect LGBTQ+ people, and opening the door for taxpayer money for schools that offer religious instruction.
In one high-profile case last year, the Supreme Court sided with a web designer who wants to decline to create websites for same-sex weddings because of her religious beliefs.
The designer, Lorie Smith, who was also represented by Alliance Defending Freedom, successfully argued that Colorado's anti-discrimination law compelled her to make speech she disagreed with.
"Laws along these lines have done much to secure the civil rights of all Americans," Justice Neil Gorsuch wrote for a 6-3 majority.
Tingley's attorneys suggested in court filings that the decision for Smith works so strongly in his favor that the Supreme Court could decide the case without hearing arguments.
But so far this term, the court has yet to grant a religious-freedom case.
Critics say they believe the law − and the science − is on their side when it comes to "conversion therapy" bans.
The American Psychological Association, the American Psychiatric Association, the National Association for Social Workers and other leading medical groups have all repudiated the practice.
Casey Pick, director of law and policy for The Trevor Project, which focuses on suicide prevention among LGBTQ+ young people, said every court that has considered a statewide ban has upheld it.
"There is no reason the (Supreme) Court should not do the same here," she said, "and ensure that LGBTQ young people across the country continue to be protected from unprofessional, unscientific and deeply harmful practices."
If you or someone you know may be struggling with suicidal thoughts, you can call the U.S. National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 988 any time day or night, or chat online.
Every time he goes on social media, Aziz Abu Sarah feels sick to his stomach.
The Palestinian man has Jewish friends who've lost family members.
Friends taken hostage.
"We need to see the nuances."
Social media, however, often renders nuance obsolete.
Misinformation and propaganda about the Israel-Hamas conflict – which has resulted in more than 900 Israelis and upwards of 680 Palestinians dead, just days into a new war – fills social media feeds and shows no signs of slowing.
Some posts mention the death toll on only one side.
Some ignore the civilians taken hostage.
Some fail to mention Israel's occupation of Gaza.
Some don't account for why Jewish people around the world grow afraid.
These posts often come from those far away from the conflict, like in the U.S., who feel like they have to say something for the sake of seeming involved.
But declaring support for one "side" over the other and listing out-of-context information about Israelis and Palestinians may hurt more than help your cause.
Infographic social media posts trying to detail a topic as fraught, as frustrating, as long-lasting as the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will always lack critical details due to social media's bite-size commentary nature.
Experts warn you should seek greater context before sharing anything.
It's perfectly acceptable – and even preferred – for you to stay quiet if you don't know enough about what you're talking about.
"Not everything is black and white," Abu Sarah says.
Abu Sarah worries the propaganda and misinformation could be result in deadly consequences, for those in the Middle East and elsewhere.
"People will read it, get angry and do things."
The latest:Israel regains control over Gaza Strip border; rocket attacks intensify
Websites like Instagram and X, formerly known as Twitter, speak in soundbites, not dissertations.
The sites have historically faced difficulty combating antisemitic and Islamophobic posts.
Plus, "we know that algorithms can trend toward feeding people polarizing and extremist content to keep them clicking," says Sarah Parkinson, assistant professor of political science and international studies at Johns Hopkins University.
"The lack of moderation makes it easy for individuals and organizations to harass people into silence."
Social media infographics, of course, can be helpful resources in educating those completely uninformed.
But the boundaries are not clear.
Jacobs says some of the posts he's seen have hurt.
"I, every day, would not only defend but really strongly defend the rights of Palestinians to have dignity and human rights," Jacobs says.
Many argue that the decades of violence against Palestinians under Israeli occupation warrants mentioning to better contextualize the attack on Israel.
He wants to see instances like these illustrated more on social media, which is often too simplified: "It's not all big explosions, and fires and rockets and tanks and this kind of thing," he adds.
How to cope:The videos out of Israel, Gaza are graphic, but some can't look away
So if social media infographic posting and re-posting isn't the right answer, what is?
"My advice to people is always to read a broad spectrum of media outlets, including media from the region, and to understand what it is that they’re reading," Parkinson says.
Verify that what you’re reading a credible outlet or source.
That doesn't mean social media is useless, either.
Abu Sarah suggests following those who have different points of view.
If you decide to post something, don't expect everyone to agree with you.
When you stop thinking of the other "side" as human, you've lost.
Abu Sarah adds: "If you think one side is a pure evil and one side is pure good, you're missing the story."
'The fear is real':Menorahs mean more this Hanukkah amid rising antisemitism
A year ago, President Joe Biden’s plan was to forgive up to $20,000 in student loan debt for tens of millions of Americans.
With that plan now extinct, the first of several conversations to hash out a new strategy for erasing loan balances en masse begins Tuesday.
"We believe that doing so will strengthen the entire student loan system, help us tackle pervasive problems in the system, and help ensure postsecondary education is a path to opportunity for more students."
Social media is littered with evidence of confusion about the size of monthly payments.
Some people say they are puzzled about why they are being billed at all.
One set of borrowers has their payments set to zero because of a new federal repayment option called SAVE that aims to be more generous than any other.
Here’s what you need to know:
Biden's new student debt relief plan5 key takeaways from the first day of public input
It has been used many times over the years to draft rules related to higher education, including on how Title IX law on sexual assault is applied at schools and colleges and how well colleges produce graduates whose jobs can cover their student debt.
The people who will hash out the student loan plan applied or were nominated to participate and then were selected by the Education Department.
They represent different groups who have a stake in student loans, such as borrowers, student loan servicers and colleges and universities.
This is a complete list of the committee members, including alternates.
Their meeting agenda doesn’t give very much away.
But the focus of the virtual meeting will be wide-reaching, with discussion reserved for each of the five guiding questions mapped out by the department.
The questions are described in this issue paper published late last month.
They are, in short:
Public comment comes at the end of each day of conversation.
To sign up to speak, send your name and, if applicable, organization to negreghearing@ed.gov no later than 12:00 p.m. Eastern time on the day of the meeting.
The negotiators have to come up with a plan to which each committee member agrees.
If they don’t arrive at a consensus, the Education Department will come up with its own proposal.
Either way, there will be another opportunity for the public to comment on what is developed before it’s finalized.
Congress will then have the opportunity to review the rule, and has the option of passing a joint resolution to overturn it.
A final rule must be published by Nov. 1 for it to go into effect in July of the following year.
If the process goes according to plan, the earliest borrowers would see forgiveness is summer of 2024.
When the Supreme Court struck down Biden’s original plan this past summer, it ruled that student loan debt relief could not happen through the president’s executive authorities the way he’d hoped.
That means the only viable routes are through Congressional legislation – which given partisan gridlock is all but impossible – or federal higher education policy changes, a.k.a.
If a rule isn’t finalized through this neg reg series and a Republican wins next year’s presidential election, the chances of broad student loan forgiveness becoming reality are even slimmer.
First, sign up to watch the negotiators discuss policies that could make large-scale loan forgiveness a reality.
You’ll need to register at this link.
The first meeting spans over two days, Tuesday and Wednesday, for five hours each – from 10 am to noon Eastern, then 1 pm to 4 pm.
The next meeting is scheduled for Nov. 6-7, and the one after that for Dec. 11-12.
Both of the sessions, like the one that kicks off Tuesday, will be virtual and include opportunities for the public to comment.
It could be excruciatingly long
WASHINGTON — Despite the House being frozen without a speaker, Congress is in for a hectic week as Republicans scramble to find a new leader after the historic ouster of former Speaker Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif.
House Republicans have a schedule: They'll meet Tuesday night to hold a candidate forum where prospective speakers will make their pitches to fellow GOP lawmakers.
Next, they'll hold a secret vote on a nominee Wednesday night.
It's unclear when the House will hold an official speaker election.
Here’s what to know going into a chaotic week in Congress.
Following McCarthy’s historic ouster as speaker last week, leaving the House virtually powerless, House Republicans went home to decide on next steps to crown a new leader and get the lower chamber moving again.
2 ranking House Republican.
The Louisiana lawmaker, who suffered a near-death experience in 2017 after a gunman opened fire at a practice session for the Congressional Baseball Game, has commanded respect from virtually every corner of the House GOP conference.
Jordan, who first came into Congress as a conservative bomb-thrower and was a founding member of the ultra-conservative House Freedom Caucus, has been a close ally of McCarthy and House GOP leadership.
Chair of the powerful House Judiciary Committee, Jordan is currently one of the lawmakers spearheading House Republicans’ impeachment inquiry into President Joe Biden.
Then on Wednesday night, GOP lawmakers will hold an internal secret ballot vote where they decide on a nominee to put forward on the House floor.
Under their current rules, a nominee only has to earn a simple majority of votes from the secret ballot.
But even if a candidate emerges victorious as the nominee Wednesday night, lawmakers aren't obligated to support that person.
Other officials could still be nominated in the speaker election on the House floor, which could happen anytime following the secret ballot vote.
House Democrats are largely expected to stay out of the process.
House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries, D-N.Y., said Sunday his conference won’t take part in the “Republican civil war.”
“It's not my job at this moment to weigh in to the politics that are taking place in the House Republican Conference, other than to make clear that it's time for the GOP to end the Republican civil war, in order for us to be able to come together in an enlightened and bipartisan way to get things done for everyday Americans,” Jeffries said Sunday on CNN’s “State of the Union.”
At the same time, as it becomes more clear that no candidate so far can earn the majority of votes needed to become speaker, 217, McCarthy has shown willingness to be reinstated as the lower chamber's leader.
“That’s a decision by the conference,” McCarthy said Monday morning at a press conference reiterating U.S. support for Israel.
McCarthy has yet to endorse a candidate for speaker and noted that “96 percent” of House Republicans stood behind him as he attempted to quell the conservative rebellion that ultimately removed him from his post.
The surprise attack by Hamas on Israel over the weekend has added a new dimension to an already unprecedented series of events in the House.
Without a speaker, the House is unable to pass any legislation, including emergency aid to Israel, a U.S. ally.
McCarthy on Monday lamented that it was “wrong” for him to be ousted by a sliver of House Republicans – just eight GOP lawmakers voted to remove him – now that the lower chamber is paralyzed as the conflict in Israel unfolds.
Uncertainty and chaos in the U.S. breeds vulnerability around the world.
But the urgency of the conflict isn't guaranteed to push GOP lawmakers to quickly throw their support behind a new leader.
Speaker pro tempore Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-N.C., is currently serving in a limited role as acting speaker, and given the historic nature of the situation, it's not clear if McHenry can put any legislation on the House floor.
The list has never been used until last week when McCarthy was ousted.
Considering the nature of the backup list, McCarthy suggested McHenry had some sort of power to lead the House and take action on the conflict in the Middle East.
It was created after 9/11.
Closing arguments are expected to begin Tuesday in the trial of one current and one former Aurora, Colorado, police officer charged in the death of 23-year-old massage therapist Elijah McClain in 2019.
The officers have pleaded not guilty to criminally negligent homicide, manslaughter and assault.
In Washington, jurors in the trial of three Tacoma Police Department officers are expected to hear more testimony in the case of 33-year-old Manuel Ellis, who died in 2020 after telling officers multiple times he couldn't breathe during a struggle that was captured on camera.
The officers face second-degree murder or first-degree manslaughter charges and have pleaded not guilty.
Meanwhile, in Tennessee, five former Memphis police officers charged in the beating and death of 29-year-old Tyre Nichols in January are waiting to learn when they will stand trial in state court.
The officers have pleaded not guilty to second-degree murder and other charges in the case.
Across the United States, the number of police officers charged with violent on-duty crimes, including murder, manslaughter and assault, has increased in recent years in part because of increased public scrutiny, new technology and legal changes that have helped make prosecutions possible.
Still, such charges for police officers remain rare and convictions are rarer still, data shows.
"There's a demand for criminal prosecution," said Kate Levine, a professor at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law in New York.
"And so prosecutors are looking to charge police officers when they wouldn't have in the past, and/or because of police bodycams or citizens taking videos, evidence comes up to contradict these claims, where it may not have in the past."
Police kill more than 1,000 people each year, according to databases created by the Washington Post and civil rights organization Campaign Zero.
Stinson's data shows the number of officers charged in on-duty fatal shootings has generally increased, from a low of one in 2011 to a high of 21 in 2021.
But Stinson said he doesn't consider that a remarkable shift in part because the number of police killings has also increased in recent years.
According to The Washington Post, fatal police shootings increased from 995 in 2015 to a record high of 1,096 in 2022.
The Mapping Police Violence database created by Campaign Zero found police killed a record-high 1,250 people last year, up from 1,099 in 2017.
"The number of officers charged in terms of a percentage has stayed flat, it's still under 2% of the cases ... so from where I sit things have not changed," Stinson said.
Since 2005, 59 officers charged with murder or manslaughter in connection with an on-duty shooting have been convicted of a crime, but only six were convicted of murder, according to Stinson's data.
The criminal cases of 45 officers arrested on charges of murder or manslaughter after an on-duty shooting are pending.
The data doesn't reflect officers charged in non-shooting deaths, such as in the deaths of McClain, Ellis, Nichols or George Floyd, who was murdered in Minneapolis in 2020.
He said the most recent data he has analyzed, which has not yet been peer-reviewed, shows that from 2014 to 2018, there was a significant increase in officers arrested in connection with other on-duty violent crimes.
"Their on-duty violence is being more closely scrutinized by prosecutors and their own agencies," Stinson said.
In most cases, on-duty fatal shootings are determined to be legally justified.
On Friday, for example, officials in Georgia announced the state troopers who shot a 26-year-old environmental activist who was protesting the construction of a police and fire training center near Atlanta will not face criminal charges because their use of deadly force was "objectively reasonable."
But last month, a judge agreed with the defense's argument that Dial acted in self-defense and dismissed the charges.
When cases do make it to trial, Stinson said, juries are still "very reluctant to second-guess the split-second decisions of on-duty police officers in potentially violent street encounters."
But as public scrutiny has increased, some states have made changes to laws surrounding the use of deadly force by police.
In 2018, voters in Washington approved Initiative 940, which removed the requirement that prosecutors prove an officer acted with malice before murder charges can be filed − something no other state required.
Ellis' case marked the first time the state's attorney general's office criminally charged police officers with the unlawful use of deadly force and the second time an officer has been charged in a homicide in Washington since the change took effect.
"What 940 established doesn't make it easy − I think it's really important to say that − but it establishes the possibility of holding police criminally accountable for negligent behavior," said Martina Morris, a member of the Washington Coalition for Police Accountability.
Abdul Nasser Rad, managing director of research and data at Campaign Zero, said it's still unclear what the impact of those changes has been.
"The jury's still out on that," he said.
Because it can take years for internal investigations and subsequent criminal cases to be resolved, it's difficult to determine whether it's getting easier to prosecute police officers, Rad said.
They also celebrated the end of a years-long battle against Greater Albany Public School District.
Their excitement to be a teen attending a Corvallis high school is a stark difference from their emotions as an Albany elementary school student.
A 6-year-old girl with a rare neurological disease recently underwent a 10-hour surgery in California where half of her brain was disconnected in an effort to help cure her.
According to the GoFundMe page, Brianna was diagnosed with epilepsy in August 2022 after suffering from nighttime seizures and being hospitalized for five days.
In September 2022, she was once again admitted to the hospital, this time for eight days, and was diagnosed with Rasmussen's encephalitis.
After several seizure medications failed to work, it was recommended that Brianna undergo the operation.
WHAT IS BRAIN FOG?
According to the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Rasmussen's encephalitis is a very rare, chronic inflammatory neurological disease that usually affects only one half of the brain.
It most often occurs in children under the age of 10 but can also affect adolescents and adults.
Brianna will then be transferred to inpatient rehab, where she will learn how to walk and use her left arm and undergo speech therapy, according to the update.
Her mother Crystal also has an Instagram page that document's Brianna's journey and road to recovery.
She only sees what's right in front of her and to the right.
We recognize that mistakes may happen – or that new information can emerge after a story is published – and we pledge to address all concerns quickly, fairly and transparently.
If a correction or clarification is warranted, we will highlight that in the original file and explain to readers why the change was made.
Any correction or clarification would also be published on our corrections log.
To report corrections & clarifications, contact:
Please indicate whether you're responding to content online or in the newspaper.
The following corrections & clarifications have been published on stories produced by USA TODAY's newsroom:
Money: A previous version of this story misstated the number of people 62 and older who have student debt loans.
Sports: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed the locations for Big Ten games.
"5 Things" podcast: On the Oct. 5 show in our segment about school psychologists, we misstated the ratio of counselors to students at a school in Hershey, Pennsylvania.
At 1 to 1000, it is half of the recommended ratio.
Money: An earlier version of this story mischaracterized the competitiveness of Capital One's savings-account interest rates.
The reference has been removed.
Jarrett Payton covers the Chicago Bears.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the amount of Fox Corp.'s settlement with Dominion Voting Systems in a defamation lawsuit.
Money: The UAW strike affects 38 locations across 20 states.
An earlier alert undercounted the number of states affected.
See the list.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly identified an organization.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified the Higher Education Advisory Group.
Sports: A headline on the story incorrectly described Christian Coleman's winning time in the men's 100 meters.
He won with a time of 9.83 seconds, tied for the world's fastest time this season.
News: This article was updated to remove incorrect details about math courses and departments at the University of California, Santa Cruz.
News: A previous version of this video misstated the Longwood Garden's distance from the prison.
His personal security guard ran onto the field to restrain the person.
A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the name of the home team.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified Chester County Prison.
It's the University of Pennsylvania.
News: A previous version of this video misstated how many co-defendants had been booked.
Money: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed among states with no Social Security tax Minnesota, which expanded in May 2023 a state tax exemption for benefits without eliminating the tax.
News: An earlier version of this story contained inaccurate or incomplete facts about the history of language.
Social media: A previous version of this post graphic contained a name misspelling of Scooter Braun.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the extent of the standing water around Dodger Stadium.
Sports: The USA TODAY Sports’ MLB power rankings in the Aug. 15 edition misstated the leader of the American League Central Division.
The Minnesota Twins lead the division.
News: A previous version of this video misidentified USA TODAY’s National Political correspondent, David Jackson.
Entertainment: The location of the bookstore in an earlier version of this story was incorrect.
Wild Geese Bookshop is located in Franklin, Indiana.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the next opponent for the U.S. women should they advance from their Round of 16 game vs. Sweden.
The Americans would then play the winner of Japan vs. Norway in the quarterfinals.
Money: Due to a typo, an earlier version of this story misstated total U.S. sales of the Kia Stinger.
The automaker has sold more than 65,000 Stinger sedans in the U.S. since the model's launch.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees between Madrid, Spain, and a mountainous area in Spain.
It also misstated a temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees in reference to average temperatures in Tunisia.
News: An earlier version incorrectly identified Victoria McQueen's title at her high school.
She is student body president.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified the Norwegian Gem.
It is a Jewel-class cruise ship.
News: A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the origins of Blue Moon.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the Iowa State teams being investigated by the Iowa Racing and Gaming Commission.
The school does not have a baseball program.
News: This article has been updated to include additional nonpartisan sources of data and research.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated 10-year-old J'Adore's diagnosis date.
News: In a 1A story on July 5 about primary care doctors, the relationship between physicians and health professionals such as nurse practitioners and physician assistants was unclear.
Paraprofessionals generally work under the supervision of a licensed physician.
Entertainment: A photo included in an earlier version of this report was misidentified as The Beatles.
The new record featuring John Lennon’s vocals will be a song.
Graphics: A previous version of this story misstated the number of competing teams in the Tour de France.
News: This story has been updated to clarify how many people died on the Titanic.
Money: This story has been updated to clarify details about local liquor laws.
News: A June 19 article on Page 2A misstated the year the 13th Amendment was passed.
Life: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated when the rescue was made.
Travel: A previous version of this story incorrectly described the Airbus A321 with new livery.
The aircraft is part of JetBlue’s existing fleet.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the number of states under red flag warnings.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly named ISR courses.
The courses are called Infant Swimming Resource courses.
News: This story has been updated to correct how far away the body was found from where the missing doctor was last seen.
News: An earlier version of this story did not make clear which versions of the AP African American Studies course framework excluded the word "queer."
It has been updated to clarify that versions in May 2022 and February 2023 did not include the word.
Travel: An earlier version of the story incorrectly listed how police resolved the case.
News: A previous version of this article incorrectly referred to the tornado data provided by the Storm Prediction Center of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Sports: A story on the documentary movie “It Ain’t Over” in the May 12 edition misstated the number of league MVP titles won by Yogi Berra.
The Yankees legend won three.
The information has been updated.
Those portions have been removed.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the Australian Open women's singles champion.
News: In some editions, the March 30 1A story about attackers targeting schools misstated the partners in the mass killing database.
They are USA TODAY, The Associated Press and Northeastern University.
News: This story originally included an inaccurate detail related to one woman's application for a domestic violence restraining order.
The information on Alison Kessler has been updated.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the comparative price between electric vehicles and gas-powered vehicles.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the year of Paul Walker's death.
News: A previous version of this article misstated Terry Wilson's employment status.
He remains a Fresno State employee but was granted leave from the position to serve as a staff-wide union representative.
News: An earlier version of this podcast incorrectly stated that USA TODAY ran the Dilbert comic strip.
It was the USA TODAY Network, not USA TODAY.
News: USA TODAY did not publish the Dilbert comic strip.
A previous version of this article was incorrect.
Facebook: A previous version of this post contained photos from other events earlier this month in Florida.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated salary figures of bartenders and pharmacists.
News: A story on Page 1A Feb. 16 about corporate diversity gave the incorrect date of Southern Co.’s annual meeting.
It takes place later this year.
News: A previous version of this graphic misstated the title of a movie.
News: A previous version of this article misstated the number of Maryland’s Eastern Shore counties.
Social media: An earlier version of this video had an incorrect description.
News: An earlier version misstated the requirements in the Biden administration’s proposed Title IX rule for determining the outcome of sexual assault cases.
The proposed regulation would require schools to use the “preponderance of evidence” standard most of the time.
News: An earlier version of this video misstated the status of a House Ethics Committee investigation.
Social media: A previous post misidentified the award Beyoncé won.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the home state of Sen. Chris Coons.
He is from Delaware.
Social media: A previous version of this post included an incorrect year of death.
News: An earlier version misstated the name of Hillsdale College's spokesperson, Emily Stack Davis.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated the new price of the Tesla Model Y.
It is $52,990.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this gallery included a photo incorrectly identifying Paige Butcher.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified who created Seven Principles of Leave No Trace.
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2016
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2017
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2018
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2019
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2020
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2021
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2022
The USA TODAY Opinion section publishes analysis, argument and essays on a wide variety of subjects.
We're looking for timeliness (pegged to news), persuasion pitched to the other side, new information, novel arguments, revelatory insights, passion without partisanship, first-person experience, original reporting that reveals fresh angles and makes news, expert knowledge, and/or a topic that will drive conversation on social media and in the real world.
We accept only pieces that are submitted exclusively to USA TODAY.
We do not accept material that has been published on blogs, social media or anywhere else.
Columns typically run 550 to 750 words.
They should be pasted directly into an email and sent to theforum@usatoday.com.
Pieces should include links (URLs, not headlines or footnotes) to back up quotes and factual material.
People featured in columns must be identified by their real, full names.
We do not publish open letters, class projects or material that has been submitted to multiple outlets.
Rebuttals to editorials and columns published in USA TODAY should be submitted as letters to the editor, not as full-length op-eds.
Due to the volume of submissions, we can’t respond to all columns sent to us.
If our Opinion team is interested in yours, you will hear from us within three business days.
Submissions may be edited for accuracy, clarity, style, standards and length.
Please include with your submission a short biography, two sentences at most, to run at the end of your column, as well as a current photograph, to which you own publishing rights.
If you or a business, trade group or other institution with which you are associated stands to gain financially or in any other way from your column, you should disclose that information in detail.
In most cases, it should also be included in the body of the piece or in the author's biographical information.
Columns are accepted for online publication; print publication is not guaranteed.
All columns published by USA TODAY are available for use online and in print by the more than 250 properties in the USA TODAY Network.
They include Austin; Bergen County, New Jersey; Burlington, Vermont; Cincinnati; Columbus, Ohio; Des Moines; Detroit; El Paso, Texas; Indianapolis; Louisville, Kentucky; Memphis, Tennessee; Milwaukee; Nashville, Tennessee; Phoenix, Reno, Nevada; Palm Beach, Florida; and Wilmington, Delaware.
Authors may post their columns elsewhere 48 hours after they are published at USA TODAY.
By submitting a column to USA TODAY and agreeing to its publication, authors are granting exclusive rights to the piece to the USA TODAY Network for 48 hours and non-exclusive rights thereafter.
To get a sense of our range, preferences and requirements, check out our op-ed section, follow us on Twitter and Facebook, or sign up for our daily Opinion newsletter.
If you're interested in joining conversations about topics in USA TODAY, email letters@usatoday.com, comment on Facebook or use #tellusatoday on Twitter.
Letters are edited for accuracy, clarity and length and to conform to our editorial style and standards.
Submissions of 200 words or fewer have the best chance of being published.
Letters must include a name, address and phone number.
Corrections to published letters or columns follow USA TODAY guidelines.
The 2024 election cycle has kicked off.
Though Election Day is over a year away, the race is well underway.
President Joe Biden announced he will seek another term, and with former President Donald Trump's hat also in the ring, a rematch of their 2020 race is a real possibility.
Though the Democratic establishment is expected to fall firmly behind Biden, the Republican side is more of a toss-up.
Trump-endorsed candidates suffered in the midterm elections, and with his legal troubles mounting, the GOP may consider other options.
Polls still show Trump with a strong lead however, and many of those trying to unseat him have floundered including Florida Gov.
DeSantis who generated early buzz has suffered in the polls, struggling to translate popularity in Florida to popularity at the national level, and recently firing much of his campaign staff in a major shake-up.
Here are the latest developments on the path to the 2024 election:
And here are the candidates who have announced their intention to run for president in the 2024 election:
Political party: Democrat
Family: Biden has spoken candidly about grief throughout his political career.
His two young sons, Beau and Hunter, were injured in the crash but survived.
In 2015, Biden lost Beau to brain cancer and has made it a major political goal to champion cancer research.
He remarried in 1977, tying the knot with now-First Lady Jill Biden.
The two share a daughter, Ashley, and a large clan of grandchildren.
Biden's son Hunter has been the subject of scandal in recent years and has written about his struggles with drug addiction.
The GOP-led House has seized on Hunter's business dealings, hosting hearings to investigate his finances and the potential influence he has on his father.
Previous political experience: Joe Biden is a veteran of the Senate.
First elected in 1972, he served as a senator from Delaware for 36 years before being elected as vice president on the Obama ticket in 2008.
After serving two terms as vice president, Biden took a brief hiatus from government work before returning to run, and win, in 2020.
His views: Biden's campaign is focused on the "battle for the soul of America," doubling down on the central message of his campaign four years ago.
He said the question facing the nation is "whether, in the years ahead, we have more freedom or less freedom, more rights or fewer."
Political party: Democratic
Family: Williamson was married once in the late 1970s to a Houston businessman whom she has not named.
She has one daughter, India Emmanuelle, whose father has not been publicly identified.
Previous political experience: Williamson is a self-help author and spiritual leader who ran unsuccessfully for president in 2020.
Then she was largely drowned out by a crowded Democratic field, breaking through for a rare viral moment, but eventually written off as a non-traditional candidate whose views involved centering the "politics of love" and rejecting a “dark psychic force of collectivized hatred.”
Her views: Williamson supports abortion rights, a single-payer health care system and reparations for descendants of formerly enslaved Americans.
She has suggested creating a U.S. Department of Children and Youth to increase child advocacy, and a U.S. Department of Peace.
He is also a faith leader, having co-founded and serving as the pastor at Create Church in Richardson, Texas.
He says he wants to stand out in a crowded field by prioritizing unity, and leaning on his faith and business experience.
Political party: Republican
He remarried in 2016, tying the knot with current wife Kathryn.
He was elected governor of North Dakota in 2016 and reelected in 2020.
He is a vocal supporter of the oil industry, and the U.S. role in exporting it to other nations, and has said he favors smaller government and lower taxes.
Family: Christie met wife Mary Pat at the University of Delaware and the two wed in 1986.
They share four children: Andrew, Sarah, Patrick and Bridget.
Previous political experience: Christie was appointed U.S. Attorney for the District of New Jersey in 2002 and served for six years.
He was elected governor of New Jersey in 2010 and occupied the office until 2018.
Christie has been a prominent figure in the GOP since he launched his first presidential campaign in 2012.
He ran again unsuccessfully in 2016 and, despite prior criticism, ultimately endorsed Trump and later joined his campaign.
His views: Christie is anti-abortion, but does support some exceptions in the case of incest, rape, and danger to the mother.
He is not for a federal ban, instead believing the issue should be left to the states.
He has advocated for a more secure border to stem the flow of fentanyl into the country and is in support of U.S. aid for Ukraine.
Political party: Republican
Family: The governor wed former television host Casey DeSantis in 2009 and the couple share two daughters Madison and Mamie and one son Mason.
Previous political experience: DeSantis serves as the 46th governor of Florida.
His national profile grew during the pandemic when he spoke out publicly against mask mandates and pushed to keep many Florida businesses and schools open.
Since then, he has captured national attention with controversial legislative measures on education and immigration.
While in law school, DeSantis joined the U.S. Navy as a JAG officer, later deploying to Iraq for active duty.
Prior to his run for governor, he served in the House of Representatives as a congressman for Florida's 6th district for three terms from 2013 to 2018.
He is widely viewed as Trump’s biggest threat in the Republican primary.
Similar in politics but different in demeanor, DeSantis represents a younger, some say more predictable, alternative to the former president.
His views: DeSantis is campaigning on a hard-right agenda to make America look more like Florida.
He is in favor of "defending parental rights and eliminating CRT," and is anti-abortion and pro-Second Amendment.
Political party: Republican
Family: Elder has no children and has been married once.
Previous political experience: Elder is a lawyer and conservative talk show host who mounted a campaign against California governor Gavin Newsom in 2021's recall election.
Though he lost, Elder received the highest number of votes of any candidate besides Newsom.
We can enter a new American Golden Age, but we must choose a leader who can bring us there.
His views: Elder backs school choice, including vouchers and charter schools.
His platform also includes a vow to be tough on crime, to secure the border, and to "contain China" by asserting military dominance in the South China Sea and minimizing reliance on the country's manufacturing.
Political party: Republican
Family: Haley is one of four children born to Indian-American parents in Bamberg, South Carolina - a town she has described as divided by race.
Previous political experience: Haley started her political career in the South Carolina state legislature where she served for 6 years before mounting a successful campaign for the governor's office in 2010.
She won reelection in 2014 and has bragged that she has "never lost a race."
In 2016, former President Trump nominated Haley to be U.S.
Ambassador to the United Nations, a position she held for a year before unexpectedly stepping down in 2018.
Haley has played up her role as a female candidate in what is expected to be a largely male primary field.
Her views: Haley is anti-abortion and pro-Israel.
She supports cracking down on illegal immigration and "getting tough" on China and Russia.
She has supported Trump in the past but also criticized him after the Jan. 6, 2021, Capitol attack.
Political party: Republican
The two first met in 2009.
Previous political experience: A former CIA officer, Hurd served three terms in Congress representing Texas in the House after first being elected in 2014.
His views: Hurd stands out from an increasingly crowded GOP field as a rare vocal critic of Trump.
He joins the likes of Chris Christie and Asa Hutchinson in publicly disavowing the former president and in his campaign launch video listed illegal immigration, inflation, crime, and homelessness as legislative priorities.
Political party: Republican
Family: Hutchinson has been married to wife Susan since 1973.
The two share four children and seven grandchildren.
Previous political experience: Hutchinson has had a long career in Republican politics.
He was first elected to the U.S. House of Representatives to serve Arkansas' 3rd district in 1997; he served until 2001 when he was appointed DEA administrator and later undersecretary for the Department of Homeland Security for the George W. Bush administration.
While in the House, Hutchinson served as impeachment manager in the trial of former president (and fellow Arkansas native) Bill Clinton.
After leaving Washington he was elected 46th Governor of Arkansas.
He served for two terms, from 2015 to 2023.
His views: He supports lower taxes, a strong national defense, and opposes abortion.
Family: Johnson tied the knot with wife Diane in 2008, and the pair share three sons.
Previous political experience: A businessman trying his hand at politics, Johnson built his wealth with the launch of Perry Johnson Registrars Inc., a company that ensures auto, aerospace and other businesses are complying with industrial standards.
In 2022, he threw his hat in the ring for the GOP nomination for Michigan governor before being disqualified because of invalid signatures.
His views: Johnson told a group of Iowa voters in July that he was "pro-life, pro-Second Amendment, anti-woke and anti-China," − and "if you don't like it, well, tough."
His campaign's signature "2 cents" proposes cutting 2 cents off every dollar of federal discretionary spending.
Family: Pence wed wife Karen in 1985 and the two share three children: Michael, Charlotte, and Audrey.
Previous political experience: Pence entered politics in 2000 when he won his local congressional seat.
He went on to serve six terms in the House of Representatives before being sworn in as governor of Indiana in 2013.
In 2016, Donald Trump chose Pence as his running mate, and he served one term as Vice President.
The role thrust him into a precarious situation in 2021 when Trump sought to pressure him to throw out some of Biden's electoral votes to overturn the election.
Pence ultimately defied Trump and certified the results, infuriating MAGA voters and Trump himself.
His candidacy will likely involve a difficult tightrope walk as he attempts to distance himself from the former president without alienating the base.
His views: Pence is a vocal opponent of abortion, and of what he sees as the nation's long-term debt problem.
He favors cuts in government spending and lower taxes, and while he often touts his time as vice president and speaks well of the policies that came out of the Trump White House, he has begun to distance himself from his former running mate in terms of tone.
He has also criticized Trump's actions during the Jan. 6, 2021 riot at the U.S. Capitol.
Political party: Republican
The pair have two sons together.
He is the author of three books, including "Woke Inc.: Inside Corporate America's Social Justice Scam," which explores how American politics and capitalism have become increasingly intertwined.
His views: He has peddled ideas such as ending affirmative action and eliminating the Department of Education.
His elevator pitch: He'll go farther than Trump ever did or could today.
Political party: Republican
Family: Scott is unmarried, with no children.
He was raised by a single mother in North Charleston and has one brother.
Previous political experience: Scott first entered politics in 1995 during a special election for City Council in Charleston.
His profile grew nationally when he suggested posting the 10 Commandments outside the council building, a proposal that was denied.
Scott served for two years in the state legislature before being elected in 2010 to the House of Representatives for South Carolina's 1st district.
He served one term before being appointed to the Senate by then-governor Nikki Haley and becoming the first Black U.S. senator from the state.
Scott is pitching himself as a more hopeful alternative to Trump, drawing on Reagan-era ideals and centering a tone of optimism.
His views: Scott joined the Senate in 2013.
He’s anti-abortion and pro-Second Amendment.
He says on his website that his “signature legislation,” Opportunity Zones, put $75 billion into “distressed communities” across the country.
Political party: Republican
Family: Trump is the son of real estate magnate Fred Trump.
Born and bred in New York, he first made his name developing skyscrapers and casinos.
Trump first married in 1977, wedding Czech-born model Ivana.
The two were married for 13 years and share three children: Ivanka, Donald Jr. and Eric.
In 1993 Trump married actress and model Marla Maples.
The two had one daughter: Tiffany.
Following his divorce from Maples, Trump tied the knot for a final time with model Melania, who is mother to his youngest child, Barron.
Trump's family was uncharacteristically involved in his presidency.
Ivanka and her husband Jared Kushner played prominent roles in the administration, and both Don Jr. and Eric were often cited as close advisors.
Prior to 2016, he dabbled in politics, often sounding off on controversial issues like the birther movement meant to cast doubt on Barack Obama's citizenship and the guiltiness of the now-exonerated Central Park Five.
However, he was still primarily known for real estate and his forays into reality television, famously starring in "The Apprentice."
In 2016, Trump shocked pollsters by securing victory over Hillary Clinton in the presidential race.
He served a full four-year term and was defeated by Biden in his reelection bid.
His views: The former president has centered much of his campaign on his purported “political persecution” by Democrats.
He supports securing America’s borders, “reclaiming free speech,” and “dismantling the Deep State,” according to his campaign website.
He has said he would consider pardoning participants in the Jan. 6, 2021, Capitol riot, which was inspired by his false claims of election fraud.
Family: Kennedy bears a powerful last name in Democratic politics.
He is the son of Robert F. Kennedy, the former attorney general who was assassinated during a 1968 presidential run, and the nephew of former president John F. Kennedy.
Though he originally launched his campaign as a Democrat, Kennedy is now running on an Independent ticket.
Kennedy has been married three times and has six children.
He wed current wife Cheryl Hines in 2014.
Hines is a television star best known for her role on "Curb Your Enthusiasm."
Previous political experience: Kennedy is an environmental lawyer known for trumpeting a debunked theory that vaccines can be linked to autism.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, Kennedy opposed vaccine mandates, calling them an infringement on individual liberty and at times used the Holocaust as a historical comparison.
In 2017, former President Trump invited Kennedy to head up a presidential commission on vaccine safety.
His views: He is campaigning on a platform of fighting for the "liberties guaranteed by the Constitution," according to his campaign website.
Political Party: Green Party
Though West originally announced his candidacy under the People's Party, he later officially filed as a Green Party candidate.
Family: West has been married five times and has two children.
He has taught at a number of Ivy League institutions and works now as a professor of philosophy at Union Theological Seminary.
As a third-party candidate, West alleged "neither political party wants to tell the truth" on various issues.
His bid with the People's Party represents the first independent ticket to enter the race thus far.
His views: West is a proponent of Medicare for All, and removing oil and gas subsidies as well as drilling on public lands.
Long a vocal opponent of militarism, West's campaign website lists "end the wars" as a key priority which would include disbanding NATO and banning nuclear weapons across the globe.
Political party: Republican
Family: Suarez is the son of another prominent Florida politician: Xavier L. Suarez, who was Miami's first Cuban-born mayor.
He is married to Gloria Fonts Suarez, and the two share one son and one daughter.
Previous political experience: Suarez serves as the 43rd mayor of Miami, a seat he has occupied since 2017.
Views: Suarez has said he did not support Trump in either 2016 or 2020, instead using his ballot to write in the names of Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, and Former Vice President Mike Pence respectively.
As mayor, Suarez has championed growing Miami's tech economy, and he has also backed low taxes and increased police spending.
This story will be updated as additional candidates officially enter the race.
The conference vote however, is just a sign of approval from House Republicans at large.
The House still has to formally elect a new speaker on the House floor, and lawmakers are still free to nominate other candidates.
2 ranking House Republican.
House Republicans could move to hold a speaker election on the floor as early as Wednesday afternoon.
The onus, they say, is on House Republicans to elect a new speaker.
Brief status updates with words of encouragement.
A picture of the beloved family dog, Tutsi.
Until no more messages came.
Four days after Hamas attacked Israel, more than 100 Israelis and possibly dozens of foreign nationals are thought to be held captive in the Gaza Strip.
Flash, 67, originally from St. Paul, Minnesota, is one of them.
"We need someone to come by the house right now."
She emigrated to Israel decades ago after a visit during college, when she fell in love with Israel's system of kibbutzim − collectives traditionally centered on agriculture but which have evolved to accommodate myriad interests, tastes and even businesses.
"No one deserves this."
Sobbing teenagers, reunited after days of having their worst fears confirmed, hugged one another tightly.
Small groups of people sat at tables hunched over laptops compiling lists of the missing.
Nobody knows for sure how many survived.
The couple had recently renovated it, which had required that they move away from the kibbutz for a few months.
And their daughter said that despite their proximity to Gaza, everyone in the family had always felt secure and reveled in their area's lush vegetation, tranquility and sense of community.
In fact, the extended Flash family had expected a very different Saturday from the one they got.
They had planned a family picnic.
And later that afternoon they were going to make and fly kites in the local soccer field as part of an annual community event.
Maybe, they thought, they'd have a little ice cream and relax after a hectic week of family life and work.
A DJ was going to play.
They leaped out of bed and dashed down the hall to grab their 1-year-old baby, Saar, and her bottle, diapers, water and a little food.
Then they locked themselves in a room of concrete and reinforced steel.
The bodies of civilians and militants were found scattered throughout the kibbutz.
One report, which USA TODAY could not independently verify, said that multiple people had been beheaded and that charred bodies had been found.
The Israeli death toll from the Hamas attack has passed 1,200.
But she had not lost hope they would be found.
"Anytime someone calls us, any authority from the kibbutz or anywhere, our hearts sink down, and then they say, 'We don't have any new information.'"
There was a crunching sound because the leaves have started to fall down because of the season.
We couldn't talk because we didn't want them to hear our voices, so we were signaling silently to each other.
She fled first to some nearby bushes, and then to an empty garden shed.
But then the baby woke up and began to cry, which attracted the attention of the attackers.
She could hear them walking toward her.
She feared they would shoot into the shed indiscriminately.
"I knew I had to run again," she said.
Moments later, a family with children sheltering in their home saw her and ushered her inside, risking their lives.
She stayed in this safe room for the next 27 hours, without food or water, and as the oxygen in the sealed safe room dwindled, before they were rescued by Israel's military.
Late Tuesday the news finally came.
I'm holding the door.
Keep up with developments from Gaza: Sign up for our Israel-Hamas War newsletter.
The Gaza Strip, one of the smallest territories in the world, may soon become a bloody battleground as Israeli Defense Forces strike back against Hamas for its brutal, hostage-taking attack on Israel.
Gaza is at the center of the Israeli-Palestinian hostility, which has existed since the creation of Israel in 1948.
The confrontation going on now is another in a long history of Middle Eastern disputes among Israelis, Palestinians, and others.
USA TODAY looks at this tiny Palestinian enclave, its people, and its place in the ongoing conflict.
The Gaza Strip comprises just under 140 square miles of relatively flat coastal plan bordering the Mediterranean Sea.
It is central to the conflict involving Israel, Hamas, the Palestinian territories and various regional actors.
Urban areas, refugee camps, border crossings and high-risk areas as defined by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs can be seen in the map above.
Gaza's area is slightly greater than twice the size of Washington, D.C.
It is home to 2.3 million people in 139 square miles, according to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Gaza borders Israeli territory on its northeastern and southeastern sides and Egypt to its southwest.
To its west, Gaza abuts the Mediterranean Sea.
At least 2.23 million people live in the Gaza Strip, according to the U.N., many of them displaced after leaving or being driven from Israel during its War of Independence and subsequent conflicts.
Gaza is often described as one of the world's most densely populated areas, but population density varies across the territory.
There are roughly an even number of women and men living there.
With 42,059 people per square mile, Gaza City is the 63rd-most densely inhabited urban region in the world.
At least eight Palestinian refugee camps lie in the Gaza Strip and have some of the highest population densities in the world, according to the U.N.
Hamas is the largest Palestinian militant group and has fired rockets from Gaza at Israeli cities in the fighting.
It's committed to the destruction of Israel and is considered a terrorist group by the U.S., the U.K. and other nations.
According to the U.N.
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the socioeconomic situation in Gaza has been in steady decline for more than a decade.
Longstanding restrictions on the movement of people and goods to and from Gaza have made living conditions extremely difficult.
Israel prevents all access to and from the Gaza Strip by sea and air.
Sixty-three percent of the population of Gaza is considered food-insecure, and 81% are living in poverty.
Access to clean water and electricity were at crisis levels even before this month's hostilities.
The U.N. secretary-general says the blockade and related restrictions contravene international humanitarian law because they target and impose hardship on the civilian population, effectively penalizing them for acts they have not committed.
Sources: United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, OCHA OPT Information Management Unit, Jewish Virtual Library, The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, USA TODAY research
Keep up with developments from Gaza:Sign up for USA TODAY's Israel-Hamas War newsletter.
The American death toll rose to 22 and Israeli fatalities surpassed 1,200 Wednesday while desperation swept across Gaza as Tel Aviv's response to the brutal attack by Hamas left neighborhoods destroyed, homes dark and hospitals low on medical supplies.
"At this time, we can confirm the deaths of at least 22 U.S. citizens," the State Department said in a statement.
"We extend our deepest condolences to the victims and to the families of all those affected."
Israeli soldiers retaking communities near the Gaza border, encountered streets littered with the bodies of civilians, including women and children.
The Israeli health ministry said the death toll is likely to increase amid continued fighting and the discovery of more bodies in the settlements.
Palestinian officials say more than 1,100 militants and citizens in Gaza have been killed and more than 5,000 wounded.
Israeli rockets smashed into neighborhoods for a fifth day Wednesday, destroying homes and infrastructure.
The territory, home to more than 2 million Palestinians, faced the grim prospects of a complete blackout and limited supplies of food and water.
The U.N.’s World Health Organization said supplies pre-positioned at hospitals were depleted.
Israel-Hamas War newsletter: Sign up to get the latest news and analysis from USA TODAY into your inbox.
∎ Key Iranian leaders had no advanced warning that Hamas would attack Israel, the New York Times reports, citing U.S. intelligence officials it did not name.
The information supports previous Biden administration statements that there was no indication Iran was involved in the attack.
∎ An estimated 250,000 people have fled their Gaza homes, most taking shelter into packed U.N. schools.
∎ Israeli forces exchanged gunfire over Israel’s northern borders with militants in Lebanon and Syria amid concerns of an expanded regional conflict.
Family's painful tale:An American mom, 67, spent her life advocating for Palestinian rights.
Then, Hamas came for her.
The Israeli government established a bipartisan war Cabinet to focus on issues of war.
Hamas has said it kidnapped more than 100 Israeli soldiers, men, women, children and older adults and are holding them in Gaza.
The Israel government, under intense public pressure to eradicate Hamas, has mobilized 360,000 reservists and could be preparing to launch a ground offensive into Gaza, possibly within days.
EU foreign ministers, meeting in a teleconference, agreed overwhelmingly to continue financial support for Palestinians, said Josep Borrell, High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
Hamas is a terrorist organization while the Palestinian Authority is an EU partner, he said.
The ministers also reiterated long-term commitment to a political solution based on creation of a free Palestinian state.
Israel has balked at any plan that would allow Palestinians to possess their own military.
The European Commission warned Elon Musk that X, formerly known as Twitter, could face penalties if it does not take action against "illegal content and disinformation" since Hamas' attack on Israel.
A letter from Thierry Breton, European commissioner for the internal market, said the company may be non-compliant of "very precise obligations regarding content moderation" in Europe's new social media laws.
The company could be fined up to 6% of its global revenue under EU rules.
Israeli aircraft and artillery are pounding Gaza towns with what Palestinians are calling "belts of fire."
The raids began at dawn Wednesday and continued into the day, targeting farmland, police stations, government buildings, factories and other crucial locations, the online outlet reported.
 Groups who study online hate speech say it has spiked in recent days – not just for Jewish communities but also for Palestinians.
And representatives of both communities agree on one thing: U.S.-based social media companies are still not doing anywhere near enough to rid their platforms of hate against targeted groups.
“When it comes to serious crises like these where you're going to see the worst of the worst types of violent content, gore, incitement to violence, it's really incumbent on social media companies to coordinate across platforms,” said Daniel Kelley, director of strategy and operations at the Anti-Defamation League’s Center for Tech and Society, “in order to make sure that the platforms play the minimal amount of role possible in inflaming further violence.” Read more here.
USA TODAY reached out to more than two dozen colleges, many with a history of having a presence in Israel or large study abroad programs, in the last two days to ask how their programs have been affected by the unfolding crisis.
Some schools confirmed students have safely left the area.
Others said students and staff remained in the region while their institutions monitor the situation and put in place new safety protocols.
Read more here.
At least 22 Americans have died in the onslaught and an unknown number are hostages of Hamas, the Biden administration says.
The struggle to come home – and the fear for loved ones left behind in the deadly war zones of Gaza and Israel – is very real for many Americans as the world watches the violence abroad unfold.
The U.S. citizens longing to return to America include several people from church groups, including those in Naples, Florida, visiting Jerusalem for religious reasons, Salt Lake City-based Palestinian-Americans visiting family members and New Jersey Jewish residents who were celebrating the Simchat Torah holiday.
They told the USA TODAY Network that their trips turned from a tranquil, joyous crusade away from home into a catastrophic nightmare from which they needed to swiftly escape.
 "I got a flight to Bulgaria and will somehow get to New Jersey," Schwartz told NorthJersey.com, part of the USA TODAY Network.
Read more here.
− Kayla Jimenez
Hamas has vowed to annihilate Israel and for years has been responsible for numerous suicide bombings and other deadly attacks.
On Saturday, about 1,000 Hamas fighters stormed across the Israeli border by land and sea in an attack that caught Israel's military off-guard.
Israeli security services routinely raid the compound.
But Hamas leaders also say they were pushed to attack because of unrelenting Israeli crackdowns on militants in the West Bank, continued construction of settlements − which the international community considers illegal − thousands of prisoners being held in Israeli jails and Israel's blockade of Gaza.
Israel countered by declaring war against Hamas and ordered its military to undertake take a "complete siege" of Gaza.
Online hate surges:Why everyone is blaming social media.
The State Department designated Hamas a terrorist group in 1997.
Several other nations also consider it a terrorist organization.
In 2006, Hamas won parliamentary elections, and in 2007 the group violently seized control of Gaza from the Palestinian Authority, which was controlled by the rival Fatah movement that still governs the West Bank.
There have been no elections since.
The group calls for establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel and believes in the use of violence to carry out the destruction of Israel.
Hamas receives financial, material and logistical support from Iran, though so far, international leaders, including in Israel, have said there is no evidence that Iran was directly involved in Hamas’ attack.
Gaza, or the Gaza Strip, is a densely populated Palestinian exclave of about 2.3 million people.
The narrow strip of land − about 150 square miles, or less than half the size of New York City − is about 25 miles long and six miles wide.
Gaza shares a northern and eastern border with Israel and a southwestern border with Egypt while its western side abuts the Mediterranean Sea.
Hamas won the 2006 parliamentary elections and in 2007 seized control of the Gaza Strip from the internationally recognized Palestinian Authority.
The Palestinian Authority, controlled by the rival Fatah movement, administers semi-autonomous areas of the Israeli-occupied West Bank.
Hamas has fought four wars against Israel since taking power.
The current war is a culmination of decades of conflict between Israel, which prides itself on its military prowess, and Palestinian territory, which has been occupied since 1948 when Israel was founded and where Hamas rules the Gaza Strip.
At the center of the conflict: Who has the right to the land?
Both Jewish people and Muslims have some of their holiest sites in Jerusalem.
Before Israel’s founding, the land was known as the Palestinian mandate, officially ruled by Great Britain.
In 1947, the United Nations adopted a resolution that aimed to divide the Palestinian mandate into two states, Arab and Jewish.
Large-scale migration of Jewish people to escape persecution, including by Nazis, prompted the U.N. solution.
A war between Israel and its Arab neighbors surrounding its founding in 1948 led to Israeli expansion of 77% of Palestinian mandate territory, and over half the Palestinian Arab population fled or were expelled, according to the U.N.
Several conflicts between Israel and Arab states in the region followed over the next decades, and peace efforts that improved relations with other nations did not solve the issue of Palestinian self-determination.
Israel captured the Gaza Strip, east Jerusalem and the West Bank in the 1967 Mideast war and has since imposed restrictions on the freedom of movement of Palestinians there.
These are all territories sought by Palestinians for their future independent state.
The war also led to a second expulsion of Palestinians, according to the U.N.
Hamas rejects proposals for a two-state solution and believes in the eradication of Israel altogether through violent means.
In 2006, Hamas won parliamentary elections, and in 2007 the group violently seized control of the Gaza Strip from the Palestinian Authority, which was controlled by the rival Fatah movement that governs the West Bank.
There have been no elections since.
Allison Josephs got a bone-chilling threat in 2012 from someone who identified herself as Becky.
“Hitler should have finished his good work,” the message read.
The writer said she had her Louisville Slugger ready for the “next chance we get.”
The frequency of hate-filled social media posts targeting Jews has only increased since then, said Josephs, a mother of four who runs the nonprofit Jew in the City.
So she said she was not surprised by the wave of online hate immediately following the deadly attacks in Israel as people celebrated Hamas’ acts of terror, striking fear of more violence to come.
“From a social media perspective, it’s already been so bad, it’s kind of hard for it to get worse,” Josephs said.
But it is getting worse.
Groups who study online hate speech say it has spiked in recent days – not just for Jewish communities but also for Palestinians, who have faced increasing online hatred.
And representatives of both communities agree on one thing: U.S.-based social media companies are still not doing anywhere near enough to rid their platforms of hate against targeted groups.
“When it comes to serious crises like these where you're going to see the worst of the worst types of violent content, gore, incitement to violence, it's really incumbent on social media companies to coordinate across platforms,” said Daniel Kelley, director of strategy and operations at the Anti-Defamation League’s Center for Tech and Society, “in order to make sure that the platforms play the minimal amount of role possible in inflaming further violence.”
The escalation in harsh rhetoric comes at a time when online hate speech was already increasing, experts said.
In the weeks before the conflict, the ADL was locked in a bitter dispute with X, formerly Twitter, over Elon Musk’s alleged promotion of extremists and hands-off approach to content moderation.
Meanwhile, 7amleh, an Arab civil rights organization has been meeting with X for months, trying to persuade the company to quell hate speech against Palestinians.
And it’s not just X.
Representatives of civil rights groups said they face a constant struggle working with powerful social media platforms to combat hate speech at the best of times.
As the conflict in the Middle East escalates, they said, these companies really need to step up their game.
Israel-Hamas War newsletter: Sign up to get the latest news and analysis on the conflict in your inbox.
“We are talking about tech giants that are making billions of dollars annually, who cannot invest more money and resources in their platforms to protect oppressed communities, especially in times of crisis.”
Several organizations monitoring online hate speech agree there has been a significant increase in such posts in the four days since Hamas attacked Israel.
Matthew Williams, founder and chief scientist of the online harms monitoring platform nisien.ai, said the online harms monitoring platform has been identifying trends across social media since the conflict broke out.
"The Hamas terror attack and the subsequent declaration of war by Israel coincided with significant spikes in both forms of hate speech, indicating their roles as 'trigger events,'" Williams said.
“Nisien.ai has identified an increase in both antisemitic and anti-Muslim rhetoric, as might have been anticipated.”
On X, a popular antisemitic influencer posted photographs of the World Trade Center attacks on 9/11 referencing the completely disproven conspiracy theory that the attack was connected to Israel: “It’s hard to have much sympathy for the Israeli regime when they helped perpetrate this attack on my country.” The post had more than 3,800 likes as of Tuesday afternoon.
The ADL counted 347 messages on Telegram from extremists calling for violence against Jews, Israelis and Zionists in the first 18 hours of Saturday, up approximately 488% from the day before.
7amleh, The Arab Center for Social Media Advancement, a nonprofit that partners with Meta, Facebook’s parent company, has also been monitoring hate speech against Palestinians.
The organization’s researchers manually found 260 examples of hate speech across all platforms in the last few days.
7amleh’s automated analysis identified 4,305 posts on X related to the invasion and ensuing conflict that contained violent or hateful speech.
Noting the “surge of antisemitism, hate, disinformation, misinformation, and propaganda spread on social media and messaging platforms,” the ADL released a guide for social media platforms over the weekend.
It details seven steps the organization wants social media companies to take immediately, including increasing human and automated trust and safety resources and promoting trusted and reliable news sources.
The ADL’s report also noted that domestic extremists, white supremacists and conspiracy theorists have flocked online to cheer on the attack on Israel.
Much of that hate unfolded on Telegram, the go-to messaging and social media platform for extremists.
But hateful posts have also been shared on X and on Gab, another fringe platform popular with far-right extremists.
Social media companies say they are closely monitoring the situation.
Meta said it has Hebrew and Arabic speakers working around the clock to respond in real time.
TikTok said it has also ramped up resources to help curb violent, hateful, or misleading content and boosted moderation resources in Hebrew and Arabic.
YouTube owner Google said during major world events like the Hamas attacks on Israel, it prioritizes news and information from authoritative sources and removes harmful content.
Content produced by terrorist organizations including footage showing hostages is not permitted on YouTube and that includes content produced by Hamas, according to YouTube.
“Hate speech targeting the Jewish, Palestinian or any other religious or ethnic communities is not allowed on YouTube,” the company said in a statement.
“This applies to all forms of content, including videos, livestreams and comments, and our policies are enforced across languages and locales.”
Adding to the challenge in monitoring antisemitic and anti-Muslim rhetoric is that “some of this hate is coded, with some posters avoiding recognized racial and religious slurs, and instead constructing their posts using negative stereotypes and tropes,” Williams said.
That makes it more difficult for automatic moderation and human moderators to catch inappropriate posts.
As hateful language evolves, and new terms and slogans become popular, moderators must constantly evolve their efforts.
But social media companies like Meta, looking to reduce costs, have eliminated jobs focused on safety issues.
They are increasingly leaning on artificial intelligence systems to moderate content and enforce their rules.
“For the moment we're seeing a lack of investment – we're seeing a lack of ability to independently verify the rate and the amount and the severity of hate,” the ADL’s Kelley said.
X has been widely criticized for its hands-off approach to posts trading in hate speech, misinformation and violence, according to experts monitoring social media.
Posts depicting graphic pictures of murdered civilians and Israeli soldiers, antisemitic hate speech and anti-Palestinian messages are being widely shared on Elon Musk’s platform, those experts said.
X, which gutted its content moderation team under Musk, said late Monday that it was taking the situation seriously as more than 50 million posts about the Hamas attack flooded the platform.
“As the events continue to unfold rapidly, a cross-company leadership group has assessed this moment as a crisis requiring the highest level of response,” the company’s safety account tweeted.
X said its escalations team was “continuing to proactively monitor for antisemitic speech,” removed newly created Hamas-affiliated accounts and took action against “tens of thousands of posts for sharing graphic media, violent speech, and hateful conduct.” It urged people who were concerned about the flood of graphic and misleading content to choose not to see “sensitive media.” X did not respond to a request for comment.
European officials warned X on Tuesday that the company appears to be hosting misinformation about the war in violation of the European Union's content moderation law, CNN reported.
The X representative asked 7amleh to translate it into English, he said.
X is “horrible at content moderation,” he said.
Basically, you can write, ‘kill them,’ ‘rape them,’ ‘burn them’ – whatever you want.
X’s response to the flood of hate speech has been to promote “community notes,” an outsourced effort that relies on verified volunteers to attach notes to posts that are inaccurate.
Musk praised the open-source effort to moderate harmful content in a post on Tuesday, writing “Thank you for fighting for truth.”
McCarthy last week became the first speaker of the House in U.S. history to be removed from the post via a procedure known as a motion to vacate.
The House is currently paralyzed and cannot pass any legislation without a speaker, including crucial government funding or international aid.
Speaker pro tempore Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-N.C., is serving in a limited role as acting speaker, but it's unclear if McHenry can put any legislation on the House floor.
Here's the latest on the U.S. House speaker election:
But these closed door deals unraveled as some of the most conservative members of his caucus, joined by Democrats, removed him from the seat.
The push to oust McCarthy began with Rep. Matt Gaetz, R-Fla., who introduced the resolution to vacate the speaker.
McCarthy's reign as speaker ended by a 216-210 vote.
The move to oust McCarthy – known as a motion to vacate – had the support of eight hard-right lawmakers.
2 ranking House Republican.
The Louisiana lawmaker, who suffered a near-death experience in 2017 after a gunman opened fire at a practice session for the Congressional Baseball Game, has commanded respect from virtually every corner of the House GOP conference.
He has since started treatment.
Jordan, who was a founding member of the ultra-conservative House Freedom Caucus, has been a close ally of McCarthy and House GOP leadership.
Chair of the powerful House Judiciary Committee, Jordan is one of the lawmakers spearheading House Republicans’ impeachment inquiry into President Joe Biden.
After McCarthy was ousted from the role last week, House Republicans went home to decide on next steps.
House Republicans met Tuesday night to hold a candidate forum where prospective speakers will make their pitches to fellow GOP lawmakers.
Then, they'll hold a secret vote on a nominee Wednesday night.
It's unclear when the House will hold an official speaker election.
Contributing: Ken Tran
We have a winner!
She has even earned a reputation among fellow bears.
“She often preemptively confronts and attacks much larger bears – even large and dominant adult males – in order to ensure her cubs are safe.”
“She's huge, just huge.”
Fat Bear Week’s champion isn’t necessarily the fattest bear at Katmai.
The March Madness-style bracket competition is based on popular vote, cast online by fans all over the world.
All the contenders are winners because they’ve all packed on pounds, gorging themselves on the Brooks River’s bountiful salmon to before hibernating for the winter.
Republican presidential candidate Asa Hutchinson told voters about his vision for America's economy, the future of Social Security, the war in Israel and other major issues around the world during a New Hampshire town hall sponsored by the USA Today Network on Tuesday.
But behind the scenes, the former Arkansas governor got more personal.
Donning a navy blue suit and a white shirt, Hutchinson, 72, talked about what’s on his playlist, what books he’s currently reading and his guilty pleasure TV picks.
As he continues his bid for the White House, here’s a closer look at some of Hutchinson’s favorites on the campaign trail.
Amidst the chaos of a GOP primary campaign, Hutchinson shared that he listens to a wide range of music, from country songwriter and singer Johnny Cash − who was born in Arkansas − to "Come Away with Me" singer Norah Jones.
And Hutchinson usually opts for nonfiction reads.
“I love history books,” Hutchinson said.
He’s said he's also reading "Why We're Polarized," a book by Ezra Klein about American's political divides.
“It's a fascinating book as to how we got to this point of division in our country,” Hutchinson said.
“I haven't got to the rest of it yet as to how we're going to end that divide, but it's a good study that I'm engaging in.”
“I'm excited about finishing that,” Hutchinson said.
Hutchinson told USA TODAY that one of his priorities is to lower interest rates on student loans, saying it's important that students are able to afford the next steps in their education.
When he was in law school, Hutchinson shared that he couldn’t afford to put gas in his car or buy books.
"We've got to lower the cost of gas," Hutchinson said.
And then you're always looking ahead as to a job opportunity.
LGBTQ+ people long for a world where coming out isn't necessary.
Where they can hold hands with whomever they choose, kiss their partners in public and use their preferred pronouns without explanation.
In some places around the world – particularly cities throughout the U.S. – it might've felt safe to do so without a second thought the last few years.
But the political climate of late suggests coming out won't be over anytime soon.
"Until that shift happens, we must intentionally choose who we wish to invite into a celebration of our identities."
LGBTQ people should come out and assert their identities in the face of bigotry, though experts say they should never feel obligated to, especially when their safety is at risk.
Coming out is a lifelong process.
You don't simply shout "I'm gay" and a rainbow halo sprouts atop your head.
Robinson-Mosley, counseling psychologist
In some ways, coming out in America has never been easier.
Seventy-one percent of people in the U.S. support marriage equality, according to a Gallup poll published this month.
Movies and TV shows have spotlighted queer characters and storylines.
More and more LGBTQ+ people hold public office.
But hundreds of anti-LGBTQ+ bills across the U.S. threaten to hinder long fought-for progress.
This is also spilling out into the private sector, with brands like Bud Light and Target facing backlash for supporting the community.
Mosley can't help but feel unsafe, nearly seven years after the Pulse nightclub shooting in Orlando, Florida, that killed 49 people and left the queer community terrified.
"Violence has become a much more routine experience, or having protesters outside of drag shows and having places that were once very safe and welcoming and a part of a nucleus in the LGBTQ community have now become battlegrounds," Mosley says.
Visibility may have consequences.
But when someone feels safe to come out, it gives those in the closet some hope.
A utopia of a world without coming out may just not be in the cards for a divided society.
But future generations will further embrace their identities compared to earlier ones.
Gallup research shows that 7.2% of U.S. adults are LGBTQ, and younger generations are responsible for the rise in identifying as such.
Good background:What to know about gender-affirming care for transgender and nonbinary communities
Coming out may go away to some extent.
Others are more optimistic.
"I believe gender and sexual orientation will be irrelevant because we get to collectively choose to eradicate the fear that prevents us from celebrating all people," Brown says.
If you or someone you know may be struggling with suicidal thoughts, you can call the U.S. National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 988 any time day or night, or chat online.
Crisis Text Line also provides free, 24/7, confidential support via text message to people in crisis when they dial 741741.
If you or someone you know needs help or support, The Trevor Project's trained crisis counselors are available 24/7 at 1-866-488-7386, via chat at TheTrevorProject.org/Help, or by texting 678-678.
'We're all overcompensating':Why so many LGBTQ community members struggle with body dysmorphia
An array of false and misleading claims have spread widely on social media in the midst of the Israel-Hamas conflict.
Israel formally declared war after the Palestinian militant group launched a surprise attack on the morning of Oct. 7.
The Israeli military has fought to regain control of several towns on the border with Gaza and responded with retaliatory strikes in the blockaded enclave.
More than 1,900 people have died in the ongoing conflict as of Oct. 11.
The ensuing wave of misinformation echoes the aftermath of Russia's invasion of Ukraine in February 2022.
Again, major social media platforms are awash in claims that old photos and videos actually showed the present conflict, while other posts fabricate or exaggerate the nature of the conflict and the American response.
Here's a roundup of claims about the Israel-Hamas conflict from the USA TODAY Fact-Check Team:
More: US death toll rises to 22; Hamas denies targeting kids; misery across Gaza: Live updates
Our rating: False
There's no evidence the White House approved an $8 billion aid package for Israel.
The supposed memo announcing the aid is a fabrication, according to officials.
Our rating: False
There are no credible reports that Saudi Arabia has called off talks to normalize diplomatic ties with Israel.
The post claims Saudi Arabia told Secretary of State Antony Blinken as much, but Blinken made no mention of it in multiple recent interviews.
The post cites The Jerusalem Post, but there is no evidence the newspaper published such a report.
Our rating: False
The video predates the Hamas attacks on Israel in October.
It was taken in May and shows an Israeli airstrike against the militant Islamic Jihad group in Gaza.
Our rating: Missing context
The implied claim is false.
Our rating: False
The video shows several leaders of an Azerbaijani separatist group after they were arrested, not Israeli generals.
The arrests took place four days before the Hamas attack on Israel.
Our rating: False
The video is from 2020, not a response to the current Israel-Hamas conflict.
There are no credible reports that any of those chants mentioned Israel.
Thank you for supporting our journalism.
You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or e-newspaper here.
Our fact-check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook.
Kelley, who was a gymnast at Louisiana State University, did not immediately respond to messages left by USA TODAY Sports.
Everything to know about the American gymnastics icon
Former NFL player Sergio Brown, who police reported missing last month following the fatal bludgeoning of his mother was in police custody in Southern California Wednesday in connection to her slaying, officials said.
On Wednesday, police said in the release, Brown was awaiting extradition to Illinois to face the homicide charge.
Here's how it works:California creates Ebony Alert for missing Black women, children.
San Diego Central Jail records show Brown was booked into the jail just after 3 p.m. Tuesday and being held without bail as a fugitive from justice.
Police previously had not said whether Brown − who lived with his mother at the time of her slaying − was a person of interest or suspect in connection to her death.
On Wednesday police did not reveal what led them to Brown being a suspect in his mother's killing.
6.3 earthquake hits Middle East:Another earthquake rattles Afghanistan days after deadly earthquake
After her body was located, she was transported to the Cook County Medical Examiner’s Office
Sergio Brown played for the Colts 2012-14, as well as three other NFL teams.
Brown played seven seasons in the NFL with the Patriots, Indianapolis Colts, Jacksonville Jaguars and Buffalo Bills, with whom he played his final season in 2016.
This is a developing story.
Reach her at nalund@usatoday.com and follow her on X @nataliealund.
The upcoming annular solar eclipse may be described as a "ring of fire" for the circular halo that will appear, but the moniker is apt for another unintended reason.
If spectators don't wear proper eyewear to watch as the moon passes in front of the sun to create the dazzling effect, the powerful rays could quite literally burn their eyes and damage their retinas.
Come Saturday, potentially millions of people across the United States will be drawn to look to the skies to glimpse the rare annular solar eclipse, which astronomers warn will be the last opportunity to see the phenomenon until 2039.
But gazing at the sun with the naked eye is never wise.
That's why astronomers also caution that celestial enthusiasts be prepared with the proper eyewear to view the ring of fire as NASA said it will travel in the U.S. from the coast of Oregon to the Texas Gulf Coast.
How to safely watch the solar eclipse:Rare 'ring of fire' has the potential to damage your eyes if you don't take precautions
According to NASA, the only safe way to watch an eclipse is through a pair of approved solar eclipse glasses or a handheld solar viewer.
Fortunately for stargazers, solar eclipse glasses are readily available for purchase and even for free ahead of the ring of fire, which should be viewable in some form in all lower 48 states.
But don't confuse the specialized eyewear with your run-of-the-mill sunglasses: certified solar eclipse glasses are held to an international safety standard and are 100,000 times darker to block nearly all visible, infrared and ultraviolet light.
In Buffalo, New York, for instance, Erie County officials provided funding to hand out hundreds of thousands of the eyewear at its local libraries, according to the Buffalo Museum of Science.
Many libraries around the country, in fact, will be giving away free pairs of approved eclipse glasses through Saturday.
The Space Science Institute distributed 5 million solar-viewing glasses to 10,000 libraries and maintains a map of participating libraries on its website.
Residents in Memphis, Tennessee have several options available to acquire solar eclipse glasses, according to the Commercial Appeal, a USA TODAY Network publication.
In addition to the city's libraries giving away the eye protection, a popup shop will also be open every day through Saturday where glasses produced by American Paper Optics costing up to $20 are for sale.
American Paper Optics, the nation's largest supplier of eclipse glasses, also offers express shipping across the country.
Plenty of other online sellers have eclipse glasses for sale that are compliant with ISO 12312-2, a long number that simply specifies the properties that a solar viewer should have in order to protect eyes from injury.
For more manufacturers and retailers who sell certified glasses, the American Astronomical Society maintains a curated list of approved vendors.
Of course, Prime Day may be over, but consumers can also turn to Amazon for their eclipse-watching needs.
The online retailer has a variety of certified solar eclipse glasses, many of which can be bought in bulk (including a 50-pack for $49.99.)
But be wary of counterfeit or unsafe eclipse glasses when shopping Amazon.
If the seller's name is not one of the verified suppliers on the American Astronomical Society's list, look elsewhere.
At least some of the sun’s powerful light will be visible Saturday even in places without a view of the spectacular partial solar eclipse.
Directly staring at the sun at any time can cause blindness or disrupted vision, but the concentrated solar rays of the partial eclipse are especially acute.
Looking at it through a camera lens, telescope or binoculars is also dangerous, as the rays can burn through even those filters, according to NASA.
An annular eclipse is different from the nighttime darkness of a total eclipse in which the Moon completely blocks the face of the Sun from Earth's view, the next of which is expected to occur in April.
Rather, an annular solar eclipse occurs when the moon is at the farthest point of its orbit from Earth and passes in front of the sun.
Because it is incapable of completely blocking the sun, the moon instead appears as a smaller dark disc in front of the larger and brighter star, creating what looks like a ring of fire.
Weather permitting, the eclipse will first become visible in Oregon around 9:13 a.m. PDT and end in Texas around 12:03 p.m. CDT, according to NASA.
It will then move beyond the U.S. and over Mexico, Central America and finally South America before ending around sunset off of Natal, Brazil in the Atlantic Ocean.
Reach him at elagatta@gannett.com
Morgan State University leaders have announced plans to build a wall around the campus after a shooting that injured five people, including four students, during homecoming week celebrations.
Police, meanwhile, are calling on the public to help them identify two persons of interest in the case.
David Wilson, the president of Morgan State University, said at a campus town hall Tuesday that the wall would effectively "eliminate unfettered access" by extending existing barriers by about 8,000 feet, encircling 90% of the campus.
"We are doing it to keep out the bad actors."
In addition to the wall, possible upgrades include installing more metal detectors in campus buildings, exploring weapons detection technology, increasing police patrols and building additional security guard booths.
Wilson said that the expected cost is more than $22 million and that a proposal will be sent to Maryland Gov.
On Tuesday, the Baltimore Police Department posted images of two men sought in connection with the Oct. 3 shooting.
The images, taken by surveillance cameras, were accompanied by a plea to the public for help identifying the two men.
Days earlier, police released a video showing several people walking in a grassy area along with a request for tips that may lead to their identification.
The combined reward totals for tips leading to an arrest and charges is at $9,000, authorities said.
Gunfire erupted on campus around 9:25 p.m. after a dispute between two groups, authorities said.
All the victims, 18 to 22 years old, were unintended targets.
None were found.
The shooting canceled the rest of the week's homecoming events, including Saturday's football game, for the first time in the university's history.
Contributing: The Associated Press
Our politics is dominated by the old.
Although the median age of the rest of America is 38.9 years, the median age in the U.S. Senate is 65.3 and is 57.8 years in the House of Representatives.
And, of course, the two front-runners for the 2024 presidential race, Joe Biden and Donald Trump, would be well into their 80s before one or the other left the Oval Office in 2029.
Unlike some of my fellow Generation Z, which spans from 1997 to 2012, I generally favor older people in office.
Young people are still forming their belief systems and learning how to accomplish the things they want to achieve.
Older politicians have more life experience and are less likely to radically change their ideological positions in response to a new crisis.
Career politicians tend to understand how the system works and the mechanisms to get things done.
While I get frustrated by a Congress predominantly made up of out-of-touch older people, inexperience is never a virtue, as much as young perspectives might be valued.
However, as always, there is a line.
As could be seen with recently deceased Sen. Dianne Feinstein, who was 90, access to the high-level medical care that our federal elected leaders enjoy can mitigate the effects of aging for only so long.
Aging also raises the risk of cognitive decline.
And 59% of those polled said the same about Trump.
Partisan politics may skew those numbers, but if more than half the country is concerned about our leading presidential candidates' competency to serve as commander in chief, we ought to take note.
Nikki Haley, former U.S. ambassador to the United Nations and one of Trump's rivals for the GOP presidential nomination, has proposed requiring a mental competency test for candidates older than 75.
Biden, to no one's surprise, has scoffed at the idea.
Trump, on the other hand, endorsed it but doubted the practicality of requiring a mental competency test: “A lot of people say it’s not constitutional to do it.”
Yet, polling suggests that 76% of Americans strongly or somewhat support such tests for politicians.
While mental competency tests would be a good thing, declining physical health also needs to be taken into account.
It may not be polite to say it, but the older the president, the higher the risk that America's commander in chief will die while still in office.
With all the chaos in the nation and the world now, America shouldn't risk the uncertainty and dangers of a sudden transfer of presidential power.
I think neither Biden nor Trump should serve a second term because of their character and policy positions.
Their age is just another important factor for why voters need strong (and younger) alternative candidates.
Sadly, voters appear too locked into partisan combativeness to fairly evaluate whether Biden and Trump are capable of serving effectively as octogenarians.
A graduate from DePaul University with a degree in political science, he's also president of the Lone Conservative, the largest conservative student-run publication in the country.
Israel’s Iron Dome is considered a highly effective missile defense system, with its latest success rating of 96% in destroying rockets fired from Gaza in May 2023, according to Israeli Defense Forces.
So did Hamas defeat the billion-dollar Iron Dome ahead of its surprise attack on Israel?
The militant group said it launched 5,000 rockets in 20 minutes – Israeli Defense Forces said 2,200 were fired – that overwhelmed the Iron Dome system.
An attack of that intensity can exhaust defensive missile stockpiles, which take time to reload.
Even if a lower number of 2,200 to 3,000 missiles were fired in 20 minutes, the quantity "was simply too much for Iron Dome to manage," according to an analysis by the Modern War Institute at West Point.
"You've seen footage of these (Israeli) interceptor missiles blowing up Hamas rockets in midair, but it's got a limited number of these interceptor missiles at any one time," Malcolm Davis, a senior analyst in defense strategy at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, told abc.net.au.
Unable to view our graphics?
Click here to see them.
The Iron Dome is a mobile all-weather missile defense system, designed to detect and shoot down short-range rockets fired into Israel.
It’s also used against enemy artillery and drones.
Iron Dome can detect and engage rockets up to 40 miles away.
Each of its 10 batteries can protect a 58-square-mile area.
It’s a portable system, towed by trucks.
The batteries are units with three main elements:
Work on the Iron Dome began in 2007.
It became operational in March 2011 and has been upgraded over the years.
Its success rate has exceeded 90% since being activated, Raytheon says.
Iron Dome is designed as protection against rockets at low altitudes.
It's part of Israel's three-tiered air defense system that includes:
◾ David's Sling: Defense against short-range ballistic missiles, large-caliber rockets, and cruise missiles.
◾ Arrow-3: Defense against medium-range ballistic missiles.
Much of the Israeli-Palestinian fighting in May 2021 was an air war, with Hamas firing long-range rockets at Israeli cities and Israel retaliating with airstrikes that targeted buildings in Gaza.
Rocket warfare between the two is not unusual.
But there's a difference now: Though Israel retains an overwhelming advantage, Hamas, the Islamist militant group in the Gaza Strip, has more and better rockets, which may affect future conflicts.
From May 11 to the cease-fire on May 21, Hamas launched a significantly higher number of rockets into Israel, much more than in previous conflicts, according to Michael Armstrong, associate professor and missile warfare researcher at Brock University.
"The rocket fire differed from the 2014 and 2012 conflicts in a couple of ways," Armstrong says.
"One was the quantity of rockets."
Hamas fired an average of 500 missiles a day for the first week of the May conflict, Armstrong says.
"They may have better supplies of rockets," Armstrong says.
"They seem to have more of the longer-range rockets, which is another important change."
More rockets hit their intended targets.
About 50% have threatened populated areas in Israel, Armstrong wrote in an analysis for The Conversation.
In 2014, the rate was 18%.
In 2012, it was 22%.
Iran has supplied Hamas with rockets and technical aid, but the militants are starting to build rockets on their own, using parts scavenged from recovered Israeli missiles and common items such as water pipes, The New York Times reported.
With its offensive weapons and defensive systems, Israel retains an overwhelming military superiority over neighboring Palestinians.
But Hamas has improved its rocket capabilities.
Israel's weaponry is aided by foreign assistance, as well as producing its own cruise and ballistic missiles.
Israel also exports missile systems.
Israel is believed to have nuclear weapons, but it has never admitted or denied possessing them, according to the Arms Control Association.
SOURCE USA TODAY Network reporting and research; Associated Press; European Leadership Network; U.S. Institute of Peace; Center for Strategic and International Studies
Keep up with developments from Gaza:Sign up for USA TODAY's Israel-Hamas War newsletter.
An Alabama woman who disappeared after telling police a story about a child walking along a highway is due in court Wednesday for criminal charges she faces in relation to the frenzy.
"I, too, share the same frustration."
Amanda Priest, spokesperson for the Alabama Attorney General's office, said the charges fit well with this case as the state's laws don't allow for harsher penalties.
Russell's attorney, Emory Anthony, declined USA TODAY's request for an interview until after the court date.
Russell initially went missing in Hoover on July 13 and reappeared at home 49 hours later.
She called police to report a toddler walking along Interstate 459 South in just a diaper, but police were unable to confirm Russell's report.
She later called her brother's girlfriend, who reported she heard Russell scream before losing contact.
Hoover police said in a July 14 statement they weren't able to locate Russell or the child.
They released video surveillance of Russell's red Mercedes-Benz pulling over on the highway with hazards on, but it doesn't show anyone driving up to Russell.
The woman later told police she was placed in a semi-truck and overheard a man and woman talking while a baby was crying.
Russell said she escaped but was recaptured and blindfolded, then taken to a home where she was fed crackers.
She told police the couple made her take her clothes off and took pictures of her.
Editor's note: Part one of a five-part USA TODAY series revealing why America hasn't solved its long struggle with Type 2 diabetes.
For chef Robin Ray, newly married with young stepchildren, the turning point came when a stabbing chest pain sent her rushing to the emergency room.
“I didn’t think you’d make it,” the doctor said.
The moments were turning points for all three to get serious about addressing their diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes, in which the body can’t properly regulate blood sugar, has become so common it’s almost considered inconsequential.
More than 1 in 10 Americans have the disease (though many don't know) and another nearly 4 in 10 are at risk for it.
In total, half of all adults and a quarter of teenagers have diabetes or pre-diabetes.
Its financial costs are astronomical.
The country spends more than $300 billion a year to address diabetes, accounting for $1 out of every $4 spent on health care.
And its personal tolls are even worse: heart attacks, amputations, blindness, kidney disease, double the risk of premature death.
It also causes what’s known as “diabetes distress,” the daily burdens and emotional toll of living with and managing a chronic ailment that can lead to regular dips in energy, foggy thinking and depression, and a sense of isolation.
The most frustrating aspect of Type 2 diabetes, experts say, is that it has long been largely preventable and controllable.
“We have made tremendous gains in understanding diabetes,” said Dr. Donald Berwick, a pediatrician and former administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Roughly 40% of people who died early in the coronavirus pandemic had Type 2 diabetes, a rate four times higher than people without the disease.
Even when elevated blood sugar levels are below the threshold for type 2 diabetes, the risk for heart disease jumps 30% to 50% compared with people with normal blood sugar levels.
(Type 1 diabetes, which accounts for 5% to 10% of diabetes, is caused by the immune system and is unrelated to diet or lifestyle.)
America’s failure to address Type 2 diabetes highlights larger problems with our food and medical systems, Berwick and other experts said.
A soda costs less than a bottle of water, a double cheeseburger and fries less than a carton of blueberries.
Patients wait months for medical appointments only to see the back of a white coat for the short time they’re allotted.
Treating disease costs society far more than preventing it but typically provides more profit for insurance companies, hospitals and the pharmaceutical industry.
The USA TODAY Health team spoke with scores of health care providers, researchers, community leaders and patients for this five-part series to understand why Type 2 diabetes continues to worsen in America despite known solutions.
The answer isn't simple.
It involves systemic problems facing everyone in society, not just those with diabetes: a food system designed to sell products; a medical system in which cutting off a leg is less expensive than saving it; the high cost of healthy living and the fact that breaking habits takes a lot more than just personal willpower.
This first story looks at what it takes for people to cope with or overcome the disease.
Then, we explore one community in a David vs. Goliath battle against a food system that fails to prioritize people's health.
More in series:Diabetes runs deep in rural Mississippi.
Locals have taken to growing their own solutions.
We next travel to Colorado, which has the lowest level of diabetes in the nation.
Yet even in this state, where hiking trails and gorgeous views abound, economic and other disparities make it easier for some people to avoid diabetes than others.
More in series:A diabetes disparity: Why Colorado's healthy lifestyle brand isn't shared by all
It's tough to manage a chronic illness in the face of high medical costs, scattered care and caregiver frustration and burnout, so we highlight that next.
More in series:The steep cost of Type 2: When diabetes dragged her down, she chose to fight
Finally, we explore solutions, addressing why it will take a combination of education, medication, medical devices and improved food access to solve this national problem.
More in series:Solutions exist to end the Type 2 diabetes dilemma but too few get the help they need
But it will take "sensible action" from across many sectors, including health care, science, nutrition, business, public health and politics to change the financial and other incentives that drive so many Americans toward sickness instead of health.
"If we do it incrementally or don't do it at all, we're all going to be toast in 50 years from diet-related illnesses and a depleted environment."
There’s no question personal responsibility plays a role in fighting diabetes.
They’ve reduced their dependence on daily medication and hope to have saved themselves the horrors of more amputations, blindness and dialysis.
They’ve extended their lives and improved the quality of that time.
But like many medical problems, the challenges of diabetes go well beyond individual responsibility and blame.
Agarwal recently led a series of studies in the journal The Lancet that looked at diabetes rates around the world.
Poverty, the studies showed, was a major driver of diabetes, along with racism and unequal access to healthy food and high-quality medical care.
Personal stories illustrate how these structural issues play out in the lives of so many Americans.
 “I’m healthy because of privilege – not diet, not exercise, not determination,” he said.
“It’s going to be all right after a while, as long as I keep this spirit,” he said.
Ray’s love for food began when she was 8 years old, watching Julia Child on TV.
During family gatherings, she would run around taking everyone’s dinner order.
Then she’d scurry back to the kitchen with a notepad full of scribbles.
Throughout her life, she made fried chicken, pork chops, baked mac and cheese, collard greens, and even a whole roasted chicken filled with wild rice and two sticks of butter – everything that made her soul sing.
In her world, food was home.
Food was family.
Food was love.
But that was some pretty tough love.
In 2002, Ray was diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes.
Her father, grandmother, aunts and uncles all had diabetes.
She knew what it meant.
“For you to tell me I can’t have ice blue raspberry Kool-Aid was like you shut down my world,” Ray said.
She didn't dwell on the diagnosis and continued with life.
Her culinary career took her to Italy, where she learned and fell even more in love with food.
She returned to St. Louis, got married and became a mom to her husband’s two children ‒ “beautiful bonus babies,” as she described them.
Through the years, she continued to express love through cooking and eating.
In 2015, a stabbing chest pain sent her to the emergency room.
Doctors assured Ray she hadn’t had a heart attack, but they warned that her life was on the line.
At 5-foot-2, she weighed 334 pounds and had an A1C, a measure of average blood sugar of 11%, well above the 6.5% cutoff to be considered diabetic.
Her diabetes – and her diet – were out of control.
She and her primary care doctor decided she would pursue weight loss surgery.
But she also decided to use her culinary prowess to transform her diet.
She reconfigured favorite foods, substituting healthier ingredients: Collard greens cooked in smoked fats or ham hocks turned into a kale, turnip and rutabaga recipe flavored with natural chicken broth fat, oils and seasonings.
She fostered her feelings into new recipes and brought them to North Sarah Food Hub, which partnered with Barnes-Jewish Hospital to make packaged, pre-made meals for St. Louis residents with diabetes and limited access to fresh food.
“I became excited about food again, and food became a joy.”
It isn’t always easy, of course.
Ray admits to an occasional cookie craving.
But now she takes the time to think about how her body processes that cookie and whether it’s worthwhile.
She hopes her cooking can help other people make the same transformation she did.
Her staff at North Sarah helps her create new recipes for others.
She wants to provide nourishment that allows people to avoid illness and medicine.
The lifetime risk of developing Type 2 diabetes if a parent has it is 40%.
If both parents have it, the risk jumps to 70%.
He knew he was at risk, but he pushed his luck, he said, by eating poorly during the pandemic and falling out of his exercise routine.
With the luxury of working from home, walking to the kitchen and bathroom was often the extent of his daily activity.
On Feb. 14, 2022 – Valentine’s Day – he went to an urgent care clinic, concerned his breathing trouble meant he had bronchitis.
His blood pressure measured 210 over 110, well above normal levels that top out at 120 over 80.
A chest X-ray showed fluid filling his lungs, leading to congestive heart failure.
The clinic sent him straight to a local emergency room, where he was diagnosed with a blockage of the left descending artery – a clogged artery made worse by diabetes.
If he had waited any longer, he would have had a massive heart attack, his doctor later told him.
After his release from the hospital, he went to the drugstore to fill his new prescriptions.
The pharmacist told him she couldn’t fill one because it would cost $1,000.
He’d have to wait until his insurance approved it.
“Please fill it,” he said.
She stressed the cost.
“Fill it,” he pleaded, putting the charge on his credit card.
Medication helped him lose 70 pounds in three months.
When his local drugstore ran out of the weight-loss drug, he easily drove to another pharmacy and then another to find what he needed.
His 100 hours of high-quality cardiac rehabilitation were fully covered by insurance.
He could devote all his energy to getting well because he didn’t have to focus on how to afford his care.
When they finally show up in the emergency room, “because they will,” they will cost the system far more, he said.
On the day Haynes stepped on a rusty nail in 2019, he walked all day as the nail pierced the sole of his sneaker and then his foot.
By the time he took off his shoe that night, his foot was infected.
He landed in the hospital for two months as doctors and nurses tried, mostly unsuccessfully, to get the infection and Haynes’ blood sugar under control.
By the time he was released, he knew enough about Type 2 diabetes to realize his daily blood sugar levels – typically in the mid-400s – were four times above what he had been told to shoot for.
But nothing he did or ate seemed to make a difference.
He had long since traded ribs for salads, beer for water.
His wife, Angela, barely noticed when James started wearing multiple pairs of socks, pouring powder on his feet and buying bigger shoes.
His feet tingled a lot, he said, but he was coping with it.
James ended up in the emergency room again, dehydrated and in need of antibiotics.
The doctor amputated the baby toe on his right foot, leaving a large open wound.
“I didn't like that we're not going to try to save anything, we're just going to start cutting.”
James was fading.
Antibiotics left him looking sickly, his voice so weak Angela could barely hear him.
“I felt like I was watching my husband slowly dying,” she said.
She thought it would take months to get James in to see the heart disease specialist, but the office called and asked if they could come the next day.
“We started looking forward to these visits because there was always hope,” Angela Haynes said, though she felt guilty they were taking up so much of the important doctor’s time.
Haynes had blockages in blood vessels on both legs.
Once he got the blood flowing again, Haynes began to feel better.
His flesh returned to its normal color.
The wound started healing at last.
Walking became easier.
Then disaster struck again.
On July 2, 2022, Haynes caught COVID-19.
"Everything went downhill after that," he said.
During his 13-day illness, the bacteria in his foot raged out of control.
Every week, a surgeon would come to the door of his hospital room and before even stepping all the way in ask Haynes whether he had decided to get his leg amputated.
I was born with this.
He was worried about how he’d get around, how he’d be able to work to support his family if he had only one leg.
No one took the time to explain why they thought the leg needed to come off or how he’d cope without it, Haynes said.
In late November, he was finally sent home in a wheelchair.
Back at the hospital, Haynes was told his foot was broken, essentially beyond repair.
He agreed to a below-the-knee amputation.
Released right before Christmas, he spent the next three weeks in bed wondering how he’d manage the rest of his life.
Finally, it looked as if his luck might be turning around.
With the leg gone, his diabetes improved.
His blood sugar dropped into the 120s or one-teens.
His blurry vision cleared up.
During his long hospital stay, he befriended nurses and learned about a program for people who needed prostheses.
The man who ran it called early in the year and said he had received a donated leg.
If it fit Haynes, he could have it while waiting for insurance to pay for a personalized one.
Miraculously, it did.
Haynes spent the next six months teaching himself to walk again.
The donor leg was heavy and uncomfortable.
He wasn't mobile enough to hold down a job.
One late spring night, picking up dinner at a nearby restaurant, he headed to the bathroom for a pit stop.
A sink had been leaking all day and Haynes slipped in the puddle, falling backward.
He's still recovering from the resulting wrist surgery.
He and Angela are living – barely – off her part-time salary as a secretary and a church organist.
Haynes has tried "at least three or four times" to receive government assistance, but they keep losing his paperwork, or not believing he's disabled, though he once checked himself out of the hospital and arrived at an appointment in his wheelchair to prove he didn't have a leg.
Still, he clings to his faith and the positive attitude he has long used to cheer up himself and others.
These are his secret weapons against diabetes and everything else life throws his way.
"I try to put a smile on other people's faces," he said.
"It keeps my day going."
This story is part of a reporting fellowship sponsored by the Association of Health Care Journalists and supported by the Commonwealth Fund.
Our goal remains the same: Provide book lovers with the best, most accurate snapshot of what people are reading by showing which titles are selling.
It is a master list, unbound by genre and format, of what’s selling broadly across the U.S.
Her novel "It Starts With Us" claimed the No.
1 spot in its first week, her highest debut ever, selling more than 800,000 copies on its first day of sales.
It was her fourth book to hit No.
1 in 2022.
The USA TODAY list is a ranking of the top-selling titles each week from a broad range of businesses including major chains, independent bookstores and online retailers.
It reflects combined sales of titles in print and electronic format, if available.
Our data team weighs and compiles those numbers to generate the week's 150 top-selling titles.
The rankings reflect sales from the previous Monday through Sunday.
The full list will publish online at 6 a.m. Wednesdays, with the top 50 titles publishing in print Thursdays.
The list, which began in 1993, went on hiatus in December.
It is the longest-running USA TODAY data journalism project.
In our continued commitment to bring readers more books coverage, USA TODAY is also excited to announce a new content partnership with The Novel Neighbor, an independently owned and operated bookstore in St. Louis.
They are expert booksellers and passionate readers who are deeply connected to what their community is reading.
With the partnership will come regular profiles of independent bookstores across the country, highlighting the important role of these businesses in their local communities.
Novel Neighbor will also be sharing expert book recommendations and fun takes on book trends.
We can't wait to see what you've been reading!
A year ago, President Joe Biden’s plan was to forgive up to $20,000 in student loan debt for tens of millions of Americans.
With that plan now extinct, the first of several conversations to hash out a new strategy for erasing loan balances en masse began Tuesday and continues Wednesday.
"We believe that doing so will strengthen the entire student loan system, help us tackle pervasive problems in the system, and help ensure postsecondary education is a path to opportunity for more students."
Social media is littered with evidence of confusion about the size of monthly payments.
Some people say they are puzzled about why they are being billed at all.
One set of borrowers has their payments set to zero because of a new federal repayment option called SAVE that aims to be more generous than any other.
The negotiators resume their conversation at 10 am Eastern time Wednesday, and it will be livestreamed with a chance for the public to weigh in.
Here’s what you need to know:
Another legal challenge:Biden student loan debt forgiveness plan for 804,000 borrowers faces another day in court
It has been used many times over the years to draft rules related to higher education, including on how Title IX law on sexual assault is applied at schools and colleges and how well colleges produce graduates whose jobs can cover their student debt.
The people who will hash out the student loan plan applied or were nominated to participate and then were selected by the Education Department.
They represent different groups who have a stake in student loans, such as borrowers, student loan servicers and colleges and universities.
This is a list of the committee members, including alternates, selected ahead of Tuesday's meeting.
But on the first day, the committee chose to add representatives of two additional groups – consumer advocates and individuals with disabilities.
Their meeting agenda doesn't give very much away.
But the focus of the virtual meeting is wide-reaching, with discussion reserved for each of the five guiding questions mapped out by the department.
The questions are described in this issue paper published late last month.
They are, in short:
Public comment comes at the end of each day of conversation.
To sign up to speak, send your name and, if applicable, organization to negreghearing@ed.gov no later than noon Eastern time on each meeting day.
On Tuesday, negotiators focused on questions No.
1 and 2 – how to better support borrowers with outsize balances and better engage borrowers who are eligible for forgiveness but haven’t applied.
The discussion was civil, though at times it meandered into territory not technically covered by this neg reg process.
Some, for example, focused on the need to ease burdens on parents who took out student loans on behalf of their kids, known as Parent PLUS loans, which are not eligible for most income-driven repayment options.
Others highlighted obstacles to participating in the public service loan forgiveness program.
Four takeaways from the day’s discussion:
The negotiators have to come up with a plan to which every committee member has to agree.
If they don’t arrive at a consensus, the Education Department will come up with its own proposal.
Either way, there will be another opportunity for the public to comment on what is developed before it’s finalized.
Congress will then have the opportunity to review the rule, and has the option of passing a joint resolution to overturn it.
A final rule must be published by Nov. 1 for it to take effect in July of the following year.
If the process goes according to plan, the earliest borrowers would see forgiveness is summer of 2024.
When the Supreme Court struck down Biden’s original plan this past summer, it ruled that student loan debt relief could not happen through the president’s executive authorities the way he’d hoped.
That means the only viable routes are through federal legislation – which given partisan gridlock is all but impossible – or federal higher education policy changes, a.k.a.
If a rule isn’t finalized through this neg reg series and a Republican wins next year’s presidential election, the chances of broad student loan forgiveness becoming reality are even slimmer.
First, sign up to watch the negotiators discuss policies that could make large-scale loan forgiveness a reality.
You’ll need to register at this link.
The first meeting spans over two days, Tuesday and Wednesday, for five hours each – from 10 am to noon Eastern, then 1 pm to 4 pm.
The next meeting is scheduled for Nov. 6-7, and the one after that for Dec. 11-12.
Both of the sessions, like the one that kicks off Tuesday, will be virtual and include opportunities for the public to comment.
The links to register will be different for the next two sessions.
It could be excruciatingly long
The 37-year-old New Yorker initially thought little of the attack.
With seven decades of war and conflict between Palestinians and Israelis, rockets aren’t uncommon in the region.
The two sisters decided to risk car rides to a safer location, fearing the situation would take a turn for the worse in their kibbutz near Gaza.
“It made all the difference.”
People across the United States have turned to communication channels like WhatsApp to get updates from friends and family in Israel amid the war, which has so far led to more than 900 dead in Israel, upward of 680 dead in Gaza and at least 14 dead Americans.
Dozens more Israelis and an unknown number of Americans have been taken hostage and are being held in locations across Gaza.
They’re our kids.
When he connected his phone to Wi-Fi, he said he discovered approximately 70 WhatsApp messages from friends and family in Israel.
He raced back home after learning about the war and sorted through the news after a “really hard” two-hour drive.
We’re all one, we’re all together.
People were asking each other are you good?
He keeps in contact with his mother “a few times a day” and gets updates from his friends in WhatsApp groups.
“I’m just grateful that I can send love,” she said.
Israel-Hamas war:Israel, Gaza and when your social media posts hurt more than help
While social media sites have been able to help connect families amid the crisis, they have also been flooded with misinformation.
False stories have already spread on sites like Facebook and X, formerly Twitter, with users posting old videos or video game clips and passing them off as updates from the Israel-Hamas war.
“Right now, there's widespread misinformation and disinformation.”
Social media to blame?
Why everyone is blaming social media.
The Israel-Hamas war isn’t the first conflict where social media has been used to spread propaganda, but some experts say managing misinformation online today is harder than ever before.
“I don't think the platforms are prepared,” she added.
There’s a horrific war going on between Israel and Gaza.
Many of us have been glued to the nonstop news coverage and social media feed as the horror unfolds before our eyes.
The question for all of us is how can we respond in a way that will bring hope and peace as opposed to more bloodshed and persecution.
The two of us have a long history of working with and alongside each other in community organizing and social justice work in and around Chicago.
We also just returned home from an absolutely transformative journey in Jerusalem and its surrounding area with a phenomenal interfaith group of community leaders, scholars, artists and others.
Our journey lasted for two weeks.
The last day of the trip coincided with horrific violence and attacks inside Israel on Saturday that have led to yet another round of aerial bombardment and an inhumane blockade on Gaza.
Our own fear and the fear of those who were sheltered with us was palpable.
We knew that wherever these other travelers were headed, this trauma would be carried with them and have an impact on communities across the globe and geopolitics.
We tried to comfort ourselves and others around us as we searched for a safe way home, eventually crossing into Jordan to catch flights back to America.
The stories of ghastly attacks by Hamas are gut-wrenching to watch, and there is nothing in our understanding of our faiths and righteous pursuits for justice that justify such horror.
We know that these brutal images and stories bring up deep-seated trauma for the Jewish community and worry and sadness for the many who have been killed, injured and taken captive.
Meanwhile, the carnage and blockade being imposed upon the civilian population in the Gaza Strip by an overwhelming military force is barbaric and inhumane – and yet not often condemned by the world.
The attacks on and closure of Gaza will certainly lead to the deaths of innocent children.
We leaned into one another’s rich spiritual backgrounds and commitments to justice, mercy and peace by exploring underappreciated connections to this sacred land, and in so doing, tried to forge another path for radical empathy and connection to the stories, hopes and aspirations of those working for and dreaming of more dignified pathways for all people on this land.
Attack timing desecrates our religion:Hamas took advantage of divisions in Israel to start a horrific war targeting civilians
Throughout our journey, we were reminded of the daily humiliation, hardship and injustice experienced by Palestinians living under military occupation in refugee camps and surrounding areas.
While none of that justifies the carnage of innocent civilians, it must be understood as the ongoing context in which decades-old Palestinian grievances are being ignored or exploited.
Now back in Chicago, we know our work will soon return to the issues that connected us before this journey together: social, racial and economic justice and equity in our city and ways to bring faith and other communities together around a larger vision for a more just and equitable Chicago.
Meanwhile, we cannot forget what we experienced together in the Middle East, especially at a time when much of America and news outlets seem to be cheering on Israel’s blockade and bombardment of one of the most densely populated and essentially imprisoned populations in the world.
We pray for the healthy return for all Israeli children, families and others taken hostage in the Gaza Strip as we pray for the cessation of collective punishment upon innocent Palestinian families.
We call upon our politicians to support an immediate end to the full blockade on Gaza and a humanitarian corridor for relief for families inside Gaza.
Among the things we were reminded of by many people of all faiths and backgrounds on this journey is the interconnected and interwoven reality of all our collective experiences, suffering and dreams for justice.
'Stand with Israel'?
Trump talked about hummus.
We are also concerned about the safety of Muslim and Jewish communities here in the United States as tensions flare in Israel and Gaza.
Some parts of both communities are receiving threats at this time.
Palestinian people are not the enemy; Jewish people are not the enemy.
The true enemy is any ideology that degrades and diminishes the sacred light resident in all humanity.
We recognize the fear, anger and helplessness so many feel at this precarious and violent time, but our traditions teach us to turn to prayer, loving support of one another, and working for justice and peace as outlets for these feelings and not violence.
We must stand up for the safety and security of everyone.
Our hearts break for all who live under the threat of terror and sit under the canopy of hopelessness.
We call upon our religious leaders, politicians and communities to stand together for justice and peace and not resort to sloganeering or jingoism at this time.
There is death here, and there are promises of more.
There is life here.
Anyone reading this is breathing, maybe hurting, but breathing for sure.
We have got to carry each other now.
You are either with life, or against it.
The Gaza Strip, one of the smallest territories in the world, may soon become a bloody battleground as Israeli Defense Forces strike back against Hamas for its brutal, hostage-taking attack on Israel.
Gaza is at the center of the Israeli-Palestinian hostility, which has existed since the creation of Israel in 1948.
The confrontation going on now is another in a long history of Middle Eastern disputes among Israelis, Palestinians, and others.
USA TODAY looks at this tiny Palestinian enclave, its people, and its place in the ongoing conflict.
The Gaza Strip comprises just under 140 square miles of relatively flat coastal plan bordering the Mediterranean Sea.
It is central to the conflict involving Israel, Hamas, the Palestinian territories and various regional actors.
Urban areas, refugee camps, border crossings and high-risk areas as defined by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs can be seen in the map above.
Gaza's area is slightly greater than twice the size of Washington, D.C.
It is home to 2.3 million people in 139 square miles, according to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Gaza borders Israeli territory on its northeastern and southeastern sides and Egypt to its southwest.
To its west, Gaza abuts the Mediterranean Sea.
At least 2.23 million people live in the Gaza Strip, according to the U.N., many of them displaced after leaving or being driven from Israel during its War of Independence and subsequent conflicts.
Gaza is often described as one of the world's most densely populated areas, but population density varies across the territory.
There are roughly an even number of women and men living there.
With 42,059 people per square mile, Gaza City is the 63rd-most densely inhabited urban region in the world.
At least eight Palestinian refugee camps lie in the Gaza Strip and have some of the highest population densities in the world, according to the U.N.
Hamas is the largest Palestinian militant group and has fired rockets from Gaza at Israeli cities in the fighting.
It's committed to the destruction of Israel and is considered a terrorist group by the U.S., the U.K. and other nations.
According to the U.N.
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the socioeconomic situation in Gaza has been in steady decline for more than a decade.
Longstanding restrictions on the movement of people and goods to and from Gaza have made living conditions extremely difficult.
Israel prevents all access to and from the Gaza Strip by sea and air.
Sixty-three percent of the population of Gaza is considered food-insecure, and 81% are living in poverty.
Access to clean water and electricity were at crisis levels even before this month's hostilities.
The U.N. secretary-general says the blockade and related restrictions contravene international humanitarian law because they target and impose hardship on the civilian population, effectively penalizing them for acts they have not committed.
Sources: United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, OCHA OPT Information Management Unit, Jewish Virtual Library, The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, USA TODAY research
Keep up with developments from Gaza:Sign up for USA TODAY's Israel-Hamas War newsletter.
Ron DeSantis said he will expand Florida sanctions against Iran for its support of terrorist organizations throughout the Mideast while condemning the attack on Israel.
Iran celebrated the attack, which began Saturday, but has denied claims that it supplied Hamas with military aid or intelligence.
The U.S. and Israeli governments do not currently have any evidence to support the claim that Iran is behind the attacks, but one U.S. official said Iran is complicit in providing funding, weapons and training to Hamas.
During a Tuesday appearance at a synagogue near Miami, DeSantis condemned the “barbarians” conducting the assault, which has killed more than 1,600 on both sides, while another 150 Israeli soldiers and civilians are being held hostage by Hamas militants.
DeSantis said he’ll ask the Florida Legislature to expand the state’s prohibition on investment in Iranian businesses to include such industries as finance, construction, shipping, ports and more.
He’d also bar any investment by local governments in Iran.
Iran is already considered one of the "countries of concern" Florida names in SB 264 that went into effect July 1, 2023.
The law prevents officers from those countries from buying farmland or land within 10 miles of a military installation or critical infrastructure in the state.
Here is the full list of countries included in the law:
The law is being challenged in court, but it remains active after a federal judge denied an injunction in August.
More:DeSantis' latest anti-communist campaign targets Florida schools linked to Chinese firms
DeSantis cited the state’s history of having steered $18 million for security at Jewish day schools in Florida, along with its long-held opposition to boycott, divestment and sanctions against Israel for its Palestinian policies.
The governor said Tuesday he has instructed the Florida Department of Law Enforcement and other agencies to be on heightened alert for any anti-Semitic activities that could extend to “fund-raising for Hamas or other terrorist groups.”
“If you’re doing that in Florida, you’re going to be held accountable,” DeSantis said.
Also:Florida man hung banners with swastikas, anti-Semitic slogans in Orlando bridge, authorities say
DeSantis on Monday ordered flags at public buildings in Florida lowered to half-staff and the state Capitol lit in blue and white in honor of the at least 900 Israeli civilians and soldiers killed so far.
DeSantis criticized Secretary of State Antony Blinken for posting on X a statement calling for a cease-fire between Israel and Hamas, then deleting it.
Blinken later posted that “Israel has the right to defend itself, rescue any hostages, and protect its citizens.”
DeSantis, though, said “you wonder what they’re doing.”
“If Israel lay down its arms tomorrow, that would result in the destruction of the Jewish state, we know that,” DeSantis said.
LAS VEGAS – The Green Bay Packers aren’t a talentless team.
They probably have as much or more talent than two of the three teams that have beaten them this year.
But, boy, are they a bad team.
Their offense is a mess.
Their defense can be pretty good but only to a point.
They are affected any time one of their starters can’t play because of injury.
And they have too many players who just do what they’re told and not whatever it takes to be a difference-maker.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
They also celebrated the end of a years-long battle against Greater Albany Public School District.
Their excitement to be a teen attending a Corvallis high school is a stark difference from their emotions as an Albany elementary school student.
Indigenous land acknowledgments are everywhere.
After taking hold on college campuses, they are recited with growing frequency at schools, sporting events and church services.
They are added as signatures at the end of emails.
They are being posted on the websites of museums, libraries, and other institutions as the era of racial reckoning and social justice that has followed the emergence of the Black Lives Matter movement and the killing of George Floyd continues to evolve.
Meet the 2024 Toyota Grand Highlander.
Bigger and better than the Highlander three-row midsize SUV that’s a mainstay of Toyota’s lineup, the Grand Highlander is evidence you can never be too rich or have too much legroom.
Be careful what you wish for, Dallas Cowboys.
As fallout lingers from the blowout loss at San Francisco, the Cowboys are so deep into their feelings about the 42-10 result that it’s fair to wonder if they are capable of recovering – physically and mentally.
 "I just feel like he’s making it way more personal than it had to be," Parsons said Tuesday.
We got something for that.
Trust the Cowboys?
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
The Cowboys, 28 years and counting since the franchise’s last whiff of Super Bowl glory, have proven (again) that they cannot be trusted as a legitimate contender.
Maybe that changes by January.
But that needs to be proven in the flesh as they’ve over-promised so many times before in morphing from America’s Team to America’s Biggest Tease.
Such an identity remains intact about now.
At this point, any threats coming from the Cowboys about what they’ll do to the 49ers have zero credibility.
Remember, Dallas was supposed to use the prime-time showcase on Sunday night as a measuring stick.
And the 49ers basically took that stick and cracked the Cowboys on the butt with it.
The defense that Parsons leads?
The Cowboys went to San Francisco with the unit allowing the fewest points in the league, like 10 points per game.
They left as the defense that gave up six touchdowns and 421 yards and had a terrible time getting off the field on third downs.
So, again, any promises about what will happen if they see them again would be ill-advised.
"It was always personal before the game started," Samuel told Kay Adams on the "Up & Adams" podcast.
Or touchdown, 49ers.
Can we stick a fork in the Cowboys already and declare that this season is kaput?
Maybe not yet.
It’s the NFL, with its week-to-week reality checks.
Look at what happened to Buffalo, a week after destroying the Dolphins: They went to London to get served up by the Jaguars.
This is not the time of year to draw conclusions about what will happen in January – even though it seems clear that if they stay healthy, the 49ers and Eagles will be major factors.
And as long as Patrick Mahomes is in the lineup, the Chiefs have a shot.
"It’s been a wide range of performance, as wide a range that I could ever recall in a 5-week period," McCarthy said after the debacle on Sunday night.
On paper, the Cowboys are not done yet.
There are 12 games left.
Just one of Dallas’ next six opponents – Philadelphia (5-0) – currently has a winning record.
A path to get back into the race in the NFC East still exists, given the two matchups looming against the Eagles in November and December.
Then again, the Eagles will be just as eager as the 49ers to demonstrate a special kind of animosity toward Dallas.
In any event, the expectation correction for the Cowboys has just happened.
After showing that figuratively they don’t belong on the same field with the 49ers, the Cowboys find themselves facing a must-win predicament when meeting the Los Angeles Chargers at SoFi Stadium on Monday night.
It’s about survival, or at least rebounding to restore some confidence after absorbing so many blows during the humiliating loss on Sunday night.
It’s a striking pattern.
Including the playoffs, teams that played the 49ers last season were 0-15 in games the following week.
The Chiefs won their next game after facing San Francisco last October, but it came after Kansas City had a bye week.
And the Eagles had a bye week following the NFC title game, although it indeed lost in the Super Bowl.
Pittsburgh snapped the “next-week” streak last month.
Blown out by the 49ers in Week 1, the Steelers rallied to defeat Cleveland the following week.
The next three 49ers opponents, though, followed suit with last season’s pattern and lost the following week.
Now the trend is attached to Dallas’ challenge to get back on track after a grueling loss to the 49ers.
Tony Pollard, the Cowboys running back limited to 29 rushing yards at San Francisco, was upbeat on Sunday night when assessing how they can rebound.
"Get back to work," Pollard said.
You have to prepare.
You have to get ready and brush it off.
See the 49ers again?
Officially, that’s a maybe for the Cowboys this season.
No, the Cowboys likely can’t achieve the dream of winning a championship without getting past the 49ers.
But considering the way San Francisco has owned them in recent years, the Cowboys had better be careful of what they wish for.
NFL power rankings entering Week 6 of the 2023 season (previous rank in parentheses):
49ers (1): What else is there to say about a team that's been in the top spot since the season started?
S.F.’s +99 point differential is already 20 better than the next team.
Probably have the best defense (though that can be settled at Cleveland on Sunday).
Might have the best offense.
Stars on basically every unit.
And second-year QB Brock Purdy continues to effectively play mistake-free football, his league-leading 123.1 passer rating testament to that.
Eagles (3): They're 5-0 in successive seasons for the first time.
Next up, the Jets – a team Philadelphia has never lost to in 12 previous meetings.
Feels safe to slot the reigning NFC champs at 6-0 and look ahead to their Week 7 date with Miami.
Sunday, Montgomery became the first Detroit rusher to top 100 yards in consecutive games since … Kevin Jones in 2004.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Weird as this sounds, Milano might be the more valuable player to Buffalo's defense.
Dolphins (7): How fast is Miami?
Per Next Gen Stats, the Fins have produced the five top speeds among all plays this season and seven of the top nine.
Jaguars (14): The first team to play multiple international games in a season is now the first to win multiple – both coming against teams with winning records.
Stay in Europe, Jags – it seems inevitable, and you're apparently better for it.
Cowboys (4): Good thing they're not part of the NFC West … even if it would make more sense geographically.
In its two defeats (to Arizona and San Francisco), Dallas has lost by a collective 70-26.
Steelers (12): They've gained the third-fewest yards in the league and surrendered the third most, the delta more than 600 yards.
But 11 takeaways, 17 sacks and just enough clutch plays from QB Kenny Pickett can mask such warts … and propel you to the top of the AFC North.
Ravens (8): It's been an uneven start, to say the least, but it's also unusual to play four of five away from home so early in the season – and Baltimore's three-game roadie winds to a conclusion Sunday in London.
Rams (9): Sure, they're 2-3, but they've hung tough against the league's top teams, San Francisco and Philadelphia.
Seahawks (10): Coming off their bye, they're currently not scheduled to face a team with a winning record until November.
Time to make serious hay toward a playoff berth.
Buccaneers (16): This marks three times in four years that QB Baker Mayfield has won three of his first four starts.
His only 4-1 beginning led to a deep playoff run in Cleveland.
Saints (20): Great sidebar to Sunday's 34-0 runaway in New England.
Pretty cool story amid the NFL's annual "Crucial Catch" campaign for cancer screening.
Falcons (18): If you know anything about the NFL, and running backs in particular, best to appreciate their genius while you can.
Texans (11): No matter Sunday's outcome, this will be their best six-game start since 2019.
But it would help if Houston would run the ball better after cracking 90 yards just once so far this season.
Chargers (22): Did you know WR Keenan Allen owns the NFL record for most games – three – with at least 15 receptions?
With wingman Mike Williams down for the count, wouldn't be a shock if Allen extends that mark before this year is out.
Bengals (26): They'll only be on the road two more times before December, so maybe the comforts of home are good for QB Joe Burrow's calf and team focus with a brutal upcoming schedule (Seattle, San Francisco, Buffalo) for a Cincinnati club that may finally otherwise be turning the corner.
Raiders (28): If they're going to salvage their season and use Monday's win as a catapult, now is the time.
The Silver and Black face three one-win teams (Patriots, Bears, Giants) over the next four weeks.
Packers (19): No worse way to go into a bye week than off a terrible loss.
But Green Bay's next three opponents (Broncos, Vikings, Rams) have a combined four wins, so hopefully a good time for the Pack to get healthy figuratively and literally.
Vikings (25): Why is offensive balance often a virtue?
Consider one-win Minnesota, which has thrown more passes (204) than any team in the league while attempting the fewest runs (91).
Bears (32): The Justin Fields-to-DJ Moore Show has sparked Chicago's revival.
But look closer, and you'll also note a running game averaging better than 170 yards the past two weeks and some encouraging signs of life on defense at Washington.
Commanders (15): Only Denver has surrendered more points than Washington's 160.
Only Minnesota has turned it over more times than Washington's 10.
Some consolation for a team that hasn't run an offensive play with the lead yet and has now been outscored by a league-most 91 points.
Cardinals (27): No NFC team is blitzing less frequently – worth wondering if that's the right approach given the way Arizona's D has been torn up the past two weeks.
Patriots (23): If the dynasty wasn't already dead, then life support has officially been unplugged.
Panthers (31): The NFL's only winless team just turned in its worst defensive performance (42 points allowed) of the season.
A trip to Miami.
Follow USA TODAY Sports' Nate Davis on X, formerly Twitter @ByNateDavis.
Week 5 in the NFL provided needed perspective.
In all, the slate didn't provide too many stunning outcomes or last-second twists.
Here's our full rundown of the biggest winners and losers from Week 5 in the NFL:
What's scary about the 5-0 49ers is not solely the manner in which they thoroughly dismantled the Dallas Cowboys in a 42-10 blowout on Sunday night, but rather that it all seemed a little ordinary.
That's life as the clearly best team in football after five weeks.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Still, let's not let one of the most sterling performances of the early season pass by without giving it proper recognition.
With the rest of the October schedule filled by teams at or below .500, it could be some time before we see a meaningful challenge for a group that has tied a franchise record with 15 consecutive wins.
Is it too late for them to offer to take either the Baltimore Ravens' or Tennessee Titans' spot in next week's London tilt to go for the triple?
In handling the Buffalo Bills in a 25-20 win after last week's victory over the Atlanta Falcons, the Jaguars became the first NFL team to play consecutive games abroad.
But there were plenty of things Sunday that Jacksonville can take back home to Duval County.
Trevor Lawrence pushed past some miscues to establish the electric connection with Calvin Ridley (seven catches, 122 yards) that fans had been hoping to see since this summer.
And the defense kept Josh Allen off balance with consistent pressure via the blitz.
With a manageable schedule before the Week 9 bye, the Jaguars have a chance to create some distance in the AFC South race and set up a favorable outlook for playoff seeding.
Netting one offensive touchdown against what is far and away the league's worst defense is nothing to brag about, but Sunday was about far more than the stats for Hackett and the New York Jets.
No need to hold back anymore, however, after Sunday's 31-21 win over Denver.
But Hackett can now let the result – as well as the Jets' players and social media team – do all the talking for him.
This week, the second-year signal-caller was far more catalyst than caretaker in a last-second 21-19 comeback win against the Houston Texans.
Long-awaited connections with his top targets in tight end Kyle Pitts (seven catches, 87 yards) and wide receiver Drake London (six catches, 78 yards) finally materialized.
Maybe dispatching the Arizona Cardinals 34-20 in a get-right game doesn't completely undo the myriad setbacks the team suffered in its first four games, but the Bengals appear to be on a much steadier course now.
Burrow finally looked fluid and comfortable, with much of his mobility seemingly having returned after the quarterback was hampered by a calf injury since the start of the season.
And just one week after he explained in frustration that he's "always (expletive) open," Chase exploded for 15 catches, 192 yards and three touchdowns.
The squeaky receiver gets the targets.
For all the histrionics about Cincinnati's start, the Bengals now stand at 2-3 with their star players seemingly back in a good place.
There's still work to be done, but there's no reason to write this team off.
One of the more disappointing developments of September was the steadily building training camp buzz around Pickens – the Pittsburgh Steelers' ultra-promising second-year receiver – fading into a dull hum amid persistent woes plaguing his entire offense.
For one week, at least, fans got a glimpse of the dynamic downfield threat that Pickens can be.
Trailing by four with just over two minutes remaining against the Baltimore Ravens, Steelers quarterback Kenny Pickett found the 6-3, 200-pound target on a back-shoulder throw for a 21-yard gain.
Two plays later, Pickens dusted Ravens cornerback Marlon Humphrey – who was playing in his first game back after August foot surgery – for a 41-yard go-ahead touchdown in a 17-10 triumph.
It's probably not the kind of play that the Steelers faithful can routinely expect from oft-criticized offensive coordinator Matt Canada.
But incorporating Pickens more can only help invigorate what has been a languishing attack.
On Sunday, he got a reminder of what it's like to be on the other side of that dynamic.
It's not clear if the Cowboys could have done much differently to have had a semblance of a chance in Sunday night's catastrophic outing against the 49ers.
What is apparent: As both as a coach and a play-caller, McCarthy proved to be no match for Kyle Shanahan.
In what was clearly designed to be a statement game for the Cowboys after the 49ers ended their playoff hopes in the past two seasons, Dallas was outclassed in almost every facet.
What McCarthy can muster might be enough to beat up on the bottom and middle tiers of the NFC, but any notion of the Cowboys beating the 49ers – and potentially the Philadelphia Eagles – on the road in January seems like a distant dream.
That kind of carelessness is no doubt maddening to a coach who hammers fundamentals and sound ball security.
But this pairing is looking more tenuous with each week, and Jones might need to find mentorship elsewhere to get his career back on track.
Lamar Jackson unraveled late in the fourth quarter with an interception that paved the way for Pittsburgh's comeback and a fumble that deflated any hopes for Baltimore's own rally.
And prior to all that, a blocked punt for a safety helped spark a Steelers team that had been stagnant.
The slip-up could prove costly in the long run.
The Ravens had a chance to begin pulling away from the pack in the AFC North, but instead they fell into a first-place tie with Pittsburgh.
Whatever mojo they had from last week's statement win over the Miami Dolphins must not have made it through customs for the overseas showdown with the Jaguars.
The offense was imbalanced and error-prone.
The defense was trampled for 29 first downs and 196 rushing yards.
Most worrisome, however, were the mounting injuries.
If the Bills don't shore things up, this could be a harbinger of the franchise's fate against the AFC's contender class.
There's still no reason to sound the alarm on a No.
1 pick who's just four starts into his professional career.
Still, after the Detroit Lions' 42-24 win over the Carolina Panthers, it's difficult to watch Young operate in this offense without wincing.
The second of Young's two interceptions, however, was the real cause for concern, as cornerback Jerry Jacobs baited the typically discerning signal-caller into the kind of throw he avoided throughout his college career.
The signs are troubling in Carolina, as there's scant support from the offensive line or running game, and the coaching staff seems to be doing Young few favors.
While this season appears to be a write-off and one that should solely be measured by Young's development, substantial change might still be required at some point.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
“So, I guess that counts.”
It was that kind of night for the 49ers (5-0), who remained perfect with their most complete game of the season.
While they handled the fundamentals with authority, they were also able to spice it up with the trick play that has been in the playbook for the better part of two years.
The 49ers ran the play during walk-through practices on Wednesday, Friday and again on Saturday.
It worked like this: McCaffrey took a handoff toward right tackle, then tossed the football to Samuel, circling back on a reverse.
Of course, the style points for the 49ers came with plenty of substance as they dismantled Dallas in myriad ways.
And you thought the gap between these teams was tight?
Take the quarterbacking.
No, it’s not all on Prescott.
His running game was feeble.
Dallas’ defense couldn’t slow down the 49ers offense.
And it was not the night for the Cowboys (3-2) to get into a shootout, unable to even get a first down until the second quarter (they finished with eight).
Prescott had three interceptions (14-of-24, 153 yards, 1 TD, 51.6 rating) and was sacked three times.
Surely, the 49ers defense had much to do with Prescott’s troubles.
No one exemplified that quite like linebacker Fred Warner.
In leading the 49ers with eight tackles (5 solo), Warner notched a sack, forced a fumble with a timely punch-out of the football from the arms of Tony Pollard and intercepted a deflected pass.
Before leaving, Warner maintained that there is no such thing as luck when it comes to big-time performances.
By that, he wasn’t dismissing the breaks that teams can capitalize on.
Instead, he preached that preparation and skill provide impetus to the breaks.
He demonstrated that with his knack on the turnovers.
That’s striking when considering how many 49ers defenders remain from the 2019 team that advanced to the Super Bowl.
In any event, there was the sense that they haven’t clicked yet this season after being the NFL’s stingiest defense last season.
The latest effort, though, marked a major step.
In allowing just the eight first downs and four turnovers, the 49ers controlled Dallas with a 4-for-11 clip on third downs.
And the domination on both sides of the ball was reflected with San Francisco’s 37 minutes of possession.
When did Warner feel it would be that type of night?
I’ve been a part of a lot of good teams since I’ve been here, but the way the offense is playing is unlike anything I’ve seen.
“That right there lets me know as long as the defense is doing our job, we’re always going to have a chance.”
Like a chance for a special season.
And arrested her for.
Less than two weeks before, the Florida woman had instead stood for a mugshot.
Police knocked on her door just before 3 a.m. and arrested her for alleged voter fraud.
"She was reliving a nightmare that she had lived five years ago, because she voted," said Akbar, who stood beside her at the beginning of a Tuesday afternoon press conference.
Her probation was supposed to end next month.
Until then, she wasn't eligible to vote.
But she did.
Akbar and the group standing behind him called the arrest voter intimidation, pointing to all the other people arrested around the state following eligibility confusion.
“This [is] about instilling fear in people in our community, to say, 'Well, I don't want to get in any trouble, so I'm not going to come and vote.'"
They called for the state attorney's office behind them, headed by Jack Campbell, to drop the case.
"I believe intent is an element here."
They called on the state to fix the confusion around voting eligibility instead of arresting people for it.
Despite that, court records said she registered to vote in 2020 as a Democrat.
The government gave her a voter registration card.
She proceeded to cast a ballot in that year's general election and the 2022 primary election.
A year ago, she told a Florida Department of Law Enforcement investigator she believed she could because "she was told she could when she was released from prison" and local TV news stories that "indicated felons could vote."
The investigator obtained documents from the Florida Department of Corrections showing that she wasn't provided any information by the prison indicating whether she could or couldn't vote.
The Tallahassee Police Department made the arrest.
Spokesperson Alicia Hill said the timing was the result of an officer "proactively searching for wanted people."
"I’m sorry her sleep was disturbed," he said, including a screenshot of an article about her charges.
“Our religion says God will fix it.”
Bourgeois had rotting flesh and numerous ulcers including one the size of a basketball, court documents said.
It wasn’t until Bourgeois started bleeding from her ulcers that Leon County Emergency Medical Services was called, and she died weeks later, in 2015.
She wasn't arrested for those things.
Akbar echoed that sentiment in a message to previously incarcerated Floridians.
"Don't be intimidated," Akbar said.
"They would rather go and try to distract instead of address the real issues here," he continued.
"The fact they still don't have a response is troubling, and it's a signal of what their priorities are."
Many of the people behind the podium Tuesday have tried for years to get the state to do more to alleviate voter confusion.
Before the 2022 midterm election, DeSantis announced a batch of arrests of people who voted despite having previous murder or sexual offenses.
Most of those arrested were Black, were issued voter registration cards and said they thought they were eligible to vote.
The confusion goes back to 2018 when voters approved Amendment 4, which aimed to restore voting rights to 1.4 million people barred because of past felony convictions.
Months later, the legislature passed a bill signed into law by DeSantis to keep hundreds of thousands of felons from becoming eligible to vote until they met all their past legal financial obligations.
Just like it never allowed those with felony murder and sex offenses, the amendment never allowed those to vote before completing their felony probation.
Still, people are confused about how the laws apply to them.
And, under Florida statute, the onus is on the voter to get it right.
Voter fraud is a felony offense.
But those gathered at the press conference Tuesday said the onus should be on the state.
They urged the state to create a checkbox for Floridians previously convicted of felonies trying to get registration to vote.
It would add additional eligibility verification without possible legal consequences in case of errors, they said.
They also called for the state to create a system for voters to easily be able to determine their eligibility.
"It's within the state's capacity to create this database," Proctor said, pointing to other databases the state maintains, like those for licenses.
"To keep this intentionally murky and ambivalent and confusing... this is nothing but a literacy exam."
"The law concerning elections is both new and has been very confused, and we are taking that into consideration each time we review [a case]," he said.
Charge: Voter fraud.
Then police came knocking at 3 a.m.
DeSantis pressed on voter arrests:Bill Maher presses DeSantis on Black voter arrests, hours after one arrested in Tallahassee
This reporting content is supported by a partnership with Freedom Forum and Journalism Funding Partners.
Attorneys representing Lindell are asking the courts for permission to quit his case according to court documents.
Attorney Andrew Parker claims that Lindell owes them millions of dollars he cannot pay back.
Lindell spoke to the Associated Press and confirmed that he does not have enough money to pay the lawyers and understands why they are dropping the case.
Parker claims that this would put the firm at a substantial financial risk.
Parker wrote in his fillings that Lindell paid the firm through the end of 2022.
However, according to Parker, the payments slowed down in 2023 when fees for litigation increased.
In May, the firm received payments over 60 days late and the payment did not meet the total of bills due.
In July and August, no payments were made at all.
Lindell has seen much financial trouble this year.
Along with the lawsuit against him, many retailers like Walmart discontinued his products after he backed former President Donald Trump's claims about the 2020 election.
In April, Lindell was ordered to pay $5 million to a software engineer for breaching a contract with the engineer.
Lindell used data to support his claims that China helped in the 2020 elections and helped President Joe Biden win.
This was all part of his "Prove Mike Wrong Challenge" at the "Cyber Symposium" in 2021 located in South Dakota.
The company was impacted by Lindell's backing of former President Donald Trump's election fraud claims, for which he is currently fighting off a $1.3 billion defamation lawsuit.
His company also lost an arbitration case in April related to election fraud claims, leading to his company, Lindell LLC, being ordered to pay $5 million.
"Not just in the House for the people of this country but we see how dangerous of a world it is and how things can change so quickly."
The conference vote however, is just a sign of approval from House Republicans at large.
The House still has to formally elect a new speaker on the House floor, and lawmakers are still free to nominate other candidates.
House Republicans control the lower chamber by a razor-thin majority.
2 ranking House Republican.
House Republicans could move to hold a speaker election on the floor as early as Wednesday afternoon.
The onus, they say, is on House Republicans to elect a new speaker.
Republican presidential candidate Asa Hutchinson told voters about his vision for America's economy, the future of Social Security, the war in Israel and other major issues around the world during a New Hampshire town hall sponsored by the USA Today Network on Tuesday.
But behind the scenes, the former Arkansas governor got more personal.
Donning a navy blue suit and a white shirt, Hutchinson, 72, talked about what’s on his playlist, what books he’s currently reading and his guilty pleasure TV picks.
As he continues his bid for the White House, here’s a closer look at some of Hutchinson’s favorites on the campaign trail.
Amidst the chaos of a GOP primary campaign, Hutchinson shared that he listens to a wide range of music, from country songwriter and singer Johnny Cash − who was born in Arkansas − to "Come Away with Me" singer Norah Jones.
And Hutchinson usually opts for nonfiction reads.
“I love history books,” Hutchinson said.
He’s said he's also reading "Why We're Polarized," a book by Ezra Klein about American's political divides.
“It's a fascinating book as to how we got to this point of division in our country,” Hutchinson said.
“I haven't got to the rest of it yet as to how we're going to end that divide, but it's a good study that I'm engaging in.”
“I'm excited about finishing that,” Hutchinson said.
Hutchinson told USA TODAY that one of his priorities is to lower interest rates on student loans, saying it's important that students are able to afford the next steps in their education.
When he was in law school, Hutchinson shared that he couldn’t afford to put gas in his car or buy books.
"We've got to lower the cost of gas," Hutchinson said.
And then you're always looking ahead as to a job opportunity.
If your satellite and cable TV goes out for more than 24 hours, you would be entitled to a refund under a proposal being introduced by the Federal Communications Commission on Wednesday.
The proposal would push cable and satellite providers to give consumers their money back when they fall short on a service, according to a senior FCC official.
Two prominent blackouts this year alone served as a catalyst for the commission’s proposal, the senior official said.
What the refunds look like will vary, the official said.
They will discuss whether refunds will come in the form of refunded money, credit on bill, or decreased bill for the following month.
In addition to refunds, the commission is proposing a reporting component.
Currently, blackouts are reported to the commission voluntarily, which makes it difficult to track how often they occur and by which companies.
Separately the commission addressed issues on broadband oversight in an Oct. 5 fact sheet about the federal government's lack of authority over broadband outages and how it "leaves open a national security loophole."
But restoring the commission's oversight with net neutrality rules could help bolster their authority "to require internet service providers to report and fix internet outages" and also inform the public of such outages.
DirecTV put measures in place to grant consumers with refunds, and The Buffalo News also reported that Charter began communicating with customers about a "prorated credit for Disney content" that wasn't available to customers during the blackout.
For now, the commission's proposal is about starting a conversation about refunds before they solicit comments from the public, the senior official said.
The story has been updated to reflect the proposed rule affects satellite and cable providers.
The climate change issue is getting critical: Warmer, drier weather could threaten the beer supply.
That's because harvests of hops, a crucial ingredient in beer making, could decline by as much as 18% in Europe by 2050 – and those hops that are harvested may have less of the substances needed to give some beers their distinct character, according to research published Tuesday in Nature Communications.
This predicted decline in hop yield and alpha (acids) content "calls for immediate adaptation measures to stabilize an ever-growing global sector," wrote the researchers from Europe and the U.K.
The researchers studied hop production in the periods of 1971–1994 and 1995–2018 in Germany, the Czech Republic and Slovenia.
Since 1995, the average annual hop yields across most of Europe have declined as much as 19%, but had remained stable in the Czech Republic.
"Unfortunately, simulations of future developments point to a further decline in both yield and alpha."
Is beer good for your health?
The researchers simulated future crops and climate conditions and estimate hop harvests that are 4% to 18% smaller by 2050 and a continued 20% to 31% decline in the acids in the hops needed for bitterness.
"It is exported to all countries that produce better beers."
"I'm not downplaying the challenges, because they are there."
Craft breweries also rely more on aroma hops – used for India pale ales and hazy IPAs – than the styles studied in this report.
Starbucks:Coffee giant releases PSL varsity jackets, tattoos and Spotify playlist for 20th anniversary
But climate change truly is on brewers' minds across the globe.
“Although with hotter weather the consumption of beer may grow and become an opportunity for us, climate change will have a serious impact,” he said.
“There is a risk that we may not be able to produce enough beer.”
Anheuser-Busch InBev, maker of Budweiser and Bud Light, and Danish beer maker Carlsberg have invested in drought-resistant barley strains grown in Africa as a hedge against climate change's effects, Fortune reported.
"Yes, we're facing a lot of challenges," he said, "but there's really smart people working on those problems."
What's everyone talking about?
Sign up for our trending newsletter to get the latest news of the day
"I was always the one to be very on the edge, very adventurous, and I don't think that's ever disappeared," the 33-year-old says.
"I've always liked to imagine a lot."
This imaginative nature has manifested throughout DPR IAN's life, making its mark in his work as a singer-songwriter, director and creative.
IAN's latest EP "Dear Insanity...", out now, captures his essence as a storyteller, diving deeper into the expansive universe he creates within his music.
"For me, this whole EP just encompasses a journey into your consciousness," he says.
IAN was born and raised in Australia.
Though he is currently based in Los Angeles, IAN is one of several artists under Dream Perfect Regime, or DPR, which based in Seoul, South Korea.
Since its inception, the collective has become known worldwide for its dynamic multimedia work and roster of talent, with IAN serving as its chief director and editor.
IAN's ethos is personified by his creativity.
Through his releases, IAN has meticulously constructed his own universe, which he calls "The Other Side."
He has come to represent his mental health through the personas "MITO" and "Mr. Insanity," with the former serving as the "the main attraction" of his discography, says IAN.
His second EP "Dear Insanity..." expands the story of MITO and Mr. Insanity, chronicling the artist's introspection.
The seven tracks on "Dear Insanity..." detail IAN's journey as each acts as a "snapshot" into certain moments of his life.
When IAN was a teenager, he was diagnosed with bipolar disorder.
This has influenced his creative work, with it serving as an outlet and extension of himself.
He likens this Batman and the Joker.
"You understand the Joker more by looking at Batman and seeing it through his eyes of how he sees the Joker and vice versa," IAN says.
He wanted to do the same for MITO and Mr. Insanity, building a foundation between the two.
"For me, it's to have people further understand who MITO is," he says.
"I had to show them what he was fighting up against."
Storytelling is a key aspect to IAN's work, whether it be visually or sonically.
With this, he opens the door for deeper understanding of his past.
"The deeper you go in, I sometimes feel like there are certain things that you unravel, that you had no idea about," he says.
IAN portrays this unraveling in a fanciful, inventive way with bright visuals, as well as via distinct tones and genres.
This underscores the intricate approach of IAN's art.
Everything has its link and can be drawn back to an earlier point.
"I've always loved being taken on a journey because essentially that means you're linking so many things," he says.
"I thought, 'Why just make a concept that's going to change every single time?'"
IAN hasn't shied away from vulnerability.
But he recognizes the responsibility that comes with being open.
"If you've been vulnerable, you can't always share the goods," he says, adding he remains careful of what he speaks about.
With his work, IAN believes he provides something to relate to.
"It's just that comfort in knowing, 'Oh my artist also feels exactly what I'm feeling.'"
"With my understanding and knowledge of learning as I go, I can also just give my two cents of what I'm discovering," he says.
Over the last year, inflation has been cooling.
But from the gas pump to the grocery store, the overall price of living still feels stubbornly high for many Americans.
The Federal Reserve has tried to strike a fragile balance: bring inflation down by raising interest rates, without pushing the economy to the brink.
In August, consumer prices rose 3.7% from a year earlier, up from a 3.2% increase in July.
That’s the second straight rise after 12 consecutive declines in annual inflation.
The next consumer price index, or CPI report, will be published on October 12, 2023, at 8:30 a.m.
The monthly update provides key information on the prices of various consumer goods and services and how much they have risen over the past month and year.
The data also gives an idea of whether inflation is slowing again or accelerating.
While it is easy to see and measure those price changes, it is something else to actually understand them.
Inflation can impact many things besides costs, such as employment and wages.
So, what is inflation, and what causes it?
Ready to retire?
How much money do you need and when you should start to save
"Inflation, though, really is meant to only refer to all goods and services, together, rising in price by some common amount," he explained.
Inflation can be caused by several factors.
In this instance, more people are spending money on goods or services that are not readily available to meet those demands, so producers begin to raise prices.
Another cause of inflation is a lack of producers.
"Labor is the primary component of cost of producing anything," he explained.
There is also a level of "built-in inflation" within economies, where central banks try to get inflation to hover roughly at a certain level.
In the U.S., the Federal Reserve's target inflation is 2%.
This means businesses can increase prices by 2% each year, and it shouldn't impose a cost burden on consumers.
Workers can also ask for a 2% wage raise based on these increases, so they can still afford goods and services.
Rent inflation:Tenants struggle with rising rent as prices hit all-time highs
CPI stands for the consumer price index.
It is a metric used by the US Bureau of Labor Statistics to gauge how much the price of consumer goods and services has changed over time.
It can effectively measure inflation in an urban market and give government officials and everyday citizens alike an idea of the health of the overall economy.
The most recent CPI report, released in early August, showed that consumer prices in July rose 3.2% from a year earlier, up from a 3% annual rise in June but far below a four-decade high of 9.1% in June 2022.
Month over month, prices increased a modest 0.2%, similar to June.
In the most basic sense, inflation is measured by comparing the current price of goods and services against their recent history.
This is done by looking at a number of government-released data reports.
The CPI is the most prominent of these metrics.
Released by the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, the consumer price index measures the prices of goods in an urban market, which represents over 90% of the American public.
The CPI looks at a 'fixed basket' of some 80,000 goods and services to come up with these numbers.
What gets put in that basket depends on the consumer expenditures survey which polls Americans to determine which goods are important.
The importance of those goods then determines their weight in the CPI– for example, the price of something like gasoline, which forms an integral part of many people’s cost of living, will contribute more than other items.
The CPI does not just have one version though.
Another version – the chained consumer price Index for all urban consumers is used to adjust tax brackets.
The virtue of the chained CPI is that it takes into account the product substitutions shoppers make, which happens often when prices go up amid inflation.
In doing this, it provides a more accurate look at consumer spending and doesn’t overstate inflation.
Inflation can also be measured through the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE).
This metric, released by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, takes a more holistic view.
Rather than calculating the change in prices for goods paid solely out of pocket for consumers, the PCE takes into account all expenses, including health care coverage compensated by insurance or the government.
The PCE is what the Fed uses as its gold standard measure of inflation.
The final piece of the puzzle to factor in is ‘core inflation.’ This is a term used by economists to reflect the rate of inflation, excluding prices for food and energy which are notoriously variable.
"Inflation is sort of greasing the wheels of the labor market," he said.
"It is a way to do some adjustments without actually having to cut nominal wages, and the economy just seems to operate better like that."
If inflation goes beyond its target percentage, though, it can cause uncertainty within the market.
In order to control inflation, one of the Federal Reserve's main tools is the federal funds rate, which is the rate banks charge each other for overnight loans.
If that rate rises, banks generally pass on their additional cost to customers.
Even though the Fed does not directly control all interest rates in the country, when it raises the fed funds rate, other interest rates eventually follow, including adjustable-rate mortgages, credit cards, home equity lines of credit, and other loans.
Higher rates curb borrowing and spending, cool off an overheated economy and fend off inflation spikes.
Whoever is spending most on goods or services can be negatively impacted by inflation.
High inflation can cause consumers to cut spending and prompt the Fed to raise interest rates - both of which can lead to a downturn.
That can result in easing price increases.
"A big rise in the unemployment rate is going to put a lot of downward pressure on inflation," he said.
"As the economy slows, inflationary pressures tend to relent."
A recession isn’t determined by a negative quarter of gross domestic product or even two for that matter.
Rather, it’s a significant decline in economic activity resulting from several factors, including high unemployment, a slowdown of goods produced and sold, and wages falling in addition to negative GDP readings.
That’s according to the National Bureau of Economic Research, which gives the official ruling on when a U.S. recession starts and ends.
So, inflation could produce a recession, but it is not a definite outcome.
Consumers were rocked by surging food prices last year.
In July, the cost of groceries rose 0.3%.
This, however, still pushed down the yearly increase to 3.6%.
The price of rice and bread both rose 0.9%, uncooked ground beef increased 1.5% while cookies rose 0.8%.
Chicken and fish prices both fell 1.1%, bacon was down 0.7% and eggs declined 2.2%.
This was the fifth straight monthly decrease for eggs after a series of sharp bird flu-related increases, and costs are now down 13.7% over the last year.
Costs to dine out are up 7.1% over the past year.
Much like other aspects of the economy, inflation can cause a raise in prices for rent as well.
And in May, housing costs were the biggest contributor to inflation, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
However, increases have somewhat slowed down.
Annually, rent eased to 8%, according to the CPI report.
The consumer price index, or CPI, measures the average change over time in the prices paid by consumers for a variety of different consumer goods and services, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Core prices exclude volatile food and energy items and generally provide a better measure of longer-term trends.
They were up 0.2% in July.
This left the annual increase at 4.7%, down just slightly from June’s 4.8% increase and well above the Fed's 2% target.
Baked potatoes are an autumn staple, especially as we make our way into the football and holiday seasons.
They make a great party snack or an easy weeknight dinner – you could even try this loaded baked potato skin board or loaded baked potato soup to impress your friends and family.
Here are a few quick tricks to keep up your sleeve for the next time you’re craving a baked potato, including cooking temperatures to know and topping ideas to try.
Internal temperature isn’t as crucial for a potato as it is for meat, but you’ll still want a baked potato to reach around 210 degrees, the Idaho Potato Commission advises.
If you want to let residual heat do the rest of the cooking for you, you can take your potato out of the oven after it reaches 185 degrees.
But beyond exact temperatures, the best way to tell if a potato is done is by sticking a fork or knife into it – if it slides through the potato easily, it’s good to go.
This will take between 45 minutes to an hour in a 400-degree oven, according to the Food Network.
If you want to speed up the cooking process, throw the potato in the microwave for a few minutes before placing it in the oven.
You can also bake a potato in the air fryer by setting it to 375 degrees and letting your potato cook for 50 minutes to an hour.
Boiling your potatoes?
Making a baked potato is simple, but there are a few things to keep in mind.
Here’s how to do it right:
How you top your baked potato is up to you: Are you content with salt, pepper and sour cream?
Do you load up your baked potato with chives and bacon?
Butter or olive oil is essential, but the possibilities are endless with other toppings.
Here are a few favorites to consider:
Microwaving a potato to baked perfection is a serious time saver, but some people are die-hard oven enthusiasts.
First, poke holes in your potato with a fork to release the steam, then cover it with oil and seasonings.
Place your potato in a microwave-safe dish and cook for 5 minutes in the microwave for one potato, or 5 to 7 minutes for two potatoes.
Flip the potatoes and cook them for another 3 minutes, the Food Network suggests.
Crispy Parmesan roasted potatoes:Try this one pan, delicious weeknight meal
USA TODAY is exploring the questions you and others ask every day.
From "What is the healthiest vegetable?"
Head to our Just Curious section to see what else we can answer for you.
"Going gray" is something few men try to prevent and some are even proud of.
For women, it's often a different story.
While only 31% of men pluck their gray hairs when they first start appearing, 82% of women do the same, per one clinical survey.
Women also turn to dyeing or coloring their hair more often than men do − with approximately half of them doing so, according to one report.
Such efforts are often employed to hide signs of getting older, but age isn't always the only factor at play.
While most people start getting gray hairs in their mid to late 30s, others do so much earlier, showing that age alone isn't the culprit behind hair changing color.
Experts weigh in on what these other causes are and whether there's anything you can do to keep the gray hairs at bay.
Graying hair is what happens when color-producing cells in the body stop producing a natural pigment known as melanin.
Such triggers include overexposure to sunlight as UV rays can create free radicals that damage the cells that give hair its color.
Vitamin B12 deficiency can also cause premature graying in some people.
The National Institutes of Health has published a report showing that stress can also cause one's hair to prematurely turn gray.
More common than environmental or behavioral factors though, the timing of one's hair turning gray "is mostly driven by genetics," says Angela Lamb, MD, a dermatologist at Mount Sinai in New York City.
"Sure, you might be the first person in your family that you know that is going gray prematurely," she explains, "but the research supports that it is predominately genetically driven."
Once that change begins taking place many are eager to know: can you stop it from progressing or even prevent it from happening altogether?
The short answer is no, not absolutely.
But as the saying goes, "though you can't change your genes, you can change your behavior," and certain behaviors can impact both the timing and the degree to which one's hair turns gray.
"Some things that can help include maintaining a balanced diet, ensuring adequate intake of essential vitamins and minerals − particularly vitamin B12 and folic acid − and refraining from smoking," advises Michelle Henry, MD, a board certified and Harvard trained dermatologist.
She also recommends limiting exposure to environmental pollutants that can cause oxidative stress or create free radicals "that could harm hair or accelerate graying."
Others want to know if it's possible to get their color back after their hair has already turned gray.
There again, it depends on a couple of factors.
But if it's been caused by nutritional deficiencies or a medical condition like thyroid disease, improving such deficiencies or treating the condition may prove helpful.
And when stress is the culprit, research shows and the experts say there may be a window of opportunity to reverse the graying hair once it first starts turning if stress levels are brought back down.
In such cases, "manage stress through relaxation techniques like meditation or yoga," suggests Henry.
If stress isn't the issue, however, or if you're worried that you're graying earlier than family members your age or because of something else, a conversation with your doctor may be in order.
"If premature graying concerns you," Henry advises, "consult your healthcare professional to rule out any underlying medical conditions."
More:Pamela Anderson's bold no-makeup look and the 'natural beauty revolution'
So California’s liberal Gov.
The law will ban the sale, distribution and production of these traditionally delicious food additives, which are used in thousands of products we eagerly put in our mouths.
Newsom’s attack on tastiness doesn’t actually impact Skittles – thank the rainbow!
– because brave candy advocates persuaded lawmakers to exclude titanium dioxide from the list of banned additives.
(Everyone knows it’s the titanium dioxide that gives Skittles their flavorful pop.)
Still, the four unjustly targeted additives will require producers of certain food-like comestibles to change recipes by 2027 if they want to sell their products in the most-populated state in the country.
What kind of newfangled communism is this?
And since when does a governor have the power to tell me when and where I can guzzle brominated vegetable oil?
Am I now supposed to start eating fruit NOT by the foot?!
I don’t recall asking for government protection from chemicals I don’t understand and didn’t technically realize I’m eating.
But if you think knowing that Red Dye 3 has been found to cause cancer in animals and has been banned from use in cosmetics for more than three decades would stop me from making my annual Thanksgiving candy corn casserole, think again.
So you’re going to have to pry the Peeps and potassium bromate from my cold, dead, Red-Dye-3-stained hands.
Which, according to these actuarial tables, you should be able to do in about a month and a half.
There’s a horrific war going on between Israel and Gaza.
Many of us have been glued to the nonstop news coverage and social media feed as the horror unfolds before our eyes.
The question for all of us is how can we respond in a way that will bring hope and peace as opposed to more bloodshed and persecution.
The two of us have a long history of working with and alongside each other in community organizing and social justice work in and around Chicago.
We also just returned home from an absolutely transformative journey in Jerusalem and its surrounding area with a phenomenal interfaith group of community leaders, scholars, artists and others.
Our journey lasted for two weeks.
The last day of the trip coincided with horrific violence and attacks inside Israel on Saturday that have led to yet another round of aerial bombardment and an inhumane blockade on Gaza.
Our own fear and the fear of those who were sheltered with us was palpable.
We knew that wherever these other travelers were headed, this trauma would be carried with them and have an impact on communities across the globe and geopolitics.
We tried to comfort ourselves and others around us as we searched for a safe way home, eventually crossing into Jordan to catch flights back to America.
The stories of ghastly attacks by Hamas are gut-wrenching to watch, and there is nothing in our understanding of our faiths and righteous pursuits for justice that justify such horror.
We know that these brutal images and stories bring up deep-seated trauma for the Jewish community and worry and sadness for the many who have been killed, injured and taken captive.
Meanwhile, the carnage and blockade being imposed upon the civilian population in the Gaza Strip by an overwhelming military force is barbaric and inhumane – and yet not often condemned by the world.
The attacks on and closure of Gaza will certainly lead to the deaths of innocent children.
We leaned into one another’s rich spiritual backgrounds and commitments to justice, mercy and peace by exploring underappreciated connections to this sacred land, and in so doing, tried to forge another path for radical empathy and connection to the stories, hopes and aspirations of those working for and dreaming of more dignified pathways for all people on this land.
Attack timing desecrates our religion:Hamas took advantage of divisions in Israel to start a horrific war targeting civilians
Throughout our journey, we were reminded of the daily humiliation, hardship and injustice experienced by Palestinians living under military occupation in refugee camps and surrounding areas.
While none of that justifies the carnage of innocent civilians, it must be understood as the ongoing context in which decades-old Palestinian grievances are being ignored or exploited.
Now back in Chicago, we know our work will soon return to the issues that connected us before this journey together: social, racial and economic justice and equity in our city and ways to bring faith and other communities together around a larger vision for a more just and equitable Chicago.
Meanwhile, we cannot forget what we experienced together in the Middle East, especially at a time when much of America and news outlets seem to be cheering on Israel’s blockade and bombardment of one of the most densely populated and essentially imprisoned populations in the world.
We pray for the healthy return for all Israeli children, families and others taken hostage in the Gaza Strip as we pray for the cessation of collective punishment upon innocent Palestinian families.
We call upon our politicians to support an immediate end to the full blockade on Gaza and a humanitarian corridor for relief for families inside Gaza.
Among the things we were reminded of by many people of all faiths and backgrounds on this journey is the interconnected and interwoven reality of all our collective experiences, suffering and dreams for justice.
'Stand with Israel'?
Trump talked about hummus.
We are also concerned about the safety of Muslim and Jewish communities here in the United States as tensions flare in Israel and Gaza.
Some parts of both communities are receiving threats at this time.
Palestinian people are not the enemy; Jewish people are not the enemy.
The true enemy is any ideology that degrades and diminishes the sacred light resident in all humanity.
We recognize the fear, anger and helplessness so many feel at this precarious and violent time, but our traditions teach us to turn to prayer, loving support of one another, and working for justice and peace as outlets for these feelings and not violence.
We must stand up for the safety and security of everyone.
Our hearts break for all who live under the threat of terror and sit under the canopy of hopelessness.
We call upon our religious leaders, politicians and communities to stand together for justice and peace and not resort to sloganeering or jingoism at this time.
There is death here, and there are promises of more.
There is life here.
Anyone reading this is breathing, maybe hurting, but breathing for sure.
We have got to carry each other now.
You are either with life, or against it.
On the high seas hundreds of miles north of the Falkland Islands, a group of Western reporters boarded a Chinese fishing ship where deckhands pulled them into a dark hallway begging for help, saying they were being held against their will.
While in Uruguay, these same reporters unearthed data showing that for much of the past decade, one dead body per month has been dropped off fishing ships, mostly Chinese, on the docks in Montevideo, often with signs of severe neglect or abuse.
They uncovered myriad abuses, including forced labor, debt bondage, wage withholding, excessive working hours, physical abuse, passport confiscation, the denial of medical care and even deaths.
And the abuse doesn’t end at sea.
As part of this same investigation, reporters discovered something even bigger and darker in China’s seafood processing plants.
By using cellphone footage from inside the plants, deploying secret surveillance at factories and ports, and mining company documents and trade data, the reporters found that much of the seafood being exported to the United States and Europe from Chinese plants is processed by Uyghur workers – a highly repressed minority population whom the Chinese government detains in “reeducation” camps and forces to work in factories throughout the country.
The United States forbids the import of products made with forced labor, and it has specific laws prohibiting the import of any products made using Uyghur labor.
What 'Sound of Freedom' gets wrong:'Sound of Freedom' misleads audiences about the horrible reality of human trafficking
These new revelations about the global seafood industry have serious implications for American consumers and policymakers because more than 80% of the seafood consumed by Americans is imported, and the largest portion of that is caught by Chinese ships or processed in China's factories.
By some estimates, half of the fish sticks served in American public schools are processed in China.
Fish tainted by Chinese forced labor is even showing up in military base cafeterias, federal prison canteens and veterans homes’ dining halls, paid for by federal and state tax dollars.
Even fish marketed as “locally caught” is tainted by these labor and human rights problems associated with China because much of the fish coming out of U.S. waters and onto U.S.-flagged ships is frozen, sent to China for processing, refrozen and shipped back to America.
Like fish from Chinese vessels, many of the workers processing U.S.-caught seafood are also Uyghurs under state-sponsored forced labor regimes, meaning importation of this catch is also in clear violation of U.S. law.
Solving problems within seafood industry supply chains is not easy because fishing ships are far from shore, almost always in motion, tough to spot-check, flagged to other nations and crewed mostly by poorer people from the global south who do these jobs with no contracts.
Even so, there are things that we as American consumers can do:
First, contact your senators and representatives and ask them whether the fish bought by the U.S. government with your tax dollars is caught and processed in China.
If it is, insist that they consider sourcing it from local fishers and processors.
Demand that these lawmakers also impose stricter rules on U.S. importers of seafood, requiring them to collect necessary information about the conditions on these foreign ships and factories.
Second, look at this interactive graphic by The Outlaw Ocean Project to find information about which seafood brands have responded to these reports by plainly stating that until China allows real oversight of its ships and factories, they will ensure that none of their seafood comes from China.
Avoid buying fish from companies that ignore these reports or fail to disclose the origin and processing location of their product.
Finally, support organizations that do the hard work of revealing such crimes and those working to prevent forced labor and human rights abuses all over the world.
A handful of nonprofit groups monitor not just whether the oceans are running out of fish but also the human rights concerns among the 50 million people who work at sea.
In the past several decades, other industries like those that produce so-called sweatshop garments, blood diamonds and fair-trade coffee have had their moment of reckoning.
That time has come for seafood.
Our politics is dominated by the old.
Although the median age of the rest of America is 38.9 years, the median age in the U.S. Senate is 65.3 and is 57.8 years in the House of Representatives.
And, of course, the two front-runners for the 2024 presidential race, Joe Biden and Donald Trump, would be well into their 80s before one or the other left the Oval Office in 2029.
Unlike some of my fellow Generation Z, which spans from 1997 to 2012, I generally favor older people in office.
Young people are still forming their belief systems and learning how to accomplish the things they want to achieve.
Older politicians have more life experience and are less likely to radically change their ideological positions in response to a new crisis.
Career politicians tend to understand how the system works and the mechanisms to get things done.
While I get frustrated by a Congress predominantly made up of out-of-touch older people, inexperience is never a virtue, as much as young perspectives might be valued.
However, as always, there is a line.
As could be seen with recently deceased Sen. Dianne Feinstein, who was 90, access to the high-level medical care that our federal elected leaders enjoy can mitigate the effects of aging for only so long.
Aging also raises the risk of cognitive decline.
And 59% of those polled said the same about Trump.
Partisan politics may skew those numbers, but if more than half the country is concerned about our leading presidential candidates' competency to serve as commander in chief, we ought to take note.
Nikki Haley, former U.S. ambassador to the United Nations and one of Trump's rivals for the GOP presidential nomination, has proposed requiring a mental competency test for candidates older than 75.
Biden, to no one's surprise, has scoffed at the idea.
Trump, on the other hand, endorsed it but doubted the practicality of requiring a mental competency test: “A lot of people say it’s not constitutional to do it.”
Yet, polling suggests that 76% of Americans strongly or somewhat support such tests for politicians.
While mental competency tests would be a good thing, declining physical health also needs to be taken into account.
It may not be polite to say it, but the older the president, the higher the risk that America's commander in chief will die while still in office.
With all the chaos in the nation and the world now, America shouldn't risk the uncertainty and dangers of a sudden transfer of presidential power.
I think neither Biden nor Trump should serve a second term because of their character and policy positions.
Their age is just another important factor for why voters need strong (and younger) alternative candidates.
Sadly, voters appear too locked into partisan combativeness to fairly evaluate whether Biden and Trump are capable of serving effectively as octogenarians.
A graduate from DePaul University with a degree in political science, he's also president of the Lone Conservative, the largest conservative student-run publication in the country.
When most people quip that they're "a bit OCD," they probably just mean they're a neat freak.
Though the "America's Got Talent" judge didn't receive his diagnosis for obsessive-compulsive disorder until his 40s, the 67-year-old says OCD has had a profound impact on most of his life.
"The word 'suffer' is not even strong enough," he says of his experience with the condition, while speaking over a Zoom call from Las Vegas.
I just have to get that germ off my hand.
That wall has gotten easier to deal with, he says, thanks to a combination of medication and therapy, but it's still something that's always there − which is why it's frustrating when well-meaning fans claim they experience the same thing, when it's clear they don't.
OCD is not that uncommon:Understand the symptoms of obsessive compulsive disorder.
According to Mayo Clinic, OCD involves persistent patterns of unwanted thoughts and fears, known as obsessions, that lead to repetitive behaviors, known as compulsions.
Ignoring or trying to stop these obsessions can worsen anxiety, so people with OCD are often driven to perform compulsive acts in an attempt to relieve stress.
These patterns can be time-consuming, interfere with day-to-day life and cause significant impairment.
Examples of obsessions include fear of contamination and intense stress when objects aren't orderly or facing a certain way.
Compulsions can take the form of hand-washing to the point of damaging the skin, repeatedly checking the stove to make sure it's off or counting in certain patterns.
"It's just this vicious, dark circle, and it makes you... unproductive, unhappy, depressed," he says.
The comedian says he coped with the added stress the way he has with many hardships: with humor.
Still, he says, laughter can only do so much.
"For somebody who was triggered by germs, COVID was not helpful," he says.
He says the two got the idea for the project while finding ways to cope with the stress of early COVID life.
'America needs you':82nd Airborne Division Chorus wins over judges, lands spot in 'AGT' finale
He also praised his co-judge Simon Cowell, 64, for recently revealing he went to therapy to help treat his depression.
He hopes that by speaking out he can help change that stigma.
"I think the younger you are, the easier it is to be open about mental health," he says.
"The reason I have that strength is because not only me, not only my daughter, but a lot of people are expanding the ability to share."
Plus, he says, the more people acknowledge their imperfections, the more they acknowledge their humanity.
"I feel broken ... but I don't know what perfection is," he says.
I think that everybody's got a little break in them.
I think some people aren't aware of it.
"Going gray" is something few men try to prevent and some are even proud of.
For women, it's often a different story.
While only 31% of men pluck their gray hairs when they first start appearing, 82% of women do the same, per one clinical survey.
Women also turn to dyeing or coloring their hair more often than men do − with approximately half of them doing so, according to one report.
Such efforts are often employed to hide signs of getting older, but age isn't always the only factor at play.
While most people start getting gray hairs in their mid to late 30s, others do so much earlier, showing that age alone isn't the culprit behind hair changing color.
Experts weigh in on what these other causes are and whether there's anything you can do to keep the gray hairs at bay.
Graying hair is what happens when color-producing cells in the body stop producing a natural pigment known as melanin.
Such triggers include overexposure to sunlight as UV rays can create free radicals that damage the cells that give hair its color.
Vitamin B12 deficiency can also cause premature graying in some people.
The National Institutes of Health has published a report showing that stress can also cause one's hair to prematurely turn gray.
More common than environmental or behavioral factors though, the timing of one's hair turning gray "is mostly driven by genetics," says Angela Lamb, MD, a dermatologist at Mount Sinai in New York City.
"Sure, you might be the first person in your family that you know that is going gray prematurely," she explains, "but the research supports that it is predominately genetically driven."
Once that change begins taking place many are eager to know: can you stop it from progressing or even prevent it from happening altogether?
The short answer is no, not absolutely.
But as the saying goes, "though you can't change your genes, you can change your behavior," and certain behaviors can impact both the timing and the degree to which one's hair turns gray.
"Some things that can help include maintaining a balanced diet, ensuring adequate intake of essential vitamins and minerals − particularly vitamin B12 and folic acid − and refraining from smoking," advises Michelle Henry, MD, a board certified and Harvard trained dermatologist.
She also recommends limiting exposure to environmental pollutants that can cause oxidative stress or create free radicals "that could harm hair or accelerate graying."
Others want to know if it's possible to get their color back after their hair has already turned gray.
There again, it depends on a couple of factors.
But if it's been caused by nutritional deficiencies or a medical condition like thyroid disease, improving such deficiencies or treating the condition may prove helpful.
And when stress is the culprit, research shows and the experts say there may be a window of opportunity to reverse the graying hair once it first starts turning if stress levels are brought back down.
In such cases, "manage stress through relaxation techniques like meditation or yoga," suggests Henry.
If stress isn't the issue, however, or if you're worried that you're graying earlier than family members your age or because of something else, a conversation with your doctor may be in order.
"If premature graying concerns you," Henry advises, "consult your healthcare professional to rule out any underlying medical conditions."
More:Pamela Anderson's bold no-makeup look and the 'natural beauty revolution'
Even so, his death sheds light on how serious and unpredictable allergies of all kinds can be.
People can be allergic to nearly anything, including pollen, dust, food, insect stings, animal dander, latex, mold and medications.
For many, all it takes is a tiny crumb or speck of an allergen to spark a reaction that can quickly become life-threatening if not treated properly or efficiently.
Anaphylactic reactions most commonly occur to foods, insect stings, medications and latex, according to the American Academy of Allergy Asthma and Immunology.
It’s still unknown what he was doing at the time of his reaction.
At least 15% of people with food allergies are first diagnosed in adulthood, according to the nonprofit FARE (Food Allergy Research & Education) — a phenomenon that some researchers deem “an important emerging health problem.”
These antibodies “fight” the food by releasing histamine and other chemicals that trigger allergic reaction symptoms such as an itchy throat, difficulty breathing or vomiting.
The surprise factor for many adult-onset allergies increases risks for anaphylaxis because people may not have an EpiPen (an auto-injector that releases epinephrine into the body to reduce inflammation) on hand.
Otherwise, treat a mild symptom with an antihistamine like Benadryl and stay cool, as heat can trigger a greater histamine response.
Learn about nasal spray epinephrine:FDA passes on first nasal spray alternative to epinephrine autoinjectors
Never assume a food or object is free of your allergen, experts say, as it can lurk in the most unexpected places.
Fish and shellfish, for example, are sometimes dipped in milk to reduce their fishy odor, putting those with dairy allergies at risk.
Doing so will help protect you from exposure to your allergen.
There are also no laws requiring manufacturers to say whether a product may have come into contact with a specific allergen.
This is why you have to read food labels every time you buy a product.
When in doubt, call the manufacturer directly to better understand what products contain or may contain.
With their chiseled physiques, Zac Efron and Jeremy Allen White are ready to step into the ring in the trailer for the upcoming wrestling drama titled "The Iron Claw."
Watch the trailer here:
As the oldest and middle brothers, the bowl-cut-sporting Kevin (Efron) and Kerry (Allen White) are their father's favorites.
But it's a status that comes with strings attached, as they're subjected to his harsh demands and vain ambitions as he pushes them to further the legacy he created as a wrestler in his own right two decades ago.
Though Efron, 35, rose to fame as the star of Disney's "High School Musical," his role in "The Iron Claw" marks his latest dramatic turn after last year starring alongside Russell Crowe in the Vietnam War film "The Greatest Beer Run Ever."
Box office:'The Exorcist: Believer' lures horror fans, takes control of box office with $27.2M
"Iron Claw" will be released Dec. 22 in theaters across the United States.
A24 financed and produced the film, and it is co-financed by Access Entertainment and BBC Film.
Reach him at elagatta@gannett.com
Five women have sued Tim Ballard, founder of an anti-child-trafficking group whose life story inspired the surprise summer hit "Sound of Freedom," alleging he sexually manipulated, abused and harassed them on overseas trips designed to catch child sex traffickers.
Ballard’s work with Operation Underground Railroad is the underpinning of the movie, which resonated with conservative moviegoers and earned more than $183 million at the North American box office.
He recently resigned from the group amid sexual abuse and harassment allegations, which he has denied.
Ballard, a former Homeland Security officer whose prominence as an opponent of child sex trafficking got him invited to the White House under President Donald Trump, was appointed to a White House anti-human-trafficking board in 2019.
Tim Ballard:'Sound of Freedom' subject speaks out on sexual misconduct allegations
The complaints against Ballard center on a “couple’s ruse” he allegedly engaged in with women from Operation Underground Railroad who posed as his wife to fool child sex traffickers into thinking he was a legitimate client, according to the lawsuit filed Monday in Utah state court.
Operation Underground Railroad and The Spear Fund, an anti-human trafficking group where Ballard now serves as a senior adviser, were named as defendants alongside Ballard in the lawsuit.
Mr. Ballard vehemently denies the allegations brought by these unnamed women.
Before the lawsuit, Ballard denied the accusations in a statement provided to USA TODAY by The Spear Fund.
"They are baseless inventions designed to destroy me and the movement we have built to end the trafficking and exploitation of vulnerable children."
Even in private, the lawsuit alleges: “Ballard would claim that he and his female partner had to maintain the appearance of a romantic relationship at all times in case suspicious traffickers might be surveilling them at any moment.”
The women, who filed the lawsuit under pseudonyms, allege Ballard meanwhile used his membership in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and connection to church leaders to persuade them what he was doing was just for the good of children in need of help.
Ballard said a high-ranking church leader, M. Russell Ballard, no relation, gave him permission to use the ruse “as long as there was no sexual intercourse or kissing.” The church in a September statement condemned Tim Ballard for “unauthorized use” of the church leader’s name for personal advantage and “activity regarded as morally unacceptable.”
Tim Ballard claimed a passage in the Book of Mormon justified performing “unconventional” tasks, the lawsuit alleges.
Tim Ballard, who has said he was considering running for the U.S. Senate, has blamed political opponents for the sexual allegations against him.
A new spooky show looking to give a modern twist on the writings of a classic American writer and poet is coming to Netflix.
It's called "The Fall of the House of Usher" and it's inspired by an 1839 Edgar Allen Poe short story with the same name.
Mike Flanagan is the creative mind behind it as well as other shows like "The Haunting of Hill House," "The Midnight Club" and "The Haunting of Bly Manor".
According to Netflix, "The Fall of the House of Usher" is an eight-episode horror-drama limited series that focuses on Roderick and Madeline Usher, siblings who have built Fortunato Pharmaceuticals into an "empire of wealth, privilege and power."
"Past secrets come to light when the heirs to the Usher dynasty start dying at the hands of a mysterious woman from their youth," the synopsis reads.
Here's everything you need to know about the new Netflix series.
BEST SCARY MOVIES:Looking for a good horror movie to creep you out?
We ranked the century's best scary films
According to Netflix, all eight episodes of the series will be released at 3 a.m.
ET on Thursday, Oct. 12.
Netflix released a trailer for the show on Sept. 12.
Thanks to Mark Stoops, coaches now have a new excuse for getting humiliated by No.
1 Georgia: fan cheapness.
In response to Kentucky's 38-point loss to Georgia, Stoops asked fans to throw money at the problem.
When a caller on Stoops' radio show asked the veteran coach about Kentucky's flops against elite teams, Stoops got defensive.
Later, he cited Georgia's NIL riches and suggested UK fans should cough up more cash.
Never mind that Stoops’ teams went 0-8 against Georgia, with an average margin of defeat of 22.4 points, before NIL deals became permissible in 2021.
He's now 0-11 against the Bulldogs.
Want to catch Georgia?
Spend, baby, spend.
"I just encourage (fans) to donate more, because that’s what those teams are doing," Stoops said.
You’re allowed to these days, and we could use some help.
That’s what they look like, you know what I mean, when you have 85 of them.
STAY UP-TO-DATE: Subscribe to our Sports newsletter for exclusive content
Why bother employing a coach?
Put a fundraising extraordinaire in charge of this operation.
Stoops’ comments came off as defensive blame-shifting, but his excuse also is somewhat clever, because it can’t be disproven.
We can speculate as to what Georgia quarterback Carson Beck earns in NIL, compared to Kentucky’s Devin Leary.
We don't know for sure.
NIL deals are not subject to public disclosure.
Undeniably, Georgia enjoys advantages over Kentucky.
What coach wouldn’t want to recruit a home state as talent-rich as Georgia’s, while facing little instate competition?
With or without NIL, Georgia’s realities position the Bulldogs to succeed at a higher level than Kentucky.
Still, Stoops and his team bear some responsibility for this hammering.
In another defensive moment during his radio show, Stoops rhetorically asked whether fans would prefer to return to 2012, the final season before his arrival.
No Kentucky fan should want that.
Stoops raised Kentucky’s bar, making performances like Saturday’s objectionable.
That's the price of success.
Own the loss, and go beat No.
25 Missouri this week at Kroger Field.
In one breath, Stoops deemed UK's performance against Georgia unacceptable.
In the next, he laid it at the feet of NIL.
The extent to which NIL factored into a 38-point loss can’t be verified, making it a handy excuse.
We can guess that Georgia’s NIL collective enjoys more football riches than Kentucky’s, but these collectives that collect booster- and fan-donated dollars are not subject to financial disclosure.
I know how much revenue Georgia athletics ($203 million) generated in 2022, compared to Kentucky ($159 million).
Those are figures that must be disclosed annually to the NCAA.
Those revenues do not reflect NIL funding, though.
The amount of cash each collective has piled inside its NIL vaults is not public record.
Also, there’s little accountability for collectives and coaches who are poor stewards of NIL funds.
Say a collective blew $250,000 in an NIL deal to a player who becomes a bust.
Tough to hold anyone accountable for a deal shrouded in mystery.
Meanwhile, Stoops asks fans to prime the pump.
Fill the war chest.
And when Kentucky loses to Georgia again next year?
Spend some more.
I sympathize with Stoops.
Succeeding at Kentucky isn’t easy, but that didn’t start with NIL.
Kentucky hasn’t beaten Georgia since 2009.
Thanks to NIL, though, when a coach suffers a humiliating result, he can reposition blame on the fans.
Convince fans their cheapness contributed to this debacle.
Who can prove Stoops is wrong, or that NIL didn’t factor in, when we don’t know Georgia's average NIL deal compared to Kentucky’s?
College football coaches know no shame when asking fans for more money.
Coaches, and to a greater extent athletics directors, have long doubled as glorified panhandlers.
They’d convince donors that State U’s poor team couldn’t possibly compete with the fellas from Rival U unless the fat cats ponied up to fund facilities that challenged the Taj Mahal as a wonder of the world.
Now, at least, the panhandling extends to milking donors to bankroll the players behind this lucrative enterprise.
“No excuses,” Stoops said repeatedly during his radio show.
Then, Stoops played the pauper and held out his hand.
Email him at BToppmeyer@gannett.com and follow him on Twitter @btoppmeyer.
Be careful what you wish for, Dallas Cowboys.
As fallout lingers from the blowout loss at San Francisco, the Cowboys are so deep into their feelings about the 42-10 result that it’s fair to wonder if they are capable of recovering – physically and mentally.
 "I just feel like he’s making it way more personal than it had to be," Parsons said Tuesday.
We got something for that.
Trust the Cowboys?
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
The Cowboys, 28 years and counting since the franchise’s last whiff of Super Bowl glory, have proven (again) that they cannot be trusted as a legitimate contender.
Maybe that changes by January.
But that needs to be proven in the flesh as they’ve over-promised so many times before in morphing from America’s Team to America’s Biggest Tease.
Such an identity remains intact about now.
At this point, any threats coming from the Cowboys about what they’ll do to the 49ers have zero credibility.
Remember, Dallas was supposed to use the prime-time showcase on Sunday night as a measuring stick.
And the 49ers basically took that stick and cracked the Cowboys on the butt with it.
The defense that Parsons leads?
The Cowboys went to San Francisco with the unit allowing the fewest points in the league, like 10 points per game.
They left as the defense that gave up six touchdowns and 421 yards and had a terrible time getting off the field on third downs.
So, again, any promises about what will happen if they see them again would be ill-advised.
"It was always personal before the game started," Samuel told Kay Adams on the "Up & Adams" podcast.
Or touchdown, 49ers.
Can we stick a fork in the Cowboys already and declare that this season is kaput?
Maybe not yet.
It’s the NFL, with its week-to-week reality checks.
Look at what happened to Buffalo, a week after destroying the Dolphins: They went to London to get served up by the Jaguars.
This is not the time of year to draw conclusions about what will happen in January – even though it seems clear that if they stay healthy, the 49ers and Eagles will be major factors.
And as long as Patrick Mahomes is in the lineup, the Chiefs have a shot.
"It’s been a wide range of performance, as wide a range that I could ever recall in a 5-week period," McCarthy said after the debacle on Sunday night.
On paper, the Cowboys are not done yet.
There are 12 games left.
Just one of Dallas’ next six opponents – Philadelphia (5-0) – currently has a winning record.
A path to get back into the race in the NFC East still exists, given the two matchups looming against the Eagles in November and December.
Then again, the Eagles will be just as eager as the 49ers to demonstrate a special kind of animosity toward Dallas.
In any event, the expectation correction for the Cowboys has just happened.
After showing that figuratively they don’t belong on the same field with the 49ers, the Cowboys find themselves facing a must-win predicament when meeting the Los Angeles Chargers at SoFi Stadium on Monday night.
It’s about survival, or at least rebounding to restore some confidence after absorbing so many blows during the humiliating loss on Sunday night.
It’s a striking pattern.
Including the playoffs, teams that played the 49ers last season were 0-15 in games the following week.
The Chiefs won their next game after facing San Francisco last October, but it came after Kansas City had a bye week.
And the Eagles had a bye week following the NFC title game, although it indeed lost in the Super Bowl.
Pittsburgh snapped the “next-week” streak last month.
Blown out by the 49ers in Week 1, the Steelers rallied to defeat Cleveland the following week.
The next three 49ers opponents, though, followed suit with last season’s pattern and lost the following week.
Now the trend is attached to Dallas’ challenge to get back on track after a grueling loss to the 49ers.
Tony Pollard, the Cowboys running back limited to 29 rushing yards at San Francisco, was upbeat on Sunday night when assessing how they can rebound.
"Get back to work," Pollard said.
You have to prepare.
You have to get ready and brush it off.
See the 49ers again?
Officially, that’s a maybe for the Cowboys this season.
No, the Cowboys likely can’t achieve the dream of winning a championship without getting past the 49ers.
But considering the way San Francisco has owned them in recent years, the Cowboys had better be careful of what they wish for.
LeBron James, in a video that went viral last week, shrieked when asked for his reaction to being the oldest player in the NBA.
Now James, the 38-year-old Los Angeles Lakers star, is getting feedback from a player who can relate to his situation.
Her name is Pat Conner, who at 91 is the oldest active player in the Granny Basketball League.
Conner has shown how it can be done, playing alongside her 64-year-old daughter, Debbie, and occasionally with her 59-year-old daughter, Becky.
(She has four more children, 14 grandchildren and two great-grandchildren.)
"She has no fear," Debbie said.
Conner texted video of herself making a free throw Granny-style.
Then she texted video of herself making a hook shot.
"I’d send you a dunk shot, but it’s not allowed in the GBL," she texted, followed by a laughing emoji.
The Granny Basketball League was founded in 2005, two years after James’ rookie season with the NBA.
The minimum age is 50, and the league features 450 players and 42 teams in 10 states.
Unlike James, Conner was not a five-star recruit coming out of high school.
"They wouldn’t let us play in high school," she said.
James graced the cover of Sports Illustrated in high school.
While he went straight to the NBA, Conner took a different route.
She said she got her start playing basketball in the intramural league at Kansas University and once scored 38 points.
Unlike her enthusiasm, her scoring output has dropped in Granny Basketball League, which plays six-on-six,
The court is divided into three sections, with two forwards and two guards on either end and two players in the center area, and Conner has played every position.
LeBron became the oldest player in the league July 28.
He’s one of its best players, coming off a season during which he was ninth in scoring (28.9 points per game), 19th in assists (6.8 assists per game) and 34th in rebounding (8.3 rebounds per game).
He also made his 19th consecutive All-Star Game and led the Lakers to the Western Conference Finals.
Asked about his longevity, James said it stems in part from "understanding if you want to be great at something, you’ve got to put in the work."
And I would like to see him shoot a Granny Shot from the 3-point line.''
Like LeBron, Conner values hard work.
"As a side note," she texted, "I did walk/run the 50 (meter) and 100 (meter) events in September at Kansas Senior Games."
She also said she started doing CrossFit in August and punctuated the revelation with a flexed bicep emoji.
On his decision to return for a 21st season, James said, "I feel like I got a lot more in the tank to give."
Said Conner, "My goal is to play until I’m 100 and still be on the court."
"Keep playing as long as you can," she said.
Kelley, who was a gymnast at Louisiana State University, did not immediately respond to messages left by USA TODAY Sports.
Everything to know about the American gymnastics icon
If you’re torn between hopping on a cruise or visiting a national park on your next vacation, why not do both?
American Cruise Lines will offer new sailings in 2024 that will take visitors to national parks across the U.S. as part of the itinerary.
The cruises will range from 11 to 18 days.
“Our new National Parks cruises highlight the breadth of itineraries only available with American Cruise Lines,” the line’s president, Charles B. Robertson, said in an emailed statement.
“Each new adventure is designed to further enhance an already-great cruise with a guided exploration in the country’s beautiful national parks.”
The first of the sailings, the 11-day Great Smoky Mountains National Park cruise, will depart on May 25, 2024.
The cruise line will offer a range of departures through 2024 and 2025 for all four itineraries.
‘A little oasis’:What travelers are missing by skipping Great Basin National Park
The first available dates for the Alaska National Parks, Great Alaska National Parks, and National Parks and Legendary Rivers cruises currently start at $14,155, $16,560 and $12,755.
The fares include all meals, transportation to the parks, park entrance fees, hotel accommodations and more.
You can reach him at ndiller@usatoday.com.
10 perfect fall weekend getaways for the whole family
Colorful foliage, cooler temperatures, pumpkin everything—what's not to love about fall?
It's something of a Goldilocks time of year in most parts of the U.S., because it’s not too hot, not too cold, and an ideal time to travel.
Unfortunately, it's also back-to-school time for kids, which makes planning a full-fledged fall vacation a real challenge.
Fall weekend getaways, especially if you can make it a three-day weekend to squeeze in a little extra fun.
Three days is more than enough time to take a picturesque hike, pick apples, sip a hot beverage, tell spooky Halloween stories, and do all the other quintessential fall weekend escape activities.
And there are so many great places in the U.S. where you can enjoy just that kind of autumnal experience, including many within driving distance of major metropolitan areas around the country.
Of course, you can use that extra weekend getaway day to hop on a quick flight, too, which really does open up the whole country for a three-day fall weekend.
MAKE MEMORIES: 23 best family vacation spots in the U.S. for all ages
When busy school and work schedules don't allow for a longer trip, try one of these three-day fall weekend getaways that pack in all the fun and charm of a longer autumn vacation.
Just north of Indianapolis, Hamilton County has everything you need for a family-friendly fall getaway: good food, lots of things to do, and easy access from a number of nearby metro areas.
(Bike share rentals are available along the trail.)
In the Carmel area, the trail passes a cool play space and Midtown Plaza, where your whole family can play a little ping-pong or corn hole, grab a bite to eat, or just relax on the bench swings.
BEST TRIP EVER: 50 best family vacation ideas for all ages
Browse the shops in the Carmel Arts and Design District, where the kids can undertake a DIY scavenger hunt to find the J. Seward Johnson Jr. sculptures dotting the area.
Nickel Plate Express offers fall foliage train rides aboard historic 1950s-era train cars, while Flat Fork Creek Park is a great place to bike or hike amid the autumn leaves.
At living history site Conner Prairie, your family can take part in special fall experiences like a corn maze and the spooky Headless Horseman Festival.
▶ Where to Stay in Hamilton County
For families with younger kids, Holiday Inn Indianapolis Carmel is a good option.
Fall is a favorite time of year in Delaware County, New York, also known as the Great Western Catskills.
The mountains are awash with vibrant autumnal hues, which can be admired by driving the Catskill Mountains Scenic Byway, biking the Catskill Scenic Trail, or hiking the many trails with sweeping views of the area.
KID-FRIENDLY: 17 best family resorts and hotels in the U.S.
There are farmers markets all over the county offering everything from fruits and veggies to jams and maple syrup.
(Hobart has seven bookstores!)
▶ Where to Stay in Delaware County
If you don’t think the fall is a good time to head to the beach, think again.
While it might not be swimming weather, lighter crowds and cooler temperatures at the best fall beach destinations let you enjoy your beach time without ever breaking a sweat.
And Virginia Beach is definitely at the top of the list for fall weekend getaways.
SAVE MONEY: Kids stay free at these 10 all-inclusive family resorts
Go leaf peeping and wildlife watching at Back Bay National Wildlife Refuge or First Landing State Park (where you can spot bioluminescent waters during the fall), or take a dolphin tour to spy the marine mammals still in the area before migrating to warmer waters for the winter.
Spots like Hunt Club Farm and Flanagan Farm amp up the fall fun with pumpkin patches, hay rides, and other kid-friendly activities.
Autumn is a great time of year to climb to the top of the Cape Henry Lighthouse (kids must be at least 42 inches tall to do so) or take on the ropes courses at The Adventure Park at the Virginia Aquarium.
Plus you can still indulge in some classic family beach vacation activities like mini golf even when the weather is cooler.
▶ Where to Stay for Fall Weekend Getaways in Virginia Beach
With three hotels to choose from, The Cavalier Resort can suit just about anyone's unique travel needs.
Stay at the Cavalier Virginia Beach for a more refined stay, the Marriott Virginia Beach Oceanfront for proximity to the sand and great views, or the Embassy Suites Virginia Beach Oceanfront Resort for a little extra space for the whole family.
The fall foliage puts on just as much of a show as any of the performers in Branson, a perennial favorite among Midwest family vacation destinations.
And you can enjoy it in all kinds of ways, whether that’s a scenic drive along Highway 165, a hike through spots like the Ruth and Paul Henning Conservation Area, riding the rails on the Branson Scenic Railway, or a mountain coaster ride or zip line excursion amid the autumn leaves.
BIG FAMILIES: 13 best all-inclusive resorts for families of 5+
There's also 10,000 acres to wander at Dogwood Canyon Nature Park, and Top of the Rock offers sweeping scenic views and a range of fun activities.
And the area’s many year-round shows and attractions means your family will never be bored here.
▶ Where to Stay in Branson
For a classic New England fall getaway, head north to the White Mountains of New Hampshire.
Home to family-favorites amusement parks for kids like Story Land and Santa’s Village, this year-round vacation destination especially shines during the autumn months.
(Check the region’s foliage tracker for up-to-the-moment info.)
SET SAIL: 12 best family cruises and ships in the world
▶ Where to Stay for Fall Weekend Getaways in the White Mountains
Spanning multiple counties in southwest Illinois, the Great Rivers and Routes Region celebrates three great U.S. rivers (the Mississippi, Missouri, and Illinois) and famous roadways like Route 66 and Great River Road.
So, it's not surprising that fall is a picture-perfect time to visit the area.
You can take in the views while someone else does the driving on a Fall Foliage and History Tour, or just set off on your own family road trip along the historic routes.
CLOSE TO HOME: 8 best Puerto Rico all-inclusive resorts for families
There’s no shortage of U-pick farms and fall festivals in the area, and the Great Godfrey Maze can be navigated by flashlight on Friday and Saturday nights for an extra-spooky experience.
▶ Where to Stay in the Great Rivers and Routes Region
Choose your way to stay at Aerie's Resort, which has guest rooms up on a bluff overlooking the confluence of the Mississippi and Illinois Rivers as well at a location on Main Street in downtown Grafton, Illinois.
Combining the vibrancy of a city with views of the Wasatch Mountains and easy access to outdoor fun, Salt Lake City is an ideal fit for long weekend getaway in the fall.
Spots like Memory Grove Park and City Creek Canyon are full of walking, hiking, and biking trails awash with fall colors.
Liberty Park is another good option for not only fall foliage but also playgrounds, paddle boats, and Tracy Aviary, home to more than 300 birds from around the world.
FIND A DEAL: 12 best hotel booking sites for cheap prices
The Salt Lake Connect Attractions Pass gives you admission to the aviary and 17 other Northern Utah attractions for a single price, including perfect-for-fall sites like Red Butte Garden, This Is the Place Heritage Park, and Thanksgiving Point, which has a full calendar of fall events.
▶ Where to Stay for Fall Weekend Getaways in Salt Lake City
The Hyatt Regency Salt Lake City has 700 guest rooms with floor-to-ceiling windows framing views of the Wasatch Mountains, along with amenities like fire pits and multiple dining options.
Hershey’s Chocolate World also adds a layer of fall fun with trick-or-treating throughout the world’s largest candy store, a seasonal version of its trolley tour, and new treats to try.
BUDGET-FRIENDLY: 11 cheap family vacations that are super fun
But there’s more to enjoy in the area than just chocolate.
Fall foliage is on full display at places like Hershey Gardens and Wildwood Park, and the Hershey Harrisburg Adventure Trail is a go-to spot for hiking, biking, and bird watching.
▶ Where to Stay in Hershey
Perched on a hillside, The Hotel Hershey has family-friendly guest rooms, suites, and cottages; amenities and activities like hiking trails and family s’mores roasts; a special kids check-in process; and various perks and benefits for visiting the local attractions.
From its working waterfront to its 19th-century architecture, Portland can't be beat for three-day fall weekend getaways.
Cobblestone streets add extra charm to the Old Port district filled with shops, restaurants, and galleries.
CRUISE DEALS: Kids sail free on these 6 cruise lines
▶ Where to Stay in Portland
The Cambria Hotel Portland Downtown Old Port puts you within walking distance of downtown Portland’s waterfront, restaurants, and attractions.
Stylish rooms and suites are ideal for a family weekend escape.
TAKE FLIGHT: 17 best flight booking sites for cheap airfares
10 perfect fall weekend getaways for the whole family originally appeared onFamilyVacationist.com.
FamilyVacationist.com andTourScoop.com are owned and operated by Vacationist Media LLC.
The views and opinions expressed in this column are the author’s and do not necessarily reflect those of USA TODAY.
UPDATE: This story has been updated with news that within hours of publication of USA TODAY's investigation, MSU suspended Coach Mel Tucker without pay.
Two years ago, one of the nation’s star college football coaches and a prominent rape survivor teamed up to fight the culture of sexual violence in sports.
Their partnership should have been a force for good.
Instead, it has devolved into scandal, with the activist accusing the coach of the same misconduct that both of them preached against.
Accusing him is Brenda Tracy, a rape survivor who has made educating athletes about sexual violence her life’s work.
Over eight months, they developed a professional relationship centered on her advocacy work.
Tucker invited Tracy to campus three times – twice to speak to his players and staff and once to be recognized as an honorary captain at the team's spring football game.
But their relationship was upended during a phone call on April 28, 2022, Tracy says in a complaint she filed with the university’s Title IX office in December that remains under investigation.
According to her complaint, Tracy sat frozen for several minutes while Tucker made sexual comments about her and masturbated.
His violation, she said, reopened 25-year-old wounds from her rape by four men – two Oregon State University football players, a junior college player and a high school recruit.
“The idea that someone could know me and say they understand my trauma but then re-inflict that trauma on me is so disgusting to me, it’s hard for me to even wrap my mind around it,” she told USA TODAY.
“It’s like he sought me out just to betray me.”
In his statements to the Title IX investigator, Tucker acknowledged masturbating on the call but said Tracy grossly mischaracterized the episode.
According to him, they had consensual “phone sex.”
Michigan State hired an outside Title IX attorney to investigate the complaint.
She finished her investigation in July.
A formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated the school’s policy banning sexual harassment and exploitation is scheduled for Oct. 5 and 6, during the Spartans’ bye week.
The stakes are high for everyone.
Tracy says Tucker is following through on a threat to ruin her career and reputation by painting her as a woman who mixes professional and personal relationships and files false reports.
She fears he will undo her legacy.
Tucker, who signed one of the most lucrative contracts in college sports history two years ago, could lose out on the roughly $80 million he is owed if Michigan State fires him for cause, which would be a stunning fall from the elite ranks of college coaches.
Reached by USA TODAY on his cellphone Saturday night, Tucker hung up after a reporter mentioned the case.
Hours after USA TODAY published its investigation, the university suspended Tucker without pay, pending a resolution of the Title IX case.
“This step, suspending Mel Tucker without pay, is … necessary and appropriate for today's circumstances,” Interim President Teresa Woodruff said at a Sunday evening press conference.
“These actions are not taken lightly.”
USA TODAY typically does not identify people who allege sexual harassment.
Tracy agreed to be identified and shared more than 1,200 pages of case documents.
Title IX, the federal law banning sex discrimination in education, requires schools to investigate allegations of sexual harassment that took place in the context of a school program or activity.
Such claims are inherently difficult to adjudicate because of many of the factors at issue in this case: a lack of eyewitnesses and recordings, the passage of time and the thorniness of litigating consent.
Adding to the uncertainty, the institution tasked with sorting out the facts is perhaps best known for missing repeated opportunities to stop one of the most prolific sexual abusers in American history.
Gymnastics and campus physician accused of sexually assaulting more than 300 female athletes under the guise of medical treatments.
He has been sentenced to a minimum of 100 years in prison.
Amid its efforts to rebuild trust among students, employees, alumni and the East Lansing community, Michigan State's leaders must now decide whether the face of its prestigious football program is guilty of sexually harassing one of the country’s most influential advocates against gender-based violence.
For some, how the university navigates the crisis will send a clear message about its commitment to progress.
“This goes beyond coach Tucker and Brenda Tracy,” said Jennifer Gomez, a Boston University professor who researches the effects of interpersonal trauma and violence.
“What happens here has the potential to be very healing or very harmful for lots and lots and lots of other people.”
Tracy and Tucker met in August 2021 during her first visit to Michigan State, after a mutual acquaintance introduced them.
Standing before a packed auditorium in the Spartans’ football operations building, Tracy told a gut-wrenching story of turning her pain into purpose two decades after filing a police report saying she had been gang-raped as a 24-year-old mother of two.
At the end, she challenged the “good men” in the room to use their privilege and influence to educate themselves and call out bad behavior.
By then she had delivered versions of the speech more than 100 times to at least 40,000 athletes and coaches.
Michigan State paid her a $10,000 speaking fee.
Tucker was in his second season as head coach.
A former University of Wisconsin-Madison defensive back, he had spent two decades coaching defenses for 10 college and NFL teams before landing the top job at the University of Colorado in late 2018.
Michigan State lured him away a year later by doubling his salary.
Mel Tucker's career at Michigan State: A timeline
Tucker and Tracy “hit it off” immediately, they would both later tell the Title IX investigator.
They bonded over their love of Jordan sneakers, shelves of which lined Tucker’s office walls.
Tucker had been moved by her speech, and she had been a big hit with players, he told the investigator.
They discussed her coming back to campus in the future.
Tracy left East Lansing feeling she had found a champion in Tucker, she told the investigator.
He seemed engaged with her cause, leading his players in signing her pledge to, among other things, obtain “ongoing, affirmative consent” before engaging in sexual acts with another person.
During that time, the two also talked on the phone at least 27 times, Tracy’s phone bills show – an average of once every two weeks for a half hour.
They often spoke at night to accommodate their work schedules, they said.
They chatted about their jobs and eventually more personal matters, such as their families, mental health and daily lives.
In November, Michigan State signed him to an unprecedented 10-year, $95 million deal that came fully guaranteed, even if it fired him for poor performance.
The only way he could lose out on the money, the contract said, was if he materially breached it, was convicted of a crime or engaged in “conduct which, in the University’s reasonable judgment, would tend to bring public disrespect, contempt or ridicule on the University.”
It was around then that Tucker, who had been married for more than two decades, started becoming interested in Tracy romantically, they both told the investigator.
Whether Tracy reciprocated is where their accounts diverge.
Tucker told the investigator that he and Tracy developed a romantic connection and talked openly about it.
They frequently made flirtatious comments about each other’s looks and bodies, Tucker said.
Tracy told him she wanted a “sugar daddy” who would pay her a monthly amount to be his girlfriend, he said, and that she would be “all over” him if he wasn’t married.
Tucker said they had acknowledged their mutual desire for a romance but agreed it would be “too messy” because of his marriage and the physical distance between them.
By contrast, Tracy told the investigator that Tucker’s romantic interest in her was entirely one-sided.
She said she came to feel he was less interested in her cause than in her.
Tucker messaged her photos of herself that he had found on her Instagram page, making comments such as, “This is the one,” or complimenting her eyes, Tracy said.
Once, Tucker called Tracy via FaceTime.
He was in bed, shirtless.
He talked about his unhappy marriage, describing himself as “more or less single.” Then, during a Nov. 9, 2021, call, she said he asked her, “If I wasn’t a football coach and if I wasn’t married, would you date me?”
Tracy said she responded that she would not because they worked together – one of several times she recalled trying to set boundaries.
She said she made clear to Tucker on a Dec. 1 call that they would only be friends, and he seemed to agree.
Then, after the spring game, Tucker called her four times, phone records show.
Tracy said he repeatedly asked her to meet him alone, without her assistant, and even suggested slipping into her hotel through a back door so no one would see him.
She said no.
Twelve days later came the call.
Tracy was in her home office in Oregon.
Tucker, who was in a hotel in Florida, called her at 12:39 a.m. EST, phone records show.
The call lasted 36 minutes.
According to Tucker, he became aroused when Tracy made a comment about needing to hit the gym more to look better without clothes on.
“Unequivocally, there’s no doubt about it,” Tucker told the investigator, case documents show.
“She was the one who said we’ll do it.”
Tracy denies all of that.
The call started off normal, she said.
But when she sent Tucker a photo of them together from the spring game, she said he responded by commenting on her buttocks and calling himself an “ass man.”
She remembered Tucker’s voice getting deeper and weirder as he continued talking about her buttocks.
She asked him what he was doing, and he said he had a “hard dick” and was touching himself.
“You’re touching yourself?” Tracy asked, according to the investigation report.
Tucker responded, “Yes.”
Tracy said she thought to herself, "Oh my god, this is happening, and I can’t stop it."
Eventually she said something along the lines of, “If you do this, I don’t ever want to hear about it, we are only friends, that’s it.”
When he finished, Tracy said, Tucker told her, “Thank you, good night, sweetheart.” She responded, “Yeah,” and he hung up.
Then she sat at her desk for a while, staring at her phone and crying.
Three months passed between the call and the next time Tracy and Tucker spoke.
At first, Tracy tried to pretend to herself that nothing had happened.
Tucker, however, was not responding to her text messages.
And he abruptly canceled her in-person training, planned for July 25, three days before it was supposed to take place.
A team staffer told her they had double-booked, but Tracy believed she knew the real reason.
When Tracy finally got Tucker on the phone about a week later, he was angry, she said, accusing her and her assistant of gossiping about his marital problems.
Tracy recalled that Tucker made comments such as, “I can’t trust you,” “If you say anything about this, I’ll hear about it,” and “I’ll be fine, it’s you that I am worried about.” She viewed it as a threat to destroy her reputation if she spoke out about him.
Tucker at one point told her he had done nothing wrong.
According to Tracy, she started to say, “Well, something…” referring to his masturbation, and Tucker interrupted, saying, “But nothing happened.”
Tucker recalled the Aug. 2 phone call much differently.
He told the investigator that Tracy apologized to him for discussing his marriage with her assistant, and he accepted.
Although they ended the call on good terms and discussed postponing her visit until next year, Tucker said he had lost trust in Tracy.
The training was never rescheduled, and they never spoke again.
Tracy initially stayed quiet about Tucker for the sake of her career, she said.
Ultimately, she decided that if she let it slide, she wouldn’t be the person she claimed to be – the one who encourages people to speak up about sexual misconduct and hold others accountable.
She filed her complaint in December – eight months after the call.
In dry and bureaucratic language, the record of that complaint begins: “The specific allegations of prohibited conduct against Respondent are as follows …” A notification was delivered to Tucker the following day.
Tucker was “absolutely shocked,” he would tell the university’s investigator.
In subsequent correspondence, he and his attorney suggested Tracy’s motive: She held a vendetta against Spartans athletics because of its history of sexual misconduct scandals and falsely accused him for financial gain.
“To say that I have learned from this situation is an understatement,” Tucker wrote in a letter to the investigator on March 22.
“I will never again allow myself to be duped by kindness.”
A former Indiana sex crimes prosecutor who now heads a private practice, she also previously worked in the Title IX offices at Michigan State and the University of Michigan.
Jacqueline Swanson, Tracy’s attorney who is also her friend, turned over a copy of the notes she took from their conversation on a yellow legal pad.
She shared a screenshot of a Dec. 2 text message in which Tracy told her she had just spoken with Tucker, who had agreed they could only be friends.
“I’m glad it didn’t get weird,” Tracy wrote.
Tracy provided phone bills and emails that corroborated her timeline of events and showed Tucker had been calling her from his personal cellphone.
Tracy said no.
In January, they sent a 12-page letter to the school arguing it lacked jurisdiction to investigate Tucker's “purely personal” relationship with Tracy.
“How far does MSU intend to go in policing the private conduct of its employees, and how does it expect its 20,000+ employees to react when they find out that they no longer have private lives outside the reach of their employer?”
Michigan State was not persuaded.
The alleged conduct would be covered by school policy, it concluded, because it took place in the context of Tracy’s work as a vendor for the school and affected their ongoing business relationship.
The case would go forward.
Tucker sat down for his interview on March 22.
He said he wanted to be transparent and set the record straight.
For instance, Tucker claimed he had made the phone sex call from home in East Lansing – not in a Florida hotel.
He had just returned from a trip to Florida, he said, where he had been doing charity work unrelated to his employment with the school.
An expense report Tucker submitted to Michigan State for his hotel and meal costs showed the trip's purpose was “administrative” and did not involve any personal travel.
The costs were paid by the Spartan Fund, the athletic department’s fundraising arm; he had flown to Florida on a donor’s private plane.
The information, Tucker said, made him question how Tracy “goes about her business.”
“I’m perplexed that Mel Tucker would respond to a complaint of sexual harassment by involving me or ESPN.”
Tucker did not identify any witnesses who could support his version of events, including his associate, whom he said he had promised anonymity.
That same associate, Tucker said, told him that Alvarado, Tracy’s assistant, had been gossiping about his marriage – a claim Alvarado denied.
Along the way, she had learned that one potentially rich source of evidence was missing: Both Tracy and Tucker had deleted their text messages with each other.
Tucker would tell her that he deletes his messages regularly because he receives so many; Tracy said she did so in a panic after their last phone call, feeling she needed to cut all ties with him.
At the hearing, planned for October, both sides will have the opportunity to present evidence and make arguments.
Another outside Title IX attorney hired by the school will then decide whether the evidence shows that Tucker likely violated school rules.
Among the witnesses who will be missing from Tracy’s witness list is her assistant and best friend, Alvarado.
She died in a car accident in June.
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
It was a private event thrown by the school to promote its migrant student services program, which provides financial aid and support to farmworkers seeking college degrees.
After the April 28, 2022, tour, disclosed in records obtained by USA TODAY this week, Tucker met with community leaders and alumni.
That night, Tucker would make the now-infamous phone call from his hotel room in nearby Naples, during which he is accused of masturbating and making unwanted sexual comments to Brenda Tracy, a prominent rape survivor and activist he had hired to speak to his team about sexual violence.
Yet, when Tucker met with the university’s outside investigator in March for his interview in the sexual harassment case against him, he insisted the trip was not work-related – a claim the investigator would disprove in her report.
It’s just one example of Tucker failing to keep his story straight at the most consequential moment of his career.
With his job, reputation and the roughly $80 million left on his contract at stake, Tucker repeatedly made false statements to the investigator and misled her about basic facts, such as his location during the phone call and the date it occurred, a USA TODAY review of more than 1,200 pages of case documents found.
Michigan State suspended Tucker without pay on Sept. 10, hours after Tracy went public for the first time with her story in USA TODAY.
On Monday, the school informed Tucker it plans to fire him for cause based on the conduct he had admitted to and the embarrassment he had caused the school.
Investigation:Michigan State football coach Mel Tucker accused of sexually harassing rape survivor
Although Tucker denied sexually harassing Tracy, he acknowledged masturbating on the call, saying he and Tracy had been in a romantic relationship and had consensual “phone sex.” Tracy said Tucker’s romantic interest in her was completely one-sided and that she had tried to set boundaries multiple times during their yearlong business partnership.
Per his contract, Tucker has until Tuesday to make a case for keeping his job.
Regardless, a formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated school policies against sexual harassment and exploitation is expected to proceed on Oct. 5 and 6.
He accused the school of conducting a “sham” hearing and having “ulterior motives.” Yet even in these written statements, the central details of his story changed entirely.
Tucker, who previously hung up on a reporter who called him on his cellphone asking about the case, did not respond to a message seeking comment for this story.
Tracy declined to comment for this story.
“Very often you’re weighing credibility based on little bits and pieces of information.”
“I believe a fact finder could assess these pieces of evidence about credibility and make a determination that Brenda is more credible than Mel,” she said.
“In my experience, a clear sign of a lack of credibility is generally taken very seriously.”
The school had informed him of Tracy’s complaint on Dec. 22, the day after she filed it.
Tucker was the only holdout.
Rather than tell his side of the story right away, Tucker and his attorney spent three months trying to stop the investigation, case documents show.
They wrote legal arguments urging Michigan State to drop the case and twice approached Tracy’s attorney proposing a settlement agreement.
Tracy said no, and the school pressed forward.
Only a handful of text messages remained; he and Tracy both told the investigator they had deleted their texts with each other in the months after the April 2022 phone call.
In his interview, which lasted 3 ½ hours, Tucker questioned whether Tracy had mixed up the date of the call.
He said he recalled being at his home in East Lansing when it occurred, but his own records showed that he had been in Florida on April 28, attending a charity function that was “absolutely not a University-sponsored event.”
His seven-page account told a different story – that he had called her while he was “alone in a hotel room.”
But by then she knew what he told her in the interview was untrue: she had already obtained records proving he had not been home in East Lansing.
An expense report he had submitted to the university for reimbursement of his hotel and meals shows Tucker flew to Naples, Florida, to attend a golf fundraiser hosted by The Greg H. Montgomery Jr. Foundation for Ultimate Growth, which raises awareness for suicide prevention.
It showed he stayed at the Hilton from April 27 to 29, that the trip’s purpose was “administrative” and that it did not involve personal travel.
He had flown there on a donor’s private plane.
The event was titled “Working to make dreams a reality,” according to an agenda obtained from the university by USA TODAY through a public records request.
The agenda features Tucker’s name prominently.
Tucker posted photos from the tour on his Twitter account.
That Tucker was on a university-sponsored work trip during the incident was a contributing factor in the university’s determination that it had jurisdiction to investigate, the investigation report shows.
Tucker’s lists of calls and text messages also were missing an important detail: They did not show any communication with Tracy on April 28.
He acknowledged in the interview, however, that he had not reviewed the lists before submitting them and that they may have been incomplete.
Tucker and Tracy did not speak in the three months after the April 28 call.
Meanwhile, their assistants were planning Tracy’s third visit to campus – an in-person training with coaches and players scheduled for July 25.
Tucker canceled that training three days before, the investigation report shows.
When Tracy spoke to him by phone on Aug. 2 seeking to find out why, she would tell the investigator in her interview that Tucker insinuated he would harm her career if she spoke about his conduct.
He never rescheduled her visit, and they never spoke again.
The cancellation became a key focus of the investigator – one of a series of alleged incidents that taken together would meet the definition of sexual harassment, which can include pressuring someone into engaging in sexual behavior for an employment benefit and threatening that rejecting such behavior will carry a negative consequence.
Tucker tried to distance himself from the cancellation in a public statement on Sept. 11, the day after Michigan State suspended him without pay.
“I never cancelled any presentation,” he wrote.
But that statement contradicts what he told the investigator.
Such timing would not make sense, he added, because most of his new players would not yet be on campus.
Tucker also told the investigator why he canceled the visit, blaming it on a scheduling conflict.
He said he had recently hired a mental conditioning coach, Ben Newman, who needed to implement his new program on short notice.
There was limited time in fall camp, Tucker said, and he didn’t want to “overwhelm” the players.
He said he decided to yield the time to Newman.
He had been meeting with them weekly since June 6, the records showed but held no meetings between July 15 and July 28.
One of Tucker’s assistants, who is a witness in the case, also told the investigator that Tucker asked him via text message to cancel it.
He said he was never instructed to reschedule.
Tucker confronted Tracy about the alleged gossiping during the Aug. 2 phone call, they both told the investigator.
Tracy said he berated and bullied her, repeatedly saying he could not trust her.
She said she told him she did not know what he was talking about.
During the Aug. 2 call, Tracy said she pressed Tucker to identify his source – the associate.
In her report, she wrote that he said he had “given (his) word that (he) wouldn’t divulge their name.”
Tucker never revealed the associate’s name to the investigator, nor did he identify anyone who could support his version of events.
In his Sept. 11 public statement, however, he lamented that the hearing would not afford him the opportunity to “offer any substantive evidence of innocence.”
It was not the only claim he attributed to his anonymous associate.
It turned out to be yet another falsehood.
“Neither the organization nor Tracy is or has been the target of any investigative reporting.”
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
Contributing: USA TODAY reporter Steve Berkowitz.
The bullets came in plywood crates.
Any given box was about the size of a small microwave oven.
The printed label stuck to each one demonstrated a militaristic brevity.
“CARTRIDGES FOR WEAPONS, INERT PROJECTILE,” next to a bright yellow hazmat sticker, “EXPLOSIVES.”
Inside the boxes: drab green steel cans of .50-caliber ammunition.
Each round was giant, more than 5 inches long, built to be fired from a gun so big it is typically bolted to a truck.
The bullets were clipped together in long strands for rapid, machine-gun fire.
By the time Bill Brown got to the boxes, they sat double-stacked eight high atop wooden pallets inside a Missouri warehouse.
The pallets went on, row after row.
Three million bullets in all.
It was enough ammunition to feed a single machine gun – if fired nonstop at its rated speed eight hours a day, seven days a week – for almost six months.
Brown’s job was to get it out of there and toward the Ukrainian front lines.
The faster, the better.
“War is bad,” Brown said.
There would be virtually no public record of this Ukrainian arms shipment.
As a weapons dealer, Brown’s company would deliver the bullets under a system known as a direct commercial sale.
Instead, it was part of a shadowy system of brokers, exporters, arms dealers and country-to-country transfers that has become one part of the race to meet demand on distant battlefields.
President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said the effort was delayed in part by the wait for more arms.
Most of America’s $44 billion in documented support to Ukraine came in the form of old U.S. military stock, donated directly by the federal government.
In general, commercial sales over $14 million, and sales of military-grade weaponry like mortars or missiles, require State Department approval and congressional notification.
But other aid comes via private sales.
More than 14,000 U.S. entities are registered to conduct defense trade activities.
Their deals are monitored by an alphabet soup of agencies including Departments of Homeland Security, Commerce, Defense and the Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
Trade secrecy clauses in federal law mean this flow of gear, weapons and ammunition is almost never revealed to the public.
Brown, who works for a small Nevada-based logistics company called Battle Born Munitions, provided USA TODAY with a rare look behind the curtain of these private sales.
Details about the shipment were verified by his employer and the European government that made the purchase.
State Department officials declined to answer questions about the specific shipment Brown described.
This March sale and the secret number of other shipments like it fuel Ukraine’s fight against a Russian invasion.
Those sales also release an unknown amount of weaponry into the world.
What becomes of that weaponry after it’s sold – and especially after it’s delivered – is difficult to track.
As Brown surveyed the warehouse in Missouri, a crew steered forklifts and skid lifts among the stacks of plain wooden boxes.
From high in the trusses, suspended lamp fixtures bathed the boxes in artificial daylight.
Brown lifted his camera and started snapping photos.
In just a few hours, he and his cargo would be boarding a jumbo jet.
From Ukraine:War crimes in Ukraine may be unprecedented.
So is the country's push for swift justice.
The bullets had once been bound for Saudi Arabia.
Lot number SMQ19K401L026 had rolled off the assembly line in 2019 at Lake City Army Ammunition Plant near Kansas City.
Lake City, owned by the government and run by a contractor, sprawls across nearly 4,000 acres of green Missouri farmland.
Roads curve past World War II-era bunkers known as igloos, spaced out amid the countryside – far enough apart that an explosion in one won’t trigger a chain reaction in the others.
Lake City has been pumping out ammunition almost without pause since 1941.
It is the largest small-arms manufacturing plant in the world.
And in 2019, Saudi Arabia was stocking up on weapons during the Trump administration, fueling the war in Yemen and other conflicts that drew criticism from congressional Democrats.
The plant manufactures .50-caliber ammunition on a rolling basis, for both military and commercial buyers.
That’s a testament to just what a legend the bullet – and the gun that shoots it – has become.
In 2019, the technology was already a century old.
The .50 caliber was the brainchild of American gunsmith John Browning during World War I.
Built to respond to German anti-tank rifles, the M2 was first tested in 1918, and it entered widespread service in 1923.
It earned the nickname “Ma Deuce” and has served in combat ever since, bolted to trucks, ships, planes and handheld stands on the battlefield.
The .50-caliber rounds – named for their diameter, about half an inch – can easily hit targets more than a mile away.
At closer ranges, they will blast through solid concrete or armored vehicles.
The gun can fire at a sustained rate of about 40 shots per minute.
Military setups use strings of “linked” ammunition to feed into machine guns.
Spaced out after every fourth bullet, so-called tracer rounds have small pyrotechnic charges that illuminate the line of fire, aiding in targeting.
The gun’s longevity and versatility made it popular for militaries the world over.
But this particular batch of bullets wouldn’t end up being sold to Saudi Arabia.
The Biden administration put a temporary freeze on sales to the Saudi government in 2021 as it reviewed weapons deals approved under Donald Trump.
Instead, Brown said, the bullets were sold to a U.S. ammunition provider, only to be held up again.
Ultimately, they were mothballed.
Then, in spring 2023, the bullets found a buyer, or actually two: first Battle Born; ultimately, the Netherlands.
The European country, a NATO ally, needed a big supply of ammunition.
It wouldn’t be keeping the bullets but giving them to Ukraine.
Its purchase, essentially a donation, would count toward the country’s required NATO contribution.
Brown had a line on exactly what they needed.
It was sitting in the warehouse in Missouri.
He arrived in March to personally oversee the shipment.
As he prepped for delivery, Brown dropped tiny black tracking devices onto several of the pallets.
Just $55 apiece, the units use GPS and cell signals to keep tabs on the load.
The idea was to ensure it wouldn’t fall into the wrong hands.
But packing up the bullets was just the beginning.
As with anything that’s deadly and made of metal, the shipping costs can be extreme.
Forty-five to 60 days on a ship?
Brown – or Chief Bill, as he prefers – is a no-nonsense 35-year veteran of the U.S. Army and former helicopter pilot.
He retired as a chief warrant officer and lives in Orlando.
Now 59, he still spends a lot of time on the road – 10 international trips this year.
He says his arms logistics work takes him to places most Americans would rather avoid – near the Syrian border or to unstable regions of Iraq.
He’ll travel halfway around the world, he quips, “have some soup, and go back to Warsaw to head home.” The trips aren’t really about the destinations.
They’re about the cargo.
On that spring day in Missouri, forklifts carefully loaded 107 pallets of the ammo onto 18 flatbed semitrailers.
They’d all make the eight-hour drive to O’Hare International Airport.
In Chicago, two Boeing 747-400s operated by National Airlines would be ready for the freight.
Four pallets each were stacked and shrink-wrapped to create “air pallets” or “cookie sheets” weighing 12,800 pounds.
Each plane could carry up to 17 of the pallets that ran the length of each plane secured by white cargo netting.
Flight records Brown provided show the two planes departed about seven hours apart, one in early afternoon, one after dark.
The flight would take nine hours.
Brown wasn’t going to the Netherlands, even though it was the buyer.
The planes were bound for Rzeszów, Poland.
The ancient city sits at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains in southeastern Poland.
It has a gleaming modern airport next to a major east-west freeway.
From there, it’s barely 60 miles to the border with Ukraine.
It was an expensive journey.
The trucking company’s bill for those 18 semis?
Chartering the two 747s?
But this shipment of .50-cal rounds was profitable for Battle Born Munitions, according to Brown.
The company purchased the 3 million rounds from Northrop Grumman at a bargain and resold them for more than double the price.
(In subsequent interviews, representatives at BBM disputed the specific totals Brown mentioned, saying the accurate figures were protected by “various commercial and government non-disclosure agreements.” They did not dispute the other specifics of the deal he provided.)
Retail prices for .50-caliber ammunition run roughly $5 per bullet.
At that rate, the whole shipment would have been worth $15 million.
The pricing might also be elastic.
The Dutch mark up the price of the bullets and count it toward their NATO contribution, pegged to a percentage of gross domestic product, Brown said.
The Netherlands has contributed about $15 billion to NATO this year, or about 1.7% of its GDP and just under the NATO mandate of 2%.
Representatives of the Dutch military confirmed the shipment to USA TODAY but declined to comment further about the pricing or details.
The war in Ukraine has only increased the demand for private deals.
The State Department signed off on more than $154 billion in commercial arms deals directly to foreign countries in 2022, a 48% increase from the previous year.
Direct commercial sales represent a modest portion of the contribution to Ukraine compared with the $44 billion donated by the U.S., but they still amounted to more than $600 million in sales from U.S. companies to the Ukrainian government last year alone.
That doesn’t include sales to other countries that also support Ukraine – sales like the one Brown described.
Jim Bartlett, an attorney with expertise in the specialized international arms transactions, said private U.S. businesses are playing a small but important role in the conflict.
“American companies are happy to export defense articles to foreign buyers approved by the U.S. State Department,” Bartlett said.
Those sales also come with risks.
Direct sales face fewer regulatory controls, oversight and enforcement, said Robert Nichols, an international military sales expert and attorney at the law firm Nichols Liu.
“You can imagine the range of characters involved in supplying a war effort,” Nichols said.
So far, the Department of Justice has indicted just a handful of arms brokers over deals related to the war in Ukraine.
They allegedly lied to Commerce Department agents and told them the parts were bound for Turkey.
Both pleaded not guilty to the charges this summer.
A State Department spokesman declined to provide details of enforcement actions but said, “The United States takes seriously our responsibility to protect American military and dual-use technologies and prevent their diversion, including through strong enforcement actions.”
NATO said it oversees allied arms deliveries, and that those arms generally reach Ukraine.
NATO itself technically only provides non-non-lethal aid, like fuel, medical supplies and generators.
Brown, of Battle Born, says he fields calls weekly from “clowns” without the proper licensing, whom he reports to the State Department for potential violations.
Some raise red flags when they approach him about transactions that include payment via diamonds or gold.
He prefers traditional wire transfers with approved sales partners since he knows government officials are watching.
He validates the contracts and checks certificates for the final users.
That’s part of why he traveled with the ammunition.
He would be meeting a Dutch military official for the official handoff.
“My job is to keep us all out of jail,” Brown said.
The two 747s touched down in Poland, one before the sun, the other in late morning.
Brown exchanged paperwork with a young Dutch military staffer who signed for the delivery, he said.
They traded military patches as souvenirs.
They snapped a photo together.
The bullets bought by the Netherlands would never touch Dutch soil.
U.S. aid:Billions from the US flows to Ukraine.
Here's where it comes from, and how it adds up
Despite playing a small role proportionately in the war, $600 million in direct commercial sales can buy a lot of small weaponry.
Put another way: It’s hard to sneak away an F-16 or a missile launcher the size of a tractor-trailer.
But a bunch of guns or a pallet of ammo?
Much easier to resell.
After Russia invaded Ukraine in 2014, the Small Arms Survey, a Swiss arms research project, estimated that within a year, battlefield seizures and other forms of diversion led to 300,000 small arms and light weapons going missing, including 100,000 in Crimea alone.
When small arms go missing, they can go missing into another country, maybe one led by a despot or even a terrorist organization.
The U.S. government says diversion of American donations has been widely absent so far in Ukraine.
That could be a combination of intensive “end-use-monitoring” programs and the reality of the battlefield, where supplies are rapidly put to use.
But even if not now, unused ammo could be resold someday.
“These are commodities with very long shelf lives.”
Florida-based Global Ordnance, another State Department-licensed exporter, is a competitor in the direct weapons sales business.
General counsel Bryan Van Brunt said the company has extensive protocols in place to track shipments and make sure the end-users are federally approved, though he declined to provide specifics about those systems.
Brown, with Battle Born Munitions, says the company employs a mix of simple and sophisticated tracking technology to ensure his shipments are tracked to end users.
The black GPS devices he dropped onto his cargo tracked the ammo all the way across the globe.
But that system only works as long as Brown is actually tracking.
“Technically, my role ends when I deliver it to NATO,” he said.
Sometime after the 747s touched down in Poland, along with signing the paperwork and snapping a selfie with the Dutch official, Brown found the tiny black GPS trackers and lifted them off the pallets.
Ukrainian trucks would arrive at the airport to pick up the ammunition.
They would point toward the border, and onward to Lviv, and some distant battlefield.
Brown would point in the opposite direction.
Just like one of his quips: Fly in, have soup, get home.
He headed toward Warsaw, with the GPS trackers in his bag.
Contact him at npenz@usatoday.com or @npenzenstadler, or on Signal at (720) 507-5273.
The geography professor didn’t hide his clown fetish or the fact that he sometimes indulged his urges by recruiting students as subjects.
He posted regularly about it on social media.
He submitted his resignation the same day their story was published.
His interactions with students and open discussion of his fetish happened in both mainstream and tailored digital spaces.
He popped into Facebook groups geared toward new students and niche forums on websites like Reddit.
He posted videos on YouTube.
Over the years, two students reported him to campus police; others complained online.
He left Kent State University after pleading no contest to something different: a theft charge that involved entering his peers’ offices without permission and taking a USB drive.
Nicholls State, for example, told USA TODAY Network reporters it does not routinely check social media for new hires.
The money was appealing but the interactions soured.
“I thought maybe they could prevent anything bad from happening since other girls would go with him.”
She said there was never any followup from campus police – or anyone else.
The two who expressed public concerns on social media told USA TODAY they never heard from their campus officials either.
She said she would pass along that reporters were trying to reach him.
He said his contract was not renewed because he was the target of a “grade inflation task force.”
She has seen the pattern often in her work maintaining a database of publicly documented sexual misconduct by faculty and staff.
As for grad students?
“I don’t on purpose,” she said, “because that’s information that almost never comes out.”
He was working toward his doctorate and researched fading businesses.
His work about shopping malls in the Rust Belt won several awards.
Like many graduate students, he also taught classes.
“I will literally pay you!”
What’s more, she figured out that he was a graduate student, a fact she said he didn’t disclose in his posts.
It arrived at midnight and contained no message, although writing on his shirt read: “I'm not a failure.”
“It’s definitely burned into my mind.”
He would send “get to know you” messages, the police report said, and then ask the student if she was “interested in having her face painted for one of his class projects.”
“She does not have any concerns for her safety, but just wanted this documented,” the police report read.
In July 2017, another student had retweeted a message from Kent State’s Twitter account that asked for Kent State love stories.
She said she tweeted to draw officials’ attention to it and moved on but now wishes she had reported it officially.
College campuses are supposed to offer students special protections from sexual harassment even when it falls short of criminal behavior.
Title IX, often associated with equity in women’s sports, also addresses “sex-based harassment, which encompasses sexual assault and other forms of sexual violence” at schools that receive federal funding.
Colleges infrequently and unevenly enforce the rule, however.
A 2022 USA TODAY investigation found just one of every 12,400 students was suspended in connection with sexual misconduct.
The student who shared her story online said the only response she received was from a graduate student in the geography department, who contacted her on Oct. 1, 2018.
In an email, he wrote that he had seen her post and suspected he knew which faculty member had asked her about face painting.
“I brought it to the attention of some of our faculty because I was pretty sure I knew who it was, but they were certain it wasn’t that individual and that you probably just meant geology,” he wrote.
He went on to reference another student being “approached in (at least by just looking at your tweet) a much more aggressive way.” The grad student asked the undergraduate for more information, but, she told USA TODAY, she didn’t respond.
She said she started drafting a reply, but a year had passed.
She wanted to move on.
Kent State would not say whether any actions were taken after the students’ reports, but Eric Mansfield, a spokesman for the university, said the police department confirmed that the students who filed police reports were provided with “university resources, which would include other non-criminal avenues to pursue (Counseling Services, Title IX, Center for Sexual and Relationship Violence Services, etc.)
Mansfield also said that the university monitors social media but that colleges “can’t always see or track every mention on social media.”
A blotter item in the local newspaper shows police obtained an arrest warrant in connection with a third-degree felony burglary charge.
“Also, we do not comment on personnel matters.”
In more recent years, Buckley has become critical of the law and how schools interpret it.
He told the Columbus Dispatch in 2010 that “the law needs to be revamped.”
Survivors of sexual violence and students accuse universities of using the law to avoid negative media coverage.
Students with a history of bad behavior may jump from one school to another without the public ever knowing about their histories.
One case involved Brandon Austin, who was accused of sexual assault at Providence College in 2013 while on the school’s basketball team.
But Providence College initially said Austin was suspended for violating the school’s code of student conduct and declined to share further details with the Providence Journal, citing federal privacy laws.
Austin denied wrongdoing and was not charged with a crime.
Austin was able to transfer to the University of Oregon, where he was again accused of sexual assault, along with other players.
Police investigated the claims, and the local district attorney declined to press charges.
And it doesn’t apply when a student is “seeking or intending to enroll” at another college.
He blamed the overuse of the law on fear of being sued.
While most U.S. employers conduct background screening, according to trade group data, those inquiries typically focus on criminal history.
Social media receives far less attention even though that is where people are most likely to share their unguarded thoughts.
Undertaking a full review of a person’s social media presence is more difficult than just checking an applicant’s Facebook page.
Does an applicant have an account on X, formerly Twitter?
How about an account with Discord, an online platform frequented by gamers, where leaked Pentagon documents were recently shared?
Or what about a Telegram account, a messaging platform popular among white nationalists?
Further complicating things, it’s common on sites like Reddit for users to adopt usernames and describe experiences with little to no ties to reality.
A little digging, however, can turn up a lot of dirt.
His time as a student and instructor at Kent State is absent.
That is the same handle used on Reddit by someone with a special interest in face paint.
Other posts mention a “clown fetish.” In a forum titled “Creepy,” he wrote, “I convince pretty girls to let me paint their faces,” along with a photo with multiple women in white face paint.
That and other similar posts remained live for years until they were taken down after the Nicholls students published their story in late March.
USA TODAY Network reporters captured screenshots before they disappeared.
With dates in 2019, the posts feature a young woman wearing a Kent State T-shirt.
The material would have been available to administrators at Northern Illinois before the start of the fall 2019 semester.
Joe King, a spokesman for Northern Illinois, said departments hiring new graduate students are “not required to check social media or investigate a disciplinary history.” He added some departments may reach out to the graduate students’ former advisers.
But there are signs the behavior continued.
She said she declined to do it but was aware that other Northern Illinois students had participated.
She asked, had anyone complained?
Many students would find a reason to complain, as Nicholls State student journalist Sally-Anne Torres learned firsthand.
It started in January when one of her fellow reporters picked up an odd rumor: a professor was offering extra credit for students willing to paint their faces like clowns.
Initially, Torres dismissed it because it seemed too unusual and there weren’t a lot of leads to follow.
He blamed his departure on giving too many A’s.
That seemed suspicious to Torres.
“It wasn’t just this innocent thing that a lot of these girls thought it was,” Torres said.
Some, she said, were followed on Twitter by him while others opted into an extra credit assignment he offered.
The women told Torres he sometimes giggled and laughed as they painted their faces in his office.
It seemed unusual at the time, Price said, because his friend wasn’t in the class.
It became more concerning to him on reading the student newspaper’s report.
“I feel frankly disgusted and disappointed that Nicholls couldn’t do a proper background check on this professor, because this is unacceptable,” Price said.
Ramos learned that the person behind the account was likely a professor at the university.
She posted about the behavior in January 2022, but nothing came of it.
On March 27, the same day the student newspaper published its piece, Ramos posted screenshots of her discoveries on Twitter with the message, “Found a Nicholls state university professor on Reddit.”
“I wish the university had acted sooner because all this information was public on the internet,” she told USA TODAY.
No one from the university, she said, has ever reached out.
He can be reached at CCampo@gannett.com.
An array of false and misleading claims have spread widely on social media in the midst of the Israel-Hamas conflict.
Israel formally declared war after the Palestinian militant group launched a surprise attack on the morning of Oct. 7.
The Israeli military has fought to regain control of several towns on the border with Gaza and responded with retaliatory strikes in the blockaded enclave.
More than 1,900 people have died in the ongoing conflict as of Oct. 11.
The ensuing wave of misinformation echoes the aftermath of Russia's invasion of Ukraine in February 2022.
Again, major social media platforms are awash in claims that old photos and videos actually showed the present conflict, while other posts fabricate or exaggerate the nature of the conflict and the American response.
Here's a roundup of claims about the Israel-Hamas conflict from the USA TODAY Fact-Check Team:
More: US death toll rises to 22; Hamas denies targeting kids; misery across Gaza: Live updates
Our rating: False
There's no evidence the White House approved an $8 billion aid package for Israel.
The supposed memo announcing the aid is a fabrication, according to officials.
Our rating: False
There are no credible reports that Saudi Arabia has called off talks to normalize diplomatic ties with Israel.
The post claims Saudi Arabia told Secretary of State Antony Blinken as much, but Blinken made no mention of it in multiple recent interviews.
The post cites The Jerusalem Post, but there is no evidence the newspaper published such a report.
Our rating: False
The video predates the Hamas attacks on Israel in October.
It was taken in May and shows an Israeli airstrike against the militant Islamic Jihad group in Gaza.
Our rating: Missing context
The implied claim is false.
Our rating: False
The video shows several leaders of an Azerbaijani separatist group after they were arrested, not Israeli generals.
The arrests took place four days before the Hamas attack on Israel.
Our rating: False
The video is from 2020, not a response to the current Israel-Hamas conflict.
There are no credible reports that any of those chants mentioned Israel.
Thank you for supporting our journalism.
You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or e-newspaper here.
Our fact-check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook.
Austin’s announcement, after a meeting of allies in Brussels, comes a week after a Russian missile attack killed more than 50 people at a café and market in eastern Ukraine.
The new weapons shipment is the latest since the Russian invasion in Feb. 2022, bringing total American military support to more than $40 billion.
The lack of House speaker has cast doubt on congressional approval for future aid to Ukraine.
The lack of a breakthrough by Ukrainian forces in their months-long offensive has also caused unease among allies and softening support in the United States.
But Austin noted that several nations, including Germany, Great Britain, Spain and Sweden, made commitments valued at hundreds of dollars to Ukraine.
F-16 warplanes, long sought by Ukraine, will be ready for combat in the spring at the earliest, Austin said.
Concerning Israel, Brown said there was no indication that adversaries such as Hezbollah had sought to attack Israel following the assault by Hamas militants on Saturday.
The Pentagon moved the USS Gerald Ford Strike Group, an aircraft carrier, destroyers and 5,000 sailors to the eastern Mediterranean to deter such attacks.
Attorneys representing Lindell are asking the courts for permission to quit his case according to court documents.
Attorney Andrew Parker claims that Lindell owes them millions of dollars he cannot pay back.
Lindell spoke to the Associated Press and confirmed that he does not have enough money to pay the lawyers and understands why they are dropping the case.
Parker claims that this would put the firm at a substantial financial risk.
Parker wrote in his fillings that Lindell paid the firm through the end of 2022.
However, according to Parker, the payments slowed down in 2023 when fees for litigation increased.
In May, the firm received payments over 60 days late and the payment did not meet the total of bills due.
In July and August, no payments were made at all.
Lindell has seen much financial trouble this year.
Along with the lawsuit against him, many retailers like Walmart discontinued his products after he backed former President Donald Trump's claims about the 2020 election.
In April, Lindell was ordered to pay $5 million to a software engineer for breaching a contract with the engineer.
Lindell used data to support his claims that China helped in the 2020 elections and helped President Joe Biden win.
This was all part of his "Prove Mike Wrong Challenge" at the "Cyber Symposium" in 2021 located in South Dakota.
The company was impacted by Lindell's backing of former President Donald Trump's election fraud claims, for which he is currently fighting off a $1.3 billion defamation lawsuit.
His company also lost an arbitration case in April related to election fraud claims, leading to his company, Lindell LLC, being ordered to pay $5 million.
"Not just in the House for the people of this country but we see how dangerous of a world it is and how things can change so quickly."
The conference vote however, is just a sign of approval from House Republicans at large.
The House still has to formally elect a new speaker on the House floor, and lawmakers are still free to nominate other candidates.
House Republicans control the lower chamber by a razor-thin majority.
2 ranking House Republican.
House Republicans could move to hold a speaker election on the floor as early as Wednesday afternoon.
The onus, they say, is on House Republicans to elect a new speaker.
Allison Josephs got a bone-chilling threat in 2012 from someone who identified herself as Becky.
“Hitler should have finished his good work,” the message read.
The writer said she had her Louisville Slugger ready for the “next chance we get.”
The frequency of hate-filled social media posts targeting Jews has only increased since then, said Josephs, a mother of four who runs the nonprofit Jew in the City.
So she said she was not surprised by the wave of online hate immediately following the deadly attacks in Israel as people celebrated Hamas’ acts of terror, striking fear of more violence to come.
“From a social media perspective, it’s already been so bad, it’s kind of hard for it to get worse,” Josephs said.
But it is getting worse.
Groups who study online hate speech say it has spiked in recent days – not just for Jewish communities but also for Palestinians, who have faced increasing online hatred.
And representatives of both communities agree on one thing: U.S.-based social media companies are still not doing anywhere near enough to rid their platforms of hate against targeted groups.
“When it comes to serious crises like these where you're going to see the worst of the worst types of violent content, gore, incitement to violence, it's really incumbent on social media companies to coordinate across platforms,” said Daniel Kelley, director of strategy and operations at the Anti-Defamation League’s Center for Tech and Society, “in order to make sure that the platforms play the minimal amount of role possible in inflaming further violence.”
The escalation in harsh rhetoric comes at a time when online hate speech was already increasing, experts said.
In the weeks before the conflict, the ADL was locked in a bitter dispute with X, formerly Twitter, over Elon Musk’s alleged promotion of extremists and hands-off approach to content moderation.
Meanwhile, 7amleh, an Arab civil rights organization has been meeting with X for months, trying to persuade the company to quell hate speech against Palestinians.
And it’s not just X.
Representatives of civil rights groups said they face a constant struggle working with powerful social media platforms to combat hate speech at the best of times.
As the conflict in the Middle East escalates, they said, these companies really need to step up their game.
Israel-Hamas War newsletter: Sign up to get the latest news and analysis on the conflict in your inbox.
“We are talking about tech giants that are making billions of dollars annually, who cannot invest more money and resources in their platforms to protect oppressed communities, especially in times of crisis.”
Several organizations monitoring online hate speech agree there has been a significant increase in such posts in the four days since Hamas attacked Israel.
Matthew Williams, founder and chief scientist of the online harms monitoring platform nisien.ai, said the online harms monitoring platform has been identifying trends across social media since the conflict broke out.
"The Hamas terror attack and the subsequent declaration of war by Israel coincided with significant spikes in both forms of hate speech, indicating their roles as 'trigger events,'" Williams said.
“Nisien.ai has identified an increase in both antisemitic and anti-Muslim rhetoric, as might have been anticipated.”
On X, a popular antisemitic influencer posted photographs of the World Trade Center attacks on 9/11 referencing the completely disproven conspiracy theory that the attack was connected to Israel: “It’s hard to have much sympathy for the Israeli regime when they helped perpetrate this attack on my country.” The post had more than 3,800 likes as of Tuesday afternoon.
The ADL counted 347 messages on Telegram from extremists calling for violence against Jews, Israelis and Zionists in the first 18 hours of Saturday, up approximately 488% from the day before.
7amleh, The Arab Center for Social Media Advancement, a nonprofit that partners with Meta, Facebook’s parent company, has also been monitoring hate speech against Palestinians.
The organization’s researchers manually found 260 examples of hate speech across all platforms in the last few days.
7amleh’s automated analysis identified 4,305 posts on X related to the invasion and ensuing conflict that contained violent or hateful speech.
Noting the “surge of antisemitism, hate, disinformation, misinformation, and propaganda spread on social media and messaging platforms,” the ADL released a guide for social media platforms over the weekend.
It details seven steps the organization wants social media companies to take immediately, including increasing human and automated trust and safety resources and promoting trusted and reliable news sources.
The ADL’s report also noted that domestic extremists, white supremacists and conspiracy theorists have flocked online to cheer on the attack on Israel.
Much of that hate unfolded on Telegram, the go-to messaging and social media platform for extremists.
But hateful posts have also been shared on X and on Gab, another fringe platform popular with far-right extremists.
Social media companies say they are closely monitoring the situation.
Meta said it has Hebrew and Arabic speakers working around the clock to respond in real time.
TikTok said it has also ramped up resources to help curb violent, hateful, or misleading content and boosted moderation resources in Hebrew and Arabic.
YouTube owner Google said during major world events like the Hamas attacks on Israel, it prioritizes news and information from authoritative sources and removes harmful content.
Content produced by terrorist organizations including footage showing hostages is not permitted on YouTube and that includes content produced by Hamas, according to YouTube.
“Hate speech targeting the Jewish, Palestinian or any other religious or ethnic communities is not allowed on YouTube,” the company said in a statement.
“This applies to all forms of content, including videos, livestreams and comments, and our policies are enforced across languages and locales.”
Adding to the challenge in monitoring antisemitic and anti-Muslim rhetoric is that “some of this hate is coded, with some posters avoiding recognized racial and religious slurs, and instead constructing their posts using negative stereotypes and tropes,” Williams said.
That makes it more difficult for automatic moderation and human moderators to catch inappropriate posts.
As hateful language evolves, and new terms and slogans become popular, moderators must constantly evolve their efforts.
But social media companies like Meta, looking to reduce costs, have eliminated jobs focused on safety issues.
They are increasingly leaning on artificial intelligence systems to moderate content and enforce their rules.
“For the moment we're seeing a lack of investment – we're seeing a lack of ability to independently verify the rate and the amount and the severity of hate,” the ADL’s Kelley said.
X has been widely criticized for its hands-off approach to posts trading in hate speech, misinformation and violence, according to experts monitoring social media.
Posts depicting graphic pictures of murdered civilians and Israeli soldiers, antisemitic hate speech and anti-Palestinian messages are being widely shared on Elon Musk’s platform, those experts said.
X, which gutted its content moderation team under Musk, said late Monday that it was taking the situation seriously as more than 50 million posts about the Hamas attack flooded the platform.
“As the events continue to unfold rapidly, a cross-company leadership group has assessed this moment as a crisis requiring the highest level of response,” the company’s safety account tweeted.
X said its escalations team was “continuing to proactively monitor for antisemitic speech,” removed newly created Hamas-affiliated accounts and took action against “tens of thousands of posts for sharing graphic media, violent speech, and hateful conduct.” It urged people who were concerned about the flood of graphic and misleading content to choose not to see “sensitive media.” X did not respond to a request for comment.
European officials warned X on Tuesday that the company appears to be hosting misinformation about the war in violation of the European Union's content moderation law, CNN reported.
The X representative asked 7amleh to translate it into English, he said.
X is “horrible at content moderation,” he said.
Basically, you can write, ‘kill them,’ ‘rape them,’ ‘burn them’ – whatever you want.
X’s response to the flood of hate speech has been to promote “community notes,” an outsourced effort that relies on verified volunteers to attach notes to posts that are inaccurate.
Musk praised the open-source effort to moderate harmful content in a post on Tuesday, writing “Thank you for fighting for truth.”
The concept that we are all computer-generated characters occupying a world as real as the ones gamers explore on their PlayStation consoles isn't exactly a new one.
As far back as 1999, Morpheus was entering "The Matrix" to break Neo and a few other chosen few out of a simulated reality created by advanced machines in order to use humans as an energy source.
That's what happened this week when a physicist at the University of Portsmouth in the United Kingdom proposed that a new law of physics could support the theory that what we see as our reality is in fact a complex virtual simulation running on a cosmic computer.
"Any normal person will think, could it be that maybe we already are in some kind of digital virtual reality world?"
Psyche mission, explained:What to know about NASA's long-awaited trip to a strange metal asteroid
In principle, anything can be simulated with a computer with sufficient power.
The theory is popular among many notable figures, including Elon Musk.
The Tesla founder and CEO weighed in at a 2016 conference, stating that in his opinion, the odds that we're living in what he called "base reality" — in other words, the real universe as opposed to a simulated one — are “one in billions.”
So are we not unlike the characters we oversee in the Sims, confined to a superficial, restricted sandbox while more advanced beings are spectators to our existence?
In fact, 2020 research authored by David Kipping, an astronomer at Columbia University, found that the odds of us living in a base reality are pretty much 50-50, with the odds only slightly in favor of our universe not being simulated.
Prada in space:Famed Italian fashion house will help design NASA's spacesuits for mission to the moon
"My questions was, where is that information going when the bit is at equilibrium and is stored information?"
"Energy can't exist on its own, it needs to be in some form."
That law essentially dictates that any naturally occurring process will result in a loss of energy and increase in a system's measure of disorder, or entropy (think of an ice cube that gradually melts when placed in a cup of water at room temperature.)
In short, it's a process he said could support the idea that we may be living in a Matrix-style artificial reality akin to a computer simulation, where we and anything else we perceive is nothing more than a virtual facsimile.
"It underpins the concept through empirical evidence, but it doesn't mean necessarily that is totally the consensus that is happening; it is one possibility."
Reach him at elagatta@gannett.com
Agility Robotics announced the opening in Salem, Oregon on Monday, saying they expect to soon have the capacity to produce 10,00 robots annually.
Construction of the 70,000-square-foot facility began last year and is set to open in late 2023.
Creating advanced robots for sale to the public is a new development in the robotics industry, as access to such high-end tech has been generally reserved for entities such as businesses and government agencies in the past.
Now, however, Damion Shelton, Agility Robotics’ co-founder and CEO, said the opening of the facility marks a pivotal moment in the history of robots: the beginning of mass production of commercial humanoid bots.
Robot dog patrols NYC:Not RoboCop, but a new robot is patrolling New York's Times Square subway station
The first iteration of Digit was initially released in 2020 and featured a bipedal, human-sized design, though it was eerily headless.
This Digit was capable of preforming some tasks autonomously, such as picking up a box, but would need help from a human to navigate through a room.
The new and improved version was released in March of this year, complete with a head and new set of animated LED "eyes."
"With logistics labor issues such as high turnover, burnout, and injury continuing to rise, we believe Digit to be the future of work."
While Digit seems to have big ambitions to climb the corporate ladder, the robot currently still has fairly limited functionality, relegated mostly to simple tasks such as picking up and putting down objects, walking and crouching.
Musk introduces chip implant:Elon Musk's Neuralink chip is ready to embark on its first clinical trial.
Here's how to sign up.
At full capacity, the new factory will employ 500 human workers who will work alongside Digit robots to build, well, more robots.
The robots already work in Agility's customer sites, moving, loading and unloading totes.
Company officials said they anticipate production capacity of hundreds of Digit robots in the first year, with the capability to scale to more than 10,000 robots per year.
"Digit is designed from the ground up to go where people go and do useful work, safely, in spaces designed for people," company officials said.
Customers in the company's Agility Partner Program can expect to receive the first Digit robots in 2024, according to the company.
Digit is scheduled to be available in the general market in 2025 for a yet undisclosed price.
A birthday party is a treat many kids can take for granted.
With a limited income and four children to provide for, Ángel's mom said she'd never had the money to throw him a party.
Together with Ángel's classmates, they hatched a plan to surprise him with a birthday party at school.
His heartfelt reaction was priceless!
Watch the video below to see a young boy shed tears of joy at his first-ever birthday party.
Humankind is your go-to spot for good news!
Click here to submit your uplifting, cute, or inspiring video moments for us to feature.
Also, click here to subscribe to our newsletter, bringing our top stories of the week straight to your inbox.
A NASA spacecraft will launch Thursday in a highly-anticipated mission though the solar system that scientists hope will reveal secrets about Earth's own core.
After years of planning and a year-long delay, NASA is planning to launch Psyche from the Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida on Thursday at 10:16 a.m.
Psyche is named for the asteroid to which it is headed to visit and gather information.
NASA is streaming the launch, with live coverage beginning at 9:15 a.m.
You can watch the launch at the video embed at the top of this page, or on NASA Television, the NASA app, NASA website and the agency's accounts on Twitch, X, Daily Motion and YouTube.
Once launched, Psyche is expected to take a six-year, 2.2 billion-mile journey to the Psyche asteroid, which orbits the sun between Mars and Jupiter.
Psyche mission:What to know about NASA's long-awaited trip to a strange metal asteroid
The two-day search for a missing special needs Michigan toddler ended in tragedy on Tuesday after authorities said they found his body in a creek bed near his home.
“It is with great sadness that we are reporting that the missing child was located deceased,” the department posted to its Facebook page about 5 p.m. Tuesday.
"Please pray for the family during this tragic time."
A medical examiner will determine the toddler's cause and manner of death, officials said.
Murder arrest in missing KY mother case:Ex boyfriend arrested in case of Crystal Rogers, who disappeared in 2015
The boy was last seen wearing a blue sweatshirt with dinosaurs on it, a pair of shorts with shark images on it.
He wore no shoes.
The temperature at the local Capital Region International Airport dipped as low as 42 degrees at 3 a.m. Tuesday, according to the National Weather Service Grand Rapids office, and remained in the low 40s later that morning.
In addition, a Michigan State Police helicopter with thermal imaging, and drones aided in the search.
Contributing, Mike Ellis and Dan Basso with the Lansing State Journal, part of the USA TODAY Network.
Reach her at nalund@usatoday.com and follow her on X @nataliealund.
Of course, many people buy their pumpkins early to ensure they get the pick of the bunch.
But while that makes sense, it can also lead to your pumpkin ending up as a slushy puddle on the floor well before any trick-or-treaters come calling.
The battle against decay, mold, and the elements can be frightfully frustrating where pumpkins are concerned.
But fear not!
Here's everything you need to know about making Halloween pumpkins last longer.
Watch the video above to learn how to make your Halloween pumpkins last longer.
Make your house smell like fall: How to make a pumpkin spice oil diffuser
Purchases you make through our links may earn us and our publishing partners a commission.
Reviewed helps you find the best stuff and get the most out of what you already own.
It sounded like fireworks.
But it turned out to be the sound of missiles.
"Please pray for our safe travel home and the peace here in the Holy Land, especially the innocent people from Israel and Palestine that are dying."
The group left Jerusalem following the violence to a safe location as they awaited their flight home to Memphis on Tuesday.
The struggle to come home – and the fear for loved ones left behind in the deadly war zones of Gaza and Israel – is very real for many Americans as the world watches the violence abroad unfold.
The news moves quickly.
We break it down for you.
Sign up for USA TODAY’S Israel-Hamas War newsletter for a run-down of the day’s headlines.
The U.S. citizens longing to return to America include several people from church groups, including those in Naples, Florida, visiting Jerusalem for religious reasons, Salt Lake City-based Palestinian-Americans visiting family members and New Jersey Jewish residents who were celebrating the Simchat Torah holiday.
They told the USA TODAY Network that their trips turned from a tranquil, joyous crusade away from home into a catastrophic nightmare from which they needed to swiftly escape.
On Saturday morning, Hamas launched a surprise attack, launching a barrage of rockets and sending gunmen onto Israeli territory.
In response, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and the Israeli cabinet declared a retaliatory war against Hamas and ordered its military factions in Gaza to undertake a "complete siege."
Israeli leaders have sent airstrikes into Gaza City, destroyed buildings including a 14-story tower and threatened to cut off essential needs including electricity, access to food and fuel, the news outlet Al Jazeera reported.
More than 1,600 people, including at least 14 Americans, have been killed so far and many others are missing.
At least 900 people from Israel and at least 765 people have been killed in Gaza, according to Israel’s Army Radio and the Gaza Health Ministry, CNN and CBS News reported.
The tension derives from decades of conflict between Palestinian territories and Israel, which has left tens of thousands of people dead and even more displaced, Al Jazeera reported.
American Airlines flights are canceled through Friday, Delta flights are canceled through Oct. 31 and United flights are canceled indefinitely.
"Our hearts are with those who are impacted as our people work to find safe alternatives for customers trying to depart TLV," said Savannah Huddleston, a spokesperson for Delta, in an email to USA TODAY.
There is congressional support to help people escape in other ways.
"While I appreciate the steps the Biden administration is taking to provide additional security assistance to Israel, I urge the State Department to use all resources at its disposal to help those Americans that remain in Israel return to the United States," she wrote in a letter to U.S. Secretary of State Anthony Blinken.
But the escape route they're recommending comes with risk as Israel attacks the border with missiles.
"U.S. citizens are reminded to remain vigilant and take appropriate steps to increase their security awareness as security incidents, including mortar and rocket fire, often take place without warning," the U.S. Embassy wrote in an alert on Monday.
The uncertainty has affected Americans who live across the nation.
He was expecting a joyous trip but now is rushing to get home.
Flights out of the country were canceled and he and others resorted to booking tickets to Europe on El AI, the Israeli airline, hoping to get a flight home, Schwartz said.
"I got a flight to Bulgaria and will somehow get to New Jersey," Schwartz told NorthJersey.com, part of the USA TODAY Network.
Hamas is also holding dozens of hostages in Gaza.
They include Israeli civilians and military personnel, according to Israel's ambassador to the United Nations.
Some Americans are among them, President Joe Biden said on Tuesday.
Officials are unsure exactly how many are in hostage situations, said Jake Sullivan, the national security adviser.
At least 20 Americans are unaccounted for, he said.
Contact Kayla Jimenez at kjimenez@usatoday.com.
Follow her on X, formerly Twitter, at @kaylajjimenez
The TV host went on to thank her co-workers for "being supportive," the guests who appeared on the show and their "wonderful viewers" for being "the very best company every day."
"I will miss you all so much."
The third party was expected to arrive in the U.K. from the U.S. this week.
On Friday's show, her co-host Dermot O'Leary addressed the charges, telling the audience, "We are not going to talk too much about it, but Holly is on the front pages after police arrested a 36-year-old man over an alleged kidnap plot."
O'Leary and Hammond both expressed love and support for their co-host in the Instagram comments of her departure announcement.
Roy Wood Jr. exits 'The Daily Show'amid Comedy Central permanent host search
WASHINGTON − The Biden administration is proposing a new rule to prohibit companies across the private sector from hiding fees from consumers, the president's most sweeping action yet on "junk fees."
The Federal Trade Commission's rule would require all industries under its jurisdiction to show the full price upfront to consumers, including for concert and sports tickets, hotel rooms, and apartment and car rentals.
Violators would be subject to financial penalties and be required to compensate customers.
President Joe Biden, in remarks Wednesday from the White House Rose Garden, called the proposal his administration's "most comprehensive action ever" to eliminate junk fees.
The move comes as Biden has made tackling junk fees a top priority to help consumers.
Americans collectively pay "tens of billions of dollars" in junk fees each year, according to the FTC.
Lina Khan, chair of the FTC, likened the fees to "an invisible tax that quietly inflates prices across the economy."
"Our proposed rule to ban junk fees would not just return money to people's pockets but also restore a degree of justice to American families and restore fairness in our markets," Khan said.
The rule will be subject to a public comments period before it can be formally adopted by the FTC.
Taking aim at the financial industry, the Biden administration is also warning large banks and credit unions that they can’t charge fees for basic services.
Examples include routine checking of bank account balances or asking the amount needed to pay off a loan.
"Folks are tired of being taken advantage of and being played for suckers," Biden said.
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau will evaluate whether any existing bank fees violate provisions in a more than 10-year-old law that bureau director Rohit Chopra said requires large banks provide complete and accurate information to customers.
“Today's guidance outlines a pretty basic concept,” Chopra said.
“When people request basic information about their accounts, big banks cannot charge them massive fees or trap them in endless customer service loops.”
Chopra touted recent oversight inspections of major financial institutions that led to $140 million in refunds for fees that shouldn’t have been charged.
For example, he said, one financial company charged monthly fees for paper statements that were never actually printed or mailed to customers.
The agency also will propose new rules to make it easier to switch a financial account and find better interest rates.
Four major airlines companies have agreed to wipe away fees for families to sit together on planes.
Some of the many other rules changes proposed under Biden would lower credit card late fees, require cable and internet providers to list fees upfront, and force major broadband companies to display all costs and fees for services.
Be careful what you wish for, Dallas Cowboys.
As fallout lingers from the blowout loss at San Francisco, the Cowboys are so deep into their feelings about the 42-10 result that it’s fair to wonder if they are capable of recovering – physically and mentally.
 "I just feel like he’s making it way more personal than it had to be," Parsons said Tuesday.
We got something for that.
Trust the Cowboys?
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
The Cowboys, 28 years and counting since the franchise’s last whiff of Super Bowl glory, have proven (again) that they cannot be trusted as a legitimate contender.
Maybe that changes by January.
But that needs to be proven in the flesh as they’ve over-promised so many times before in morphing from America’s Team to America’s Biggest Tease.
Such an identity remains intact about now.
At this point, any threats coming from the Cowboys about what they’ll do to the 49ers have zero credibility.
Remember, Dallas was supposed to use the prime-time showcase on Sunday night as a measuring stick.
And the 49ers basically took that stick and cracked the Cowboys on the butt with it.
The defense that Parsons leads?
The Cowboys went to San Francisco with the unit allowing the fewest points in the league, like 10 points per game.
They left as the defense that gave up six touchdowns and 421 yards and had a terrible time getting off the field on third downs.
So, again, any promises about what will happen if they see them again would be ill-advised.
"It was always personal before the game started," Samuel told Kay Adams on the "Up & Adams" podcast.
Or touchdown, 49ers.
Can we stick a fork in the Cowboys already and declare that this season is kaput?
Maybe not yet.
It’s the NFL, with its week-to-week reality checks.
Look at what happened to Buffalo, a week after destroying the Dolphins: They went to London to get served up by the Jaguars.
This is not the time of year to draw conclusions about what will happen in January – even though it seems clear that if they stay healthy, the 49ers and Eagles will be major factors.
And as long as Patrick Mahomes is in the lineup, the Chiefs have a shot.
"It’s been a wide range of performance, as wide a range that I could ever recall in a 5-week period," McCarthy said after the debacle on Sunday night.
On paper, the Cowboys are not done yet.
There are 12 games left.
Just one of Dallas’ next six opponents – Philadelphia (5-0) – currently has a winning record.
A path to get back into the race in the NFC East still exists, given the two matchups looming against the Eagles in November and December.
Then again, the Eagles will be just as eager as the 49ers to demonstrate a special kind of animosity toward Dallas.
In any event, the expectation correction for the Cowboys has just happened.
After showing that figuratively they don’t belong on the same field with the 49ers, the Cowboys find themselves facing a must-win predicament when meeting the Los Angeles Chargers at SoFi Stadium on Monday night.
It’s about survival, or at least rebounding to restore some confidence after absorbing so many blows during the humiliating loss on Sunday night.
It’s a striking pattern.
Including the playoffs, teams that played the 49ers last season were 0-15 in games the following week.
The Chiefs won their next game after facing San Francisco last October, but it came after Kansas City had a bye week.
And the Eagles had a bye week following the NFC title game, although it indeed lost in the Super Bowl.
Pittsburgh snapped the “next-week” streak last month.
Blown out by the 49ers in Week 1, the Steelers rallied to defeat Cleveland the following week.
The next three 49ers opponents, though, followed suit with last season’s pattern and lost the following week.
Now the trend is attached to Dallas’ challenge to get back on track after a grueling loss to the 49ers.
Tony Pollard, the Cowboys running back limited to 29 rushing yards at San Francisco, was upbeat on Sunday night when assessing how they can rebound.
"Get back to work," Pollard said.
You have to prepare.
You have to get ready and brush it off.
See the 49ers again?
Officially, that’s a maybe for the Cowboys this season.
No, the Cowboys likely can’t achieve the dream of winning a championship without getting past the 49ers.
But considering the way San Francisco has owned them in recent years, the Cowboys had better be careful of what they wish for.
Another day, another thing to celebrate.
The term "coming out" is abbreviated from the commonly used phrase "coming out of the closest," a metaphor used to describe the process of an LGBTQIA+ person revealing their identity to the people around them.
While the term sounds like it refers to a single moment in time, being "out" can mean something different for everyone and often includes a longer process of accepting one's own identity before sharing with a chosen group of people and the world at large.
Nonbinary student wins lawsuit:Nonbinary student ready for 'normal' after winning Oregon school discrimination lawsuit
National Coming Out Day is celebrated on Oct. 11 every year in the U.S. and is sponsored by the Human Rights Campaign (HRC).
Besides offering public support and encouragement to people still in the closet, in the process of coming out or who are already proudly out, it also aims to increase visibility around the LGBTQIA+ community.
Members of the community (and allies!)
“The spirit of National Coming Out Day has always been that the most powerful act of resistance as an LGBTQ+ person is to live our life loudly in a world that tells us to be quiet,” President of the Human Rights Campaign Kelley Robinson, said in a statement.
National Coming Out Day was founded in 1988 and inspired by the March on Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights that occurred the year before.
On Oct. 11, 1987, 500,000 people participated in the march past the White House and through the National Mall, demanding an end to sexual orientation discrimination and asking for more funding for the fight against AIDS, which had become a highly deadly epidemic in the U.S. at that point.
"Most people think they don’t know anyone gay or lesbian, and in fact everybody does," he once said, according to his New York Times obituary.
This year's theme is “Coming Out Against Hate," which encourages allies to join "with HRC and countless LGBTQ+ people to stand up against hate in schools, libraries, and everywhere they live, work, and play."
Taking public action is especially vital this year, said HRC, thanks to the hundreds of pieces of legislation aimed at attacking LGBTQIA+ people in the last year alone.
This legislation remains at an all-time high, said HRC, which prompted the organization to declare a National State of Emergency in June.
More than 650 anti-LGBTQ bills have been introduced in states across the country this year alone.
Trips for trans travelers:Trips can bring joy to trans travelers.
Here are tips to make the most of your getaways.
According to HRC, there are an estimated 20 million LGBTQ+ adults and more than 2 million LGBTQ+ youth in the U.S. Every person's journey to finding their voice and sharing their identity is different, but access to support and resources are helpful to any and everyone, allies and loved ones included.
They also offer webinars and an entire coming out resource page, which features intersectional guides regarding coming and living out for people of different demographics and backgrounds.
People looking for a local group in their own community can use the websites' "in your area" tool to find local groups, ways to participate and volunteer and what activity the HRC is involved in near you to support LGBTQIA+ people.
The Trevor Project is an organization which aims to end suicide amongst LGBTQIA+ youth.
Perhaps most importantly, their website offers a free, 24/7 suicide hotline for LGBTQ youth which can be accessed via text, online chat or phone.
Staffed by trained counselors, the hotline is available 365 days a year.
Like HRC, The Trevor Project has a Coming Out Handbook and resource center full of valuable information for people at any stage in their journey.
The SAGE National Resource Center on LGBTQ+ Aging recognizes that not only young people struggle with the prospect of coming out.
An organization focused on supporting and connecting older members of the community, their website includes not only a wealth of information for LGBTQIA+ older adults and their families, but any person looking to get involved.
The center also offers their own hotline specifically for older LGBTQ+ people which runs 24/7, 365 days a year and is staffed by people certified in handling crisis situations.
They also offer information and referral forms to connect LGBTQ+ older people and their families with aging services, a technical assistance program that provides best practice information to aging network providers, programming to support further education and research for the community and local opportunities to volunteer.
You can also use their state search tool to find local resources or check their coming out later in life guide.
They have also created their own coming out guide.
If you are struggling with your identity and experiencing a crisis, suicidal thoughts or are in need of someone to talk to, contact the Trevor Project 24/7 hotline at www.thetrevorproject/get-help/, by phone at 1-866-488-7386 or by text at 678-678.
So California’s liberal Gov.
The law will ban the sale, distribution and production of these traditionally delicious food additives, which are used in thousands of products we eagerly put in our mouths.
Newsom’s attack on tastiness doesn’t actually impact Skittles – thank the rainbow!
– because brave candy advocates persuaded lawmakers to exclude titanium dioxide from the list of banned additives.
(Everyone knows it’s the titanium dioxide that gives Skittles their flavorful pop.)
Still, the four unjustly targeted additives will require producers of certain food-like comestibles to change recipes by 2027 if they want to sell their products in the most-populated state in the country.
What kind of newfangled communism is this?
And since when does a governor have the power to tell me when and where I can guzzle brominated vegetable oil?
Am I now supposed to start eating fruit NOT by the foot?!
I don’t recall asking for government protection from chemicals I don’t understand and didn’t technically realize I’m eating.
But if you think knowing that Red Dye 3 has been found to cause cancer in animals and has been banned from use in cosmetics for more than three decades would stop me from making my annual Thanksgiving candy corn casserole, think again.
So you’re going to have to pry the Peeps and potassium bromate from my cold, dead, Red-Dye-3-stained hands.
Which, according to these actuarial tables, you should be able to do in about a month and a half.
When most people quip that they're "a bit OCD," they probably just mean they're a neat freak.
Though the "America's Got Talent" judge didn't receive his diagnosis for obsessive-compulsive disorder until his 40s, the 67-year-old says OCD has had a profound impact on most of his life.
"The word 'suffer' is not even strong enough," he says of his experience with the condition, while speaking over a Zoom call from Las Vegas.
I just have to get that germ off my hand.
That wall has gotten easier to deal with, he says, thanks to a combination of medication and therapy, but it's still something that's always there − which is why it's frustrating when well-meaning fans claim they experience the same thing, when it's clear they don't.
OCD is not that uncommon:Understand the symptoms of obsessive compulsive disorder.
According to Mayo Clinic, OCD involves persistent patterns of unwanted thoughts and fears, known as obsessions, that lead to repetitive behaviors, known as compulsions.
Ignoring or trying to stop these obsessions can worsen anxiety, so people with OCD are often driven to perform compulsive acts in an attempt to relieve stress.
These patterns can be time-consuming, interfere with day-to-day life and cause significant impairment.
Examples of obsessions include fear of contamination and intense stress when objects aren't orderly or facing a certain way.
Compulsions can take the form of hand-washing to the point of damaging the skin, repeatedly checking the stove to make sure it's off or counting in certain patterns.
"It's just this vicious, dark circle, and it makes you... unproductive, unhappy, depressed," he says.
The comedian says he coped with the added stress the way he has with many hardships: with humor.
Still, he says, laughter can only do so much.
"For somebody who was triggered by germs, COVID was not helpful," he says.
He says the two got the idea for the project while finding ways to cope with the stress of early COVID life.
'America needs you':82nd Airborne Division Chorus wins over judges, lands spot in 'AGT' finale
He also praised his co-judge Simon Cowell, 64, for recently revealing he went to therapy to help treat his depression.
He hopes that by speaking out he can help change that stigma.
"I think the younger you are, the easier it is to be open about mental health," he says.
"The reason I have that strength is because not only me, not only my daughter, but a lot of people are expanding the ability to share."
Plus, he says, the more people acknowledge their imperfections, the more they acknowledge their humanity.
"I feel broken ... but I don't know what perfection is," he says.
I think that everybody's got a little break in them.
I think some people aren't aware of it.
We recognize that mistakes may happen – or that new information can emerge after a story is published – and we pledge to address all concerns quickly, fairly and transparently.
If a correction or clarification is warranted, we will highlight that in the original file and explain to readers why the change was made.
Any correction or clarification would also be published on our corrections log.
To report corrections & clarifications, contact:
Please indicate whether you're responding to content online or in the newspaper.
The following corrections & clarifications have been published on stories produced by USA TODAY's newsroom:
Money: A previous version of this story misstated the number of people 62 and older who have student debt loans.
Sports: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed the locations for Big Ten games.
"5 Things" podcast: On the Oct. 5 show in our segment about school psychologists, we misstated the ratio of counselors to students at a school in Hershey, Pennsylvania.
At 1 to 1000, it is half of the recommended ratio.
Money: An earlier version of this story mischaracterized the competitiveness of Capital One's savings-account interest rates.
The reference has been removed.
Jarrett Payton covers the Chicago Bears.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the amount of Fox Corp.'s settlement with Dominion Voting Systems in a defamation lawsuit.
Money: The UAW strike affects 38 locations across 20 states.
An earlier alert undercounted the number of states affected.
See the list.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly identified an organization.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified the Higher Education Advisory Group.
Sports: A headline on the story incorrectly described Christian Coleman's winning time in the men's 100 meters.
He won with a time of 9.83 seconds, tied for the world's fastest time this season.
News: This article was updated to remove incorrect details about math courses and departments at the University of California, Santa Cruz.
News: A previous version of this video misstated the Longwood Garden's distance from the prison.
His personal security guard ran onto the field to restrain the person.
A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the name of the home team.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified Chester County Prison.
It's the University of Pennsylvania.
News: A previous version of this video misstated how many co-defendants had been booked.
Money: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed among states with no Social Security tax Minnesota, which expanded in May 2023 a state tax exemption for benefits without eliminating the tax.
News: An earlier version of this story contained inaccurate or incomplete facts about the history of language.
Social media: A previous version of this post graphic contained a name misspelling of Scooter Braun.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the extent of the standing water around Dodger Stadium.
Sports: The USA TODAY Sports’ MLB power rankings in the Aug. 15 edition misstated the leader of the American League Central Division.
The Minnesota Twins lead the division.
News: A previous version of this video misidentified USA TODAY’s National Political correspondent, David Jackson.
Entertainment: The location of the bookstore in an earlier version of this story was incorrect.
Wild Geese Bookshop is located in Franklin, Indiana.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the next opponent for the U.S. women should they advance from their Round of 16 game vs. Sweden.
The Americans would then play the winner of Japan vs. Norway in the quarterfinals.
Money: Due to a typo, an earlier version of this story misstated total U.S. sales of the Kia Stinger.
The automaker has sold more than 65,000 Stinger sedans in the U.S. since the model's launch.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees between Madrid, Spain, and a mountainous area in Spain.
It also misstated a temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees in reference to average temperatures in Tunisia.
News: An earlier version incorrectly identified Victoria McQueen's title at her high school.
She is student body president.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified the Norwegian Gem.
It is a Jewel-class cruise ship.
News: A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the origins of Blue Moon.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the Iowa State teams being investigated by the Iowa Racing and Gaming Commission.
The school does not have a baseball program.
News: This article has been updated to include additional nonpartisan sources of data and research.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated 10-year-old J'Adore's diagnosis date.
News: In a 1A story on July 5 about primary care doctors, the relationship between physicians and health professionals such as nurse practitioners and physician assistants was unclear.
Paraprofessionals generally work under the supervision of a licensed physician.
Entertainment: A photo included in an earlier version of this report was misidentified as The Beatles.
The new record featuring John Lennon’s vocals will be a song.
Graphics: A previous version of this story misstated the number of competing teams in the Tour de France.
News: This story has been updated to clarify how many people died on the Titanic.
Money: This story has been updated to clarify details about local liquor laws.
News: A June 19 article on Page 2A misstated the year the 13th Amendment was passed.
Life: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated when the rescue was made.
Travel: A previous version of this story incorrectly described the Airbus A321 with new livery.
The aircraft is part of JetBlue’s existing fleet.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the number of states under red flag warnings.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly named ISR courses.
The courses are called Infant Swimming Resource courses.
News: This story has been updated to correct how far away the body was found from where the missing doctor was last seen.
News: An earlier version of this story did not make clear which versions of the AP African American Studies course framework excluded the word "queer."
It has been updated to clarify that versions in May 2022 and February 2023 did not include the word.
Travel: An earlier version of the story incorrectly listed how police resolved the case.
News: A previous version of this article incorrectly referred to the tornado data provided by the Storm Prediction Center of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Sports: A story on the documentary movie “It Ain’t Over” in the May 12 edition misstated the number of league MVP titles won by Yogi Berra.
The Yankees legend won three.
The information has been updated.
Those portions have been removed.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the Australian Open women's singles champion.
News: In some editions, the March 30 1A story about attackers targeting schools misstated the partners in the mass killing database.
They are USA TODAY, The Associated Press and Northeastern University.
News: This story originally included an inaccurate detail related to one woman's application for a domestic violence restraining order.
The information on Alison Kessler has been updated.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the comparative price between electric vehicles and gas-powered vehicles.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the year of Paul Walker's death.
News: A previous version of this article misstated Terry Wilson's employment status.
He remains a Fresno State employee but was granted leave from the position to serve as a staff-wide union representative.
News: An earlier version of this podcast incorrectly stated that USA TODAY ran the Dilbert comic strip.
It was the USA TODAY Network, not USA TODAY.
News: USA TODAY did not publish the Dilbert comic strip.
A previous version of this article was incorrect.
Facebook: A previous version of this post contained photos from other events earlier this month in Florida.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated salary figures of bartenders and pharmacists.
News: A story on Page 1A Feb. 16 about corporate diversity gave the incorrect date of Southern Co.’s annual meeting.
It takes place later this year.
News: A previous version of this graphic misstated the title of a movie.
News: A previous version of this article misstated the number of Maryland’s Eastern Shore counties.
Social media: An earlier version of this video had an incorrect description.
News: An earlier version misstated the requirements in the Biden administration’s proposed Title IX rule for determining the outcome of sexual assault cases.
The proposed regulation would require schools to use the “preponderance of evidence” standard most of the time.
News: An earlier version of this video misstated the status of a House Ethics Committee investigation.
Social media: A previous post misidentified the award Beyoncé won.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the home state of Sen. Chris Coons.
He is from Delaware.
Social media: A previous version of this post included an incorrect year of death.
News: An earlier version misstated the name of Hillsdale College's spokesperson, Emily Stack Davis.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated the new price of the Tesla Model Y.
It is $52,990.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this gallery included a photo incorrectly identifying Paige Butcher.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified who created Seven Principles of Leave No Trace.
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2016
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2017
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2018
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2019
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2020
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2021
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2022
The USA TODAY Opinion section publishes analysis, argument and essays on a wide variety of subjects.
We're looking for timeliness (pegged to news), persuasion pitched to the other side, new information, novel arguments, revelatory insights, passion without partisanship, first-person experience, original reporting that reveals fresh angles and makes news, expert knowledge, and/or a topic that will drive conversation on social media and in the real world.
We accept only pieces that are submitted exclusively to USA TODAY.
We do not accept material that has been published on blogs, social media or anywhere else.
Columns typically run 550 to 750 words.
They should be pasted directly into an email and sent to theforum@usatoday.com.
Pieces should include links (URLs, not headlines or footnotes) to back up quotes and factual material.
People featured in columns must be identified by their real, full names.
We do not publish open letters, class projects or material that has been submitted to multiple outlets.
Rebuttals to editorials and columns published in USA TODAY should be submitted as letters to the editor, not as full-length op-eds.
Due to the volume of submissions, we can’t respond to all columns sent to us.
If our Opinion team is interested in yours, you will hear from us within three business days.
Submissions may be edited for accuracy, clarity, style, standards and length.
Please include with your submission a short biography, two sentences at most, to run at the end of your column, as well as a current photograph, to which you own publishing rights.
If you or a business, trade group or other institution with which you are associated stands to gain financially or in any other way from your column, you should disclose that information in detail.
In most cases, it should also be included in the body of the piece or in the author's biographical information.
Columns are accepted for online publication; print publication is not guaranteed.
All columns published by USA TODAY are available for use online and in print by the more than 250 properties in the USA TODAY Network.
They include Austin; Bergen County, New Jersey; Burlington, Vermont; Cincinnati; Columbus, Ohio; Des Moines; Detroit; El Paso, Texas; Indianapolis; Louisville, Kentucky; Memphis, Tennessee; Milwaukee; Nashville, Tennessee; Phoenix, Reno, Nevada; Palm Beach, Florida; and Wilmington, Delaware.
Authors may post their columns elsewhere 48 hours after they are published at USA TODAY.
By submitting a column to USA TODAY and agreeing to its publication, authors are granting exclusive rights to the piece to the USA TODAY Network for 48 hours and non-exclusive rights thereafter.
To get a sense of our range, preferences and requirements, check out our op-ed section, follow us on Twitter and Facebook, or sign up for our daily Opinion newsletter.
If you're interested in joining conversations about topics in USA TODAY, email letters@usatoday.com, comment on Facebook or use #tellusatoday on Twitter.
Letters are edited for accuracy, clarity and length and to conform to our editorial style and standards.
Submissions of 200 words or fewer have the best chance of being published.
Letters must include a name, address and phone number.
Corrections to published letters or columns follow USA TODAY guidelines.
The forums are scheduled to take place Oct. 10-15.
Former Arkansas Gov.
Asa Hutchinson kicked off the event at 5 p.m. Tuesday and you can watch the replay here.
Voters who attend will have a chance to directly ask candidates the questions on their mind and receive in-person responses.
All times are Eastern.
The forums are free and open to the public on a first-come, first-serve basis.
At the start of the forums, candidates make their brief opening remarks before proceeding to answer questions from the audience and engage in a meaningful dialogue about various issues.
The attacks came by land, sea, air – and online.
Some Hamas officials have since walked back the threat.
The videos and images from the deadly attacks posted by Hamas-affiliated accounts were shared by Hamas allies and unwitting participants around the globe, Clarke said.
“This is the nature of asymmetric warfare – you've got to utilize tools that are going to make you seem bigger and more powerful than you are,” Clarke said.
“For Hamas, it costs them nothing to videotape something and send it out there, and now everyone thinks that they're creeping around every corner.”
Hamas fired off posts from official accounts on the encrypted messaging and social media app Telegram that ricocheted to X, formerly Twitter, and beyond.
Telegram – which allows messaging between users but also has a “Channel” function that works similarly to X – has a long history of being used by terrorists, among them the Islamic State, or ISIS.
X, which gutted its trust and safety teams under new owner Elon Musk, was unprepared for the wave of terror propaganda that then spread to other social media platforms and messaging apps like WhatsApp.
This week, X said it was removing newly created Hamas-affiliated accounts and coordinating with industry peers “to try and prevent terrorist content from being distributed online.” It also recommended that people adjust their sensitive media settings if they don’t want to see disturbing content.
The U.K. summoned social media executives Wednesday to demand platforms remove violent content of the Hamas attacks on Israel.
Telegram and X did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
If social media sites continue to erode guardrails and safeguards, Clarke warned, what is happening today will get worse.
“This is just the facet of what’s called ‘fourth generation warfare,’ or ‘modern warfare’ in this era,” he said.
“So, whatever the next conflict is, it doesn't really matter, you're going to see this on steroids.”
Once propaganda and disinformation reaches X, the platform is allowing it to be shared and even monetized, a report from the Tech Transparency Project found.
The report, an advance copy of which was provided exclusively to USA TODAY, found several premium subscriber accounts – which pay a fee of $8 a month to the platform – sharing Hamas propaganda including violent and graphic images of the attacks on Israel.
It also appears to violate an X policy stating that the platform will remove accounts sharing content produced by terrorists, the report states.
It also notes that in some cases, X ran advertisements in the comments under the video posts.
The TTP report found several instances of “verified” X users, some with more than 500,000 followers, spreading uncensored Hamas propaganda videos.
One clip posted to X shows bodycam footage of Hamas militants going room-to-room in an Israeli military base firing automatic weapons.
Bloodied bodies lie on the ground in the video, which has been watched more than 60,000 times.
“The amount of content is going to be more than any team, whether it’s at a platform or a research team like mine, or a journalism outlet or organization could possibly sift through,” he said.
“This includes the possibility that a range of terrorist and violent extremist networks and groups may seek to exploit the conflict for their own purposes, as we have seen in past events.”
Facebook, YouTube and TikTok say they have poured resources into moderating content from the Israel-Hamas war.
“After the terrorist attacks by Hamas on Israel on Saturday, we quickly established a special operations center staffed with experts, including fluent Hebrew and Arabic speakers, to closely monitor and respond to this rapidly evolving situation,” Meta said in a statement.
The major platforms prohibit content produced by terrorist organizations including Hamas as well as footage showing hostages.
"Now is not the time to be attacking our ally," DeSantis told supporters at the New Hampshire State House.
Several Republicans noted that, after the 2020 election, Trump attacked Netanyahu for hailing Biden as the president-elect.
"It’s clear he’s angry at Netanyahu for recognizing Trump lost in 2020," said a statement from Never Back Down, a pro-DeSantis political action committee.
"Trump puts himself first."
DeSantis spoke after formally filing for January’s New Hampshire primary, a contest he declared “wide open” despite Trump’s huge lead in polls.
“If you want to change from Trump, I think I’m the best leader,” DeSantis said, adding that he gives Republicans “the best chance to be able to do well” in a general election.
DeSantis, who has seen his support erode after months of attacks from Trump, has gradually escalated counter-criticism of the former president throughout the campaign.
He has been more pointed in recent days, part of a strategy adjustment that includes more interviews with mainstream media outlets.
The Florida governor plans to spend Thursday touring the northern part of the state along with members of his political action committee, Never Back Down.
He is scheduled to participate Friday in traditional events, including a "Politics and Eggs" breakfast hosted by the New Hampshire Institute of Politics.
DeSantis and other Republican candidates are scheduled to address the state Republican Party's "First in the Nation Leadership Summit" in Nashua, N.H. this weekend.
The indictment cites the three with meeting at Manhattan restaurants with Egyptian officials on June 30, 2018, and Sept. 21, 2019, as part of the alleged conspiracy.
The Federal Agents Registration Act requires people who represent foreign governments trying to influence U.S. policy to register with the Justice Department.
Violations carry a maximum penalty of five years in prison and a $250,000 fine.
The trial is scheduled May 6.
A former Hamas leader’s call for protests around the world has some Americans who are planning travel in the coming days weighing agonizing choices days after the militant group's deadly attack on Israeli communities.
For those Americans in Israel who want to leave, the White House said the U.S. government will arrange charter flights to Europe starting Friday.
A White House spokesman said Thursday the U.S. death toll from the Hamas attacks rose to 27, a day after the State Department raised its alert level for American travelers to Israel and the West Bank, urging them to reconsider their plans.
Travel advisories already are in place urging increased caution for U.S. citizens traveling to Jordan and Turkey and advising them to reconsider travel to Egypt and Lebanon because of terrorism.
"Terrorists may attack with little or no warning," the agency warns.
The uncertainty follows a trip to Israel by U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken, who met with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in Tel Aviv in a show of support.
In the U.S., National Security Council spokesman John Kirby said federal, state and local authorities are working to identify and disrupt any threats toward the Jewish community.
He said 14 Americans remain missing in Israel.
Israel-Hamas War newsletter:Sign up to get the latest news and analysis from USA TODAY into your inbox.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu denies the claim, but the chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee blamed "failure of intelligence.''
Blinken expressed U.S. solidarity with Israel, its military operations in Gaza and its goal of destroying the militant Hamas organization during his meeting with Netanyahu in Tel Aviv.
"Hamas has only one agenda, to destroy Israel and to murder Jews," Blinken said.
"No country can or would tolerate the slaughter of its citizens or return to the conditions that allowed it to take place."
The war has already claimed over 2,500 lives on both sides.
International aid groups warn that the death toll may rise after Israel stopped all deliveries of food, water, fuel and electricity to Gaza.
Blinken said victims from Saturday's attack include citizens from 36 nations.
Blinken said the Israeli government shared photos and videos of Hamas' atrocities and called them "overwhelming.''
Young people burned alive in their cars or in their highway runs,'' Blinken said.
"It's simply depravity in the worst imaginable way.''
Gillian Kaye awoke Saturday to a nightmare: Her stepson was missing.
“This is so unfathomable,” said Kaye, a resident of Sarasota, Florida who was traveling when she learned of the assault.
According to his family, he sent his wife and children to the house’s bomb shelter while he confronted the attackers upstairs.
Kaye and her family are urging Americans to write to their representatives in Congress to bolster search and rescue efforts.
With no information about her stepson's whereabouts, Kaye said spreading the word is the only course of action.
“We do what needs to get done,” Kaye said.
− Heather Bushman, Sarasota Herald-Tribune
Hamas has vowed to annihilate Israel and has been responsible for numerous suicide bombings and other deadly attacks since the militant group was formed in 1987.
On Saturday, about 1,000 Hamas fighters stormed across the Israeli border by land and sea in an attack that caught Israel's military off-guard.
The Jerusalem mosque is located on a holy site for Jews, who refer to it as the Temple Mount.
But Hamas leaders also blame unrelenting Israeli crackdowns and a 16-year blockade in Gaza and the West Bank, continued construction of settlements − which the international community considers illegal − and Israel's tight military control of Gaza.
Also, the attack came amid thawing relations between some Arab nations and Israel, the blood enemy of Hamas.
The attack and Israel's harsh response could slow or derail those diplomatic overtures.
By land, sea, air and online:How Hamas used the internet to terrorize Israel
The State Department designated Hamas a terrorist group in 1997.
Several other nations also consider it a terrorist organization.
In 2006, Hamas won parliamentary elections, and in 2007 the group violently seized control of Gaza from the Palestinian Authority, which was controlled by the rival Fatah movement that still governs the West Bank.
There have been no elections since.
The group calls for establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel and believes in the use of violence to carry out the destruction of Israel.
Hamas receives financial, material and logistical support from Iran, though so far, international leaders, including in Israel, have said there is no evidence that Iran was directly involved in Hamas’ attack.
Gaza, or the Gaza Strip, is a densely populated Palestinian enclave of about 2.3 million people.
The narrow strip of land − about 150 square miles, or less than half the size of New York City − is about 25 miles long and six miles wide.
Gaza shares a northern and eastern border with Israel and a southwestern border with Egypt while its western side abuts the Mediterranean Sea.
Hamas won the 2006 parliamentary elections and in 2007 seized control of the Gaza Strip from the internationally recognized Palestinian Authority.
The Palestinian Authority, controlled by the rival Fatah movement, administers semi-autonomous areas of the Israeli-occupied West Bank.
Hamas has fought four wars against Israel since taking power.
The current war is a culmination of decades of conflict between Israel and the Palestinian territory, which has been occupied since Israel was founded in 1948 and where Hamas rules the Gaza Strip.
Jewish people and Muslims have some of their holiest sites in Jerusalem.
Before Israel’s founding, the land was known as the Palestinian mandate, officially ruled by Great Britain.
Prompted by the Holocaust, the UN United Nations adopted a resolution in 1947 that aimed to divide the Palestinian mandate into two states, Arab and Jewish.
War quickly broke out between Israel and its Arab neighbors, leading to Israeli expansion three-quarters of Palestinian mandate territory.
Over half the Palestinian Arab population fled or was expelled, according to the U.N. Several conflicts between Israel and Arab states in the region followed over the next decades, and peace efforts that improved relations with other nations did not solve the issue of Palestinian self-determination.
Israel captured the Gaza Strip, east Jerusalem and the West Bank in the 1967 Mideast war and has since imposed restrictions on the freedom of movement of Palestinians there.
These are all territories that had been sought by Palestinians for their future independent state.
But Hamas rejects proposals for a two-state solution and believes in the eradication of Israel altogether through violent means.
Contributing: The Associate Press
A truck drove around Harvard University's campus on Wednesday displaying the names and faces of several students allegedly affiliated with student-groups that co-signed a letter blaming Israel for Hamas' attack.
The stunt claimed by the conservative media group Accuracy in Media comes after several CEOs have called on Harvard to release the names of students affiliated with groups tied to the controversial letter that solely blamed Israel for the attack.
According to the Harvard Crimson, 34 Harvard student groups initially signed on to the statement originally written by the Harvard Undergraduate Palestine Solidarity Committee.
"The apartheid regime is the only one to blame," the statement read.
Following the national attention to the statement, the university distanced itself from the remarks.
"Let me also state, on this matter as on others, that while our students have the right to speak for themselves, no student group — not even 30 student groups — speaks for Harvard University or its leadership," Harvard President Claudine Gay said in a statement on Tuesday.
As of Wednesday, at least eight groups have removed their signatures amid a growing national backlash and the doxing, the Crimson reported.
At least four sites have published the names and contact information of students
We do not condone or ignore intimidation.
Hundreds of Israelis and Palestinians have been killed, and thousands more have been injured on both sides since Saturday.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu declared war after about 1,000 Hamas fighters stormed across the Israeli border by land and sea in an attack that caught Israel's military off-guard.
"We are at war, and we will win it," Netanyahu said.
Israel then launched retaliatory military strikes into Gaza, levelling buildings.
Israel has also tightened a blockade on food, fuel and medicines.
Attacks have continued and the death toll on both sides keeps rising.
Executives at X say they are cracking down on misinformation and illegal content pervading the social media platform amid mounting pressure from the European Union in the days since the Palestinian militant group Hamas attacked Israel.
Changes Elon Musk has put in place since he purchased Twitter and renamed it X have caused the platform to run afoul of the EU’s Digital Services Act.
Taking effect in August 2022, the law penalizes social media companies with hefty fines if it's found that illegal content like terrorist propaganda or hate speech are insufficiently policed.
Under Musk's leadership, X has carried out massive cuts to its content moderation teams and required that users pay to have a blue checkmark that once indicated a verified account.
The changes have caused many experts and media observers to worry that Musk has made the platform more susceptible to misinformation.
And that was before decades of Israeli-Palestinian hostility was reignited.
Online hatred spreads:Israel, Gaza and when your social media posts hurt more than help
Exploiting lax content moderation on X and other sites, experts warn that Hamas has made online terror propaganda that includes violent videos and graphic images of kidnappings and murders of civilians and soldiers a key strategy in its military campaign.
Groups who study online hate speech say it has spiked against both Jews and Palestinians following the deadly attacks in Israel, where the death toll has already risen to the thousands on both sides of the fighting.
Furthermore, representatives of both communities have told USA TODAY that they believe U.S.-based social media companies have not done enough to rid their platforms of violent rhetoric.
In the weeks before the conflict, the Anti-Defamation League had already been critical of X over what it believes are Musk’s alleged promotion of extremists on the site and his perceived laissez-faire approach to content moderation.
7amleh, an Arab civil rights organization, has also been attempting for months to persuade X to quell hate speech against Palestinians, USA TODAY has reported.
Trump blames Netanyahu:Former president calls Hamas 'very smart' amid Israel war
European Commissioner Thierry Breton, the 27-nation bloc’s digital enforcer, had sought an explanation from X for how the company was complying with the EU's strict digital rules as the Hamas Israel war rages.
"There is no place on X for terrorist organizations or extremist groups."
By land, sea, air and online:How Hamas used the internet to terrorize Israel
But some observers are skeptical of X's commitment to controlling the propaganda and depictions of violence flooding its platform.
A report from the Tech Transparency Project found several instances of “verified” X users, some with more than 500,000 followers, spreading uncensored Hamas propaganda videos.
One clip viewed more than 60,000 times posted to X shows bodycam footage of Hamas militants going room-to-room in an Israeli military base firing automatic weapons as bloodied corpses lie on the ground.
Reach him at elagatta@gannett.com
Consumer price increases stayed high in September after picking up over the summer as steady gains in rent and other services offset another decline in used car prices and a smaller rise in gasoline and food costs.
Consumer prices overall rose 3.7% from a year earlier, similar to August's increase, according to the Labor Department’s consumer price index.
On a monthly basis, prices increased 0.4% following a 0.6% rise in August that was fueled by a surge in pump prices.
Protect your assets: Best high-yield savings accounts of 2023
Core prices, which strip out volatile food and energy items and which the Federal Reserve watches more closely as it weighs interest rate changes, remained high.
They rose 0.3% last month after 0.2% bumps over the summer.
The advance still lowered the annual increase to 4.1% from 4.3% in August, marking the smallest gain since September 2021.
Annual inflation has slowed significantly after hitting a 40-year high of 9.1% in June 2022, including a sharp drop to 3% in the first half of 2023.
But since then, the cost of some goods and services has accelerated or pulled back more slowly, pushing up the yearly rise.
Prices for items such as used cars and furniture have dropped as pandemic-related supply-chain snarls have been resolved.
But the cost of services such as rent, car repairs and auto insurance, have continued to drift higher in part because of briskly rising employee wages.
As a result, driving down inflation to the Fed’s annual 2% target is becoming a tougher slog.
Barclays expects inflation broadly to dip to 3.3% in December and 2.6% at the end of 2024.
Core price gains are projected to drift down to 3.7% at the end of the year and 2.8% at the close of 2024.
Barclays expects the Fed to raise its key interest rate once more this year, by a quarter percentage point, after lifting it by 5.25 points in 16 months.
But other economists say tumbling wholesale costs will prompt a faster pullback in inflation.
"Overall, there is nothing here that will convince Fed officials to hike rates at the next...meeting, and we continue to expect a more rapid decline in inflation and weaker economic growth to result in rates being cut much more aggressively next year than markets are pricing in," says economist Andrew Hunter of Capital Economics.
Stocks were mixed in late morning trading as investors digested the uncertain odds of another Fed rate increase.
Households, meanwhile, are still struggling.
Although price increases are moderating, costs are still high and many Americans say they aren’t feeling much relief.
“We’re not seeing it easing at all.”
He says he pays $6.50 a gallon for gas in California and as much as $135 for weekly groceries for him and his wife, up from $100 before the pandemic.
“You just have to deal with it,” he says.
Pump prices are well below their $5 peak in summer 2022 and are likely move lower in the short term following the busy summer driving season despite the Israel-Hamas war, which has pushed up oil prices.
Grocery prices rose more modestly, inching up 0.1% and lowering the yearly increase to 2.4%.
The cost of commodities such as wheat and corn generally have fallen as major producers Ukraine and Russia have found alternative shipping routes that skirt their 18-month war.
Last month, the price of breakfast cereal fell 0.5%, while rice and fish both slid 1.3%.
But some proteins moved higher.
Bacon rose 4.8% following a 4% rise in August; uncooked ground beef increased 0.6%; and eggs jumped 0.9% after a string of declines.
Rent, which has been the biggest inflation driver, rose a sturdy 0.5% for the second straight month, though that’s down from a spate of stronger gains.
That nudged up the yearly rise to 7.4%.
Economists expect rent increases to pull back, based on new leases, but that shift has been slow to filter through to existing leases.
Generally, the pattern of rising service costs fueled by healthy wage growth and falling goods prices continued last month.
Car repair costs rose 0.2%; auto insurance climbed 1.3%; and hotel rates leaped 3.7%.
Meanwhile, used car prices fell 2.5%; clothing dropped 0.8%; and furniture declined 1.2% as supply chain troubles eased further.
USA TODAY explores the questions you and others ask about inflation and how it affects your life, from "What is inflation?"
For more answers to your questions about today's report and other economic trends, keep reading:
Social Security recipients will get 3.2% more in their checks next year, a cost-of-living adjustment, or COLA, based on Thursday's consumer price report showing that annual overall inflation remained at the same level as the previous month.
The 3.7% rise in overall prices is nearly twice the 2% target favored by the Federal Reserve.
But inflation has been mostly trending down, leading to the modest Social Security COLA increase.
Major differences, according to the Cleveland Fed, are:
The Fed raised its key rate at 10 meetings in a row starting in March 2022, the most aggressive run of rate hikes in four decades.
It paused that streak in June, leaving the benchmark federal funds rate where it stood, but implemented another increase the following month lifting the rate by a quarter point to a range of 5.25% to 5.5%.
The federal funds rate is what banks pay each other for overnight loans.
If that rate rises, banks typically pass along that extra cost, meaning it becomes more expensive to borrow as rates increase on services and items ranging from credit cards to home equity lines.
That’s why the funds rate is the primary tool used by the Federal Reserve to try and put the brakes on inflation.
The Fed’s policy arm meets next on Oct. 31-Nov. 1.
It will announce its interest rate decision at 2 P.M.
ET on Nov. 1.
The Fed’s final meeting of the year is Dec. 12-13.
But it’s still above the 2% target preferred by the Federal Reserve.
Here's where the U.S. inflation rate has stood each month since May 2022:
The Federal Reserve watches two key measures of the economy, price stability and maximum employment, which are its main considerations in interest-rate decisions.
CPI is also used to inflation-adjust things like Social Security payments and income tax brackets.
It’s also the reference rate for some financial contracts, such as Treasury Inflation Protected Securities (TIPS).
Core prices leave out volatile food and energy items and therefore are a more accurate reflection of longer-term trends.
September used car prices likely fell at least 2% from the prior month, while energy prices recorded a modest increase of 0.4% after a 5.6% jump in August, said Stephen Juneau, U.S. economist at Bank of America.
Retail gasoline prices, he said, were nearly flat last month.
Goldman Sachs economists forecast a 2.3% decline in used car prices and a 0.1% dip in new car prices last month.
Renters are still getting squeezed.
Goldman Sachs economists see rents up 0.48% on the month, rising at about a steady pace.
Shelter inflation, which includes home prices, rents and other lodging, comprises about a third of the consumer price index (CPI).
However, Goldman says
Airfares are also expected to post a gain, some economists noted.
It depends on the data.
The CME Fed watch tool that helps gauge the market’s expectation for a rate move puts the chances of a Fed rate hike at only 10%, but economists aren’t yet fully ruling one out, partly because the labor market remains strong.
A strong job market puts money in people’s pockets, which can fuel spending and inflation.
“With the surprisingly-strong September job report intensifying the debate on the further hikes, the near-term policy trajectory will be highly sensitive to Thursday’s CPI,” Deutsche Bank economists said in a note.
The last time the Fed met in September, it held rates steady at a 22-year high of 5.25% to 5.5% but signaled another hike is likely this year amid still elevated inflation and a sturdy economy.
“Broadly, stronger economic activity means we have to do more with rates,” Fed Chairman Jerome Powell told reporters then.
He also said, separately, “we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation, as well as the balance of risks.”
CPI measures inflation as experienced by consumers going about their day-to-day lives, while the PPI, or producer price index, measures the average changes over time in the sale prices received by domestic producers for their output.
Core inflation, which assesses inflation but leaves out the more volatile prices of food and energy, is the other key price metric.
In bonds, the 10-year Treasury yield, which tends to rise if inflation accelerates, was 4.64%, up a modest 0.046 points.
Social Security recipients found out Thursday how much of a raise they will get next year.
That’s because the consumer price index report contains data the Social Security Administration (SSA) uses to determine the cost-of-living adjustment or COLA for 2024.
Those payments will go up 3.2%.
The annual overall inflation rate is currently 3.7%, but is expected to have slid by a tenth of a point in September.
The cost of items and services ranging from health care, to gas, to groceries can shift depending on inflation.
When there are too few goods to meet the demand, prices are likely to rise, according to Investopedia.
That disparity is called demand pull inflation.
The Department of Labor has a tool that enables consumers to find out shifts in their buying power.
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) looks at the average change in prices for particular products and services over a period of time, according to the Bureau of Labor Services.
It’s one inflation measure that the Fed and the economist use as a barometer to gauge price stability.
The Fed’s preferred inflation gauge is the Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index, or PCE, prepared by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).
The next PCE report for September is due Oct. 27.
Mark your calendar:Why October 12 matters for Social Security recipients
Wages vs. inflation:US wage growth is finally outpacing inflation.
Many Americans aren't feeling it.
After suspending a Black student over his dreadlocks, a Texas high school sent a notice to his family saying the student will be sent to a disciplinary education program, according to a letter reviewed by the Associated Press.
Darryl George, 18, was referred to EPIC, an alternative school program, from Oct. 12 through Nov. 29 for "failure to comply" with multiple campus and classroom regulations, including a "violation of the dress and grooming policy," read the letter signed by Lance Murphy, the principal of Barbers Hill High School.
Murphy wrote that George can return to the classroom on Nov. 30.
His family cannot appeal the decision because the alternative school referral was not for a period longer than 60 days, according to the Texas Education Code cited in the letter.
The school district did not respond to USA TODAY's request for comment.
On Aug. 31, George, a junior at Barbers Hill High School, was suspended after school officials said his twisted dreadlocks violated the district's dress and grooming code.
Although the district's policy does not prohibit dreadlocks or braids, it states that male student's hair cannot "be gathered or worn in a style that would allow the hair to extend below the top of a t-shirt collar, below the eyebrows, or below the ear lobes when let down."
Last month the family filed a formal complaint with the Texas Education Agency and a federal civil rights lawsuit against the state’s governor and attorney general, alleging they failed to enforce a new law outlawing discrimination based on hairstyles.
George has twisted dreadlocks tied on top of his head that he wears as an "outward expression of his Black identity and culture," according to the lawsuit filed in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Texas.
The suit also alleges that Texas Gov.
Greg Abbott and Attorney General Ken Paxton have failed to enforce the CROWN Act, which went into effect on Sept. 1 – a day after George was suspended.
The lawsuit alleges that the state leaders did not protect George's constitutional and state rights, and allowed the school district to violate the law.
On Wednesday, an attorney representing the Barbers Hill Independent School District filed a motion asking the judge to send the case back to state court, arguing that "No federal claims were raised" in the lawsuit by George's family, according to court records.
The following day, Judge George C. Hanks Jr. of the U.S. District Court in Houston denied the motion because it did not comply with court procedures, records said.
The attorneys for the George family and school district did not reply to requests for comment.
Barbers Hill High School has previously clashed with two other Black male students over the dress code.
Their families sued the district in May 2020, and a federal judge later ruled the district’s hair policy was discriminatory.
Their pending case helped spur Texas lawmakers to approve the state’s CROWN Act.
WASHINGTON — Words carry weight.
They provide context amid chaos, solace amid uncertainty, hope amid horror.
But what if you couldn't read?
How much of the world might you miss?
Authors and other members of the literary community – including first lady Jill Biden – gathered Wednesday night at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts for the Barbara Bush Foundation’s 2023 National Celebration of Reading.
One such person was Oliver James, who gained hundreds of thousands of TikTok followers on his journey of learning to read in his 30s.
"It's hard to tell (someone) that they don't know things," James said.
To put it in context: 130 million American adults read below a sixth-grade level – that's 54% of 16- to 74-year-olds.
It's why – especially given our polarizing political climate – reading is more fundamental than ever.
"Reading forces us to challenge our preconceived notions, question our underlying assumptions and wrestle with uncomfortable truths," the first lady said before a rapt room at the Terrace Theater.
"Few skills are as crucial in democracy that owes its endurance to engage and inform citizens."
The "Fourth Wing" sequel, "Iron Flame," is out in a few weeks.
The accomplished author, mother of six and military spouse championed literacy in remarks at the event: "I've been raised by military parents who never want censored what I read as I grew up," she said.
"They believed that knowing both sides of an argument made you better informed, better prepared to form your own opinion, or defend your point at the dinner table, and the only truly unacceptable opinion was ignorance."
She later denounced book bans.
"As an author, I can't comprehend why we would ban books, shown to increase students' empathy and understanding of the world around them, simply because those novels don't align with a particular viewpoint," she said.
"And I definitely can't understand the attacks on books that represent marginalized readers."
Strayed learned how to read at 6 years old.
Her world would never be the same: "I learned the power of literature is that we get to see ourselves most truly, we get to see others in the world in ways that we could never conjure or imagine left to our own devices," she said.
"We get to understand that people who seem different from us, actually are the same as us."
Strayed also told USA TODAY that she loves all kinds of art forms – but something about literature hits differently.
"It's the only art form that honestly allows you to mind meld with somebody else," she said.
What was I thinking when my toenails were falling off?
What was I telling myself when I was afraid, and I had to say to myself, 'I am not afraid,' as I wrote in 'Wild?'
"For young queer kids, like sometimes they're very on their own, and they don't have the support or don't feel yet that they can trust that they have the support of their parents," Rowley said.
"Being able to have access to these stories and not have them kept from them is incredibly important."
I repeat, books are mirrors.
One couldn't help but feel these lyrics linger: "Close your eyes and surrender to your darkest dreams / Purge your thoughts of the life you knew before / Close your eyes, let your spirit start to soar / And you'll live as you've never lived before."
Opinion:Why you should read these 51 banned books now
We all have to face the prospect of aging at some point.
We prepare for this reality for years in advance, starting 401ks, contributing to Medicare and Social Security as well as comparing insurance plans.
For many Americans, the goal is to have ample healthcare, a nest egg to retire on and the ability to age peacefully at home.
Conducted with 2,227 random Americans aged 50 to 80 online or via phone, the survey found that Black citizens were less likely to achieve aging in place.
This is thanks to a variety of factors, with the two most significant being self-reported disability status and income.
Social security changes:Why October 12 is a big day for Social Security recipients
Black adults experienced the highest rate of disability at 40% as well as higher rates of "fair" or "poor" physical health at 37.1% versus 20.9% overall.
Black households were also more likely to report having a family member with a disability present with 36.4% compared to the overall sample of 23.3%.
Half of Black households also reported an income lower than $30,000 a year, a significant discrepancy from the quarter of overall respondents who reported the same thing (23.3%).
Older Black Americans are also more likely to live alone, with 44.1% reporting they were the only one in their home versus a quarter of overall respondents.
This, paired with the aforementioned factors, cumulate in Black adults having lower rates of confidence in their ability to afford and find necessary in-home care.
How does all of this prevent Black Americans from aging at home?
First and foremost, said the study's authors, increased rates of disability mean more strain on already thinly stretched resources.
Older adults with disabilities often require some form of assistive device, human support or other accommodations.
The U.S. Department of Health & Human Services' Administration on Aging found that on average, 70% of people 65 and up need some type of long-term care, such as a nursing home or assisted living, at some point, while 20% will need that care for more than five years.
Women face microaggressions at work:We need to talk about the macro effect of microaggressions on women at work
In-home care is pricey as well, with median prices hovering between $4,957 to $5,148 per month for homemaker services or a home health aide, according to the same 2021 data.
In the same year, more than half of Americans had less than $250 left at the end of the month after paying necessary bills.
With older Black Americans more likely to shoulder the weight of higher healthcare costs due to disability, more likely to live alone without in-home familial assistance and more likely to grapple with an income under $30,000, they face multiple barriers to aging in their own home and communities.
Within the overall sample, 41.3% of respondents were not confident they could afford supportive care such as assistance with chores, shopping, personal care or finance management if needed.
Facing down the existing cost-of-living crisis, many older Americans have found themselves without means to live comfortably or access necessary resources.
In an already difficult fiscal climate, ethnic and racial discrepancies continue to impact quality of care for our older population.
According to the study's authors, healthcare facilities placing a focus on adapting and optimizing care to close these gaps is an important course of action to begin addressing the disparity.
"Aging in place requires a proactive individual and community-based approach that facilitates older adult independence and connects adults with the social, clinical, and environmental support needed to remain in one's home for as long as possible," the study said.
The movie "Snakes on a Plane" dramatized perhaps the worst things to encounter on a flight, but imagine being stuck on a real-world plane with a swarm of mosquitos.
It happened to a local flight in Mexico, which was delayed for more than two hours from its scheduled departure time of 4:30 p.m., due to a mosquito infestation, local media reported.
Cabin crew and ground staff tried to get the situation under control by spraying mosquito and insect repellent in the cabins.
It eventually took off at 6:59 p.m., according to the flight's history.
Stop clipping your toenails:These are the 'most offensive' airplane behaviors
Don't bring bedbugs back home:How to avoid the bloodsuckers while traveling
Video footage from the incident, recorded by a passenger, shows the airplane's cabin filled with fumes as flight attendants spray insect repellent to counteract the swarm of mosquitoes buzzing around the cabin.
The flight appeared to be ready for takeoff, with all passengers seated.
Some of them could be heard screaming in the video, while others swatted the insects away.
As the airlines staff sprayed the mosquito repellent, the insects became more agitated reported the local media outlet El Sol de León.
This is not the first time that a swarm of mosquitos attacked a flight taking off from the Guadalajara International Airport.
A similar incident took place in 2019.
El Sol de León said that the area in which the airport is located is close to contaminated water bodies and vegetation, both of which are ideal breeding grounds for mosquitoes.
Favorable weather conditions also contribute to increasing mosquito populations.
Airport authorities have recognized this as a problem, reported El Sol de León, and have taken steps such as draining water, pruning grass and spraying insecticides to curb the problem.
'It's a party plane':Young man and woman caught having sex on flight to Ibiza
Pray or move?40% of surveyed Americans experience 'unexplained' phenomena in homes
Reach her at sshafiq@gannett.com and follow her on X, the platform formerly known as Twitter @saman_shafiq7.
Strong storms are moving across central Florida Thursday morning, producing at least two tornados in the area and keeping residents on high alert.
The National Weather Service had issued a multitude of tornado warnings and watches across the state as the low-pressure system moved through and caused damage along a major highway in Crystal River, about 80 miles north of Tampa.
The Citrus County Sheriff's Office posted an alert on X, formerly known as Twitter, about damages the tornado caused along the highway with debris, shingles and fences sprawled across the road and the city.
About two hours south in Clearwater, no injuries were reported related to the storm, police said.
A possible tornado was reported in Palm Coast, along Florida's Atlantic coast, causing damage to residences and vehicles, according to photos shared with the Daytona Beach News-Journal, part of the USA TODAY Network.
Scott Cordero, a NWS meteorologist in Jacksonville, said a team is also surveying the damage there and referring to radar data to determine if a tornado occurred.
He added the determination could take a few hours as most of the state is under a tornado watch until 3 p.m. Thursday, with severe weather still threatening the area until then.
No injuries have been reported at this time, although "there is some significant damage in the area."
The National Weather Service also issued tornado warnings for Flagler and Citrus counties Thursday.
Tornado watches are active throughout central to northern Florida.
Contributing: Frank Fernandez, Daytona Beach News-Journal; Associated Press
Now, it's officially the "Renaissance Era."
In a show of legendary pop stars supporting one another, Beyoncé appeared as a guest at the world premiere of Taylor Swift's concert film "Taylor Swift: The Eras Tour" in Los Angeles on Wednesday.
Beyoncé, 42, posed alongside the "Lavender Haze" singer, wearing a chrome breastplate over a black bodysuit, in true Renaissance fashion.
The "Karma" singer shared a Boomerang video with the "Virgo's Groove" singer on Instagram as they enjoyed each other's company over a tub of popcorn.
"The way she's taught me and every artist out here to break rules and defy industry norms."
The 33-year-old pop star continued to praise her peer for "her generosity of spirit" and "her resilience and versatility."
The multi-Grammy award winners each headlined two of the biggest tours of the year, both of which are getting the concert movie treatment.
It's unclear when Beyoncé plans to have her concert film premiere, but we can only guess Swift will be a guest.
Taylor Swift 'Eras' movie review:Concert film a thrilling revisit of her live spectacle
At just under three hours, the film version of Swift's live spectacle is about 30 minutes shorter than her in-person performances throughout her six-month U.S. tour (her overseas dates kick off in November).
Her live shows offered a set list of 45 songs – once she added "Long Live" to the rundown in July – and the film, directed by Sam Wrench, shaves off only a handful of tunes for a more efficient run time.
Inside the 'Eras Tour' movie premiere:Watching with Taylor Swift felt like a dance party
The UAW strike against the Ford Kentucky Truck Plant is a signal that hourly workers are willing to inflict − and sustain − increasingly serious financial pain to achieve their goals during labor negotiations, as the union and the Detroit Three approach a full month without resolution.
The financial impact of the surprise strike called Wednesday night was swift and immediate.
Forty years of adoration is a lot of years and a lot of love.
I have been fortunate to witness it all as a journalist, to interview and catch up with Mary Lou on the phone, at social events, at subsequent Olympics.
But it all goes back to those early days in 1984, summed up so succinctly and presciently by a copy of Sports Illustrated I pulled out of a cabinet Wednesday morning, one of my many mementos from the L.A. Olympics, which were my first.
She was lovable from the get-go.
We actually met before the L.A. Games.
I looked it up in my diary: it was June 3, 1984, the morning after she qualified for the U.S. Olympic team at the gymnastics trials in Jacksonville.
Mary Lou told me she wished she was taller.
She was 4-9.
“I wish I was 5 feet tall,” she said.
“That would be perfect.”
Her parents used to tell her they were going to give her hormone shots to help her grow but never did.
So short jokes became a big part of her young life.
Her favorite: “Stand up, Mary Lou,” when she already was.
Her father, Ronnie, a veritable giant at 5-7, was an athlete as well.
He was the sixth man, a guard, on the West Virginia men’s basketball team that was led by Hall of Famer Jerry West.
Mary Lou was a natural athlete who was unstoppable inside the house.
Her mother, Lois, said she finally put Mary Lou into a gymnastics class when far too many lamps were overturned.
“I was a tomboy,” Mary Lou told me.
She said all this with a smile.
Everything about this teenager, unknown to me until that week, screamed out fun, joy, happiness.
Bill had an idea for a photo and asked if anyone had any bubble gum.
I actually did, so I handed it to Mary Lou, who started chewing and then blew a massive pink bubble that covered her entire face.
This made quite a picture, with her grandmother standing beside her, looking on with a wry smile, both of them in bathing suits.
She should be going to proms and ball games.
I feel like I’ve lost her to the world.
She did, just much more famous.
Mary Lou of course became the darling of those Olympics, a household name, a role model for several generations of young female athletes — and someone I would seek for perspective when writing about little girls in big-time sports.
She has one of my favorite quotes on the subject:
“While other kids were reading about the Great Wall, I was walking on it.”
It’s worth remembering exactly what happened at those 1984 Olympics.
She won five medals altogether in L.A., including silvers in the team competition and on the vault, and bronze medals on the uneven bars and floor exercise.
Considering that no American woman had ever won an individual Olympic gymnastics medal of any color, she was a revelation.
She also knew luck was on her side.
The strong Soviet gymnasts, including the reigning women’s individual all-around world champion, were not in L.A., having boycotted those Games.
What happened next was a dream.
She was everywhere, from the front of the Wheaties box to SI’s Sportswoman of the Year.
She appeared on gymnastics tours, on TV shows and in the movies.
She has been a constant presence at the Olympic Games and is one of the most sought-after speakers and celebrities in the U.S. Olympic movement.
She also has four daughters, all of whom have been involved in gymnastics.
She got a kick out of relating how she tried to remain anonymous when taking one of her daughters to a gymnastics class.
That didn’t last long.
“They knew it was me,” she said with a hearty laugh.
In the same week that the sports world continues to celebrate the greatness of Simone Biles, there’s now an outpouring of concern over the woman who started it all.
Who are some of those clients?
That Sports Illustrated cover had it right all those years ago.
Mary Lou, it has always been only you.
The judge in Donald Trump's criminal case alleging that classified documents were mishandled will weigh on Thursday whether lawyers for two co-defendants are too close to witnesses.
U.S. District Judge Aileen Cannon will consider arguments related to witnesses expected to testify about the co-defendants moving boxes and trying to delete surveillance video at Mar-a-Lago.
The testimony is part of the evidence against Trump and his co-defendants for allegedly retaining and hiding national security records after he left the White House.
John Irving represents De Oliveira, the property manager at Mar-a-Lago.
Woodward and Irving also represented several witnesses in the case.
Woodward told prosecutors he had no conflicts.
Donnie Murrell, another lawyer for De Oliveira, said there was no conflict with witnesses and that even if there was, Murrell could cross-examine them rather than Irving.
Trump is charged with unlawful retention of national defense information.
All three have pleaded not guilty.
Here is a summary of potential conflicts prosecutors raised:
Woodward represented seven other people questioned during the investigation, including three likely witnesses at trial, prosecutors said.
Irving represented four other people questioned during the investigation, including three potential witnesses at trial, prosecutors said.
Prosecutors argued there could be two types of conflicts.
One is that a lawyer could disclose confidences from his client during cross-examination of a witness.
Another is that the attorney might “pull his punches” during cross-examination to protect his client's confidences or because of his personal interests.
In De Oliveira’s case, according to prosecutors:
Murrell, De Oliveira's lawyer, said in a court filing that Irving no longer represents the three witnesses and that he has no confidential information about those witnesses that could be a conflict in cross-examination.
"Here, the Government seeks a hearing based on only what it believes is a potential for a conflict, and not any actual conflict," Murrell wrote.
According to prosecutors:
The director of information technology changed lawyers before the grand jury handed up the indictment.
Woodward told prosecutors that he notified his various clients about potential conflicts, but doesn’t think there are any.
LOS ANGELES – There are movie premieres here where the red carpet is the star event.
But this is Taylor's version.
The world premiere of Taylor Swift's "Eras Tour" movie on Wednesday night was all about what was inside a very common AMC movie theater in an outdoor mall that was closed for the day.
And Taylor Swift herself, sitting in theater No.
2, seat F8, at the center, next to her tour backup singers and dancers, and actress Julia Garner.
I've always had fun doing this.
I can't believe music is my career; that's crazy to me.
I've always loved it.
Taylor Swift 'Eras' movie review:Concert film a thrilling revisit of her live spectacle
Swift visited each theater to thank guests before coming to the spot where she would watch her movie.
... We pranced on that stage grinning because of what met us on the other side and that was you, how much you cared about it.
"So, I think you will see that you absolutely are main characters in this film because that's what made the tour magical, that's what made the tour different from anything I've ever done in my life."
It made us want to add even more shows.
I just have never felt this way about anything.
So let's have a blast, guys.
Guests ate popcorn out of commemorative Eras Tour tins and Reese's Pieces and Red Vines from a complimentary elaborate candy bar decorated with fresh flowers flown in that morning for the display.
An AMC employee stopped by Swift's seat and poured glasses of white wine.
Moviegoers at the premiere captured the concert feel with sequined jackets, sparkly boots, pastel pouf dresses and friendship bracelets.
'Eras' tour movie etiquette:How to enjoy the Taylor Swift concert film (the right way)
Throughout the movie, Swift bopped her head with the songs, pumped her arms, mimicked her onscreen dance moves and smiled almost nonstop.
Watching her was as fun as watching the movie.
It was also a movie where participation felt almost mandatory.
As the screen showed "Look What You Made Me Do" from the "Reputation" era, Sandler - sitting just behind Swift in his trademark Hawaiian polo shirt – bounced in his chair and clapped, one of Swift's vocalists held her hands up in the shape of a heart, and Swift vibed to the beat.
Before the movie began, Swift took photos with fans and made a video with Beyoncé in an empty theater.
It was unclear if Beyoncé, who opens her own movie "Renaissance: A Film by Beyoncé" with AMC in December, stayed to watch the movie.
She was not in the theater with Swift.
While Swift's appearance at the movie was expected, most people in theater No.
2 hadn't expected to watch the movie with her.
Their eyes gazed from the screen to Swift, while they joined her in singing everything from "Cruel Summer" to "Midnight Rain."
Swift took selfies – with a flash – with her dancers, singers and Garner.
The credits included cute outtakes from the tour – and some names spelled out in friendship bracelet style.
After the movie, Swift took photos with fans and posed while Sandler snapped a photo of her with his daughters before she slipped out a door at the back of the theater.
The movie was scheduled to open on Friday.
But after selling more than $100 million in presale tickets and leaving many people waiting in online queues to buy movie tickets, it now will open on Thursday.
Editor's note: Part one of a five-part USA TODAY series revealing why America hasn't solved its long struggle with Type 2 diabetes.
For chef Robin Ray, newly married with young stepchildren, the turning point came when a stabbing chest pain sent her rushing to the emergency room.
“I didn’t think you’d make it,” the doctor said.
The moments were turning points for all three to get serious about addressing their diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes, in which the body can’t properly regulate blood sugar, has become so common it’s almost considered inconsequential.
More than 1 in 10 Americans have the disease (though many don't know) and another nearly 4 in 10 are at risk for it.
In total, half of all adults and a quarter of teenagers have diabetes or pre-diabetes.
Its financial costs are astronomical.
The country spends more than $300 billion a year to address diabetes, accounting for $1 out of every $4 spent on health care.
And its personal tolls are even worse: heart attacks, amputations, blindness, kidney disease, double the risk of premature death.
It also causes what’s known as “diabetes distress,” the daily burdens and emotional toll of living with and managing a chronic ailment that can lead to regular dips in energy, foggy thinking and depression, and a sense of isolation.
The most frustrating aspect of Type 2 diabetes, experts say, is that it has long been largely preventable and controllable.
“We have made tremendous gains in understanding diabetes,” said Dr. Donald Berwick, a pediatrician and former administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Roughly 40% of people who died early in the coronavirus pandemic had Type 2 diabetes, a rate four times higher than people without the disease.
Even when elevated blood sugar levels are below the threshold for type 2 diabetes, the risk for heart disease jumps 30% to 50% compared with people with normal blood sugar levels.
(Type 1 diabetes, which accounts for 5% to 10% of diabetes, is caused by the immune system and is unrelated to diet or lifestyle.)
America’s failure to address Type 2 diabetes highlights larger problems with our food and medical systems, Berwick and other experts said.
A soda costs less than a bottle of water, a double cheeseburger and fries less than a carton of blueberries.
Patients wait months for medical appointments only to see the back of a white coat for the short time they’re allotted.
Treating disease costs society far more than preventing it but typically provides more profit for insurance companies, hospitals and the pharmaceutical industry.
The USA TODAY Health team spoke with scores of health care providers, researchers, community leaders and patients for this five-part series to understand why Type 2 diabetes continues to worsen in America despite known solutions.
The answer isn't simple.
It involves systemic problems facing everyone in society, not just those with diabetes: a food system designed to sell products; a medical system in which cutting off a leg is less expensive than saving it; the high cost of healthy living and the fact that breaking habits takes a lot more than just personal willpower.
This first story looks at what it takes for people to cope with or overcome the disease.
Then, we explore one community in a David vs. Goliath battle against a food system that fails to prioritize people's health.
More in series:Diabetes runs deep in rural Mississippi.
Locals have taken to growing their own solutions.
We next travel to Colorado, which has the lowest level of diabetes in the nation.
Yet even in this state, where hiking trails and gorgeous views abound, economic and other disparities make it easier for some people to avoid diabetes than others.
More in series:A diabetes disparity: Why Colorado's healthy lifestyle brand isn't shared by all
It's tough to manage a chronic illness in the face of high medical costs, scattered care and caregiver frustration and burnout, so we highlight that next.
More in series:The steep cost of Type 2: When diabetes dragged her down, she chose to fight
Finally, we explore solutions, addressing why it will take a combination of education, medication, medical devices and improved food access to solve this national problem.
More in series:Solutions exist to end the Type 2 diabetes dilemma but too few get the help they need
But it will take "sensible action" from across many sectors, including health care, science, nutrition, business, public health and politics to change the financial and other incentives that drive so many Americans toward sickness instead of health.
"If we do it incrementally or don't do it at all, we're all going to be toast in 50 years from diet-related illnesses and a depleted environment."
There’s no question personal responsibility plays a role in fighting diabetes.
They’ve reduced their dependence on daily medication and hope to have saved themselves the horrors of more amputations, blindness and dialysis.
They’ve extended their lives and improved the quality of that time.
But like many medical problems, the challenges of diabetes go well beyond individual responsibility and blame.
Agarwal recently led a series of studies in the journal The Lancet that looked at diabetes rates around the world.
Poverty, the studies showed, was a major driver of diabetes, along with racism and unequal access to healthy food and high-quality medical care.
Personal stories illustrate how these structural issues play out in the lives of so many Americans.
 “I’m healthy because of privilege – not diet, not exercise, not determination,” he said.
“It’s going to be all right after a while, as long as I keep this spirit,” he said.
Ray’s love for food began when she was 8 years old, watching Julia Child on TV.
During family gatherings, she would run around taking everyone’s dinner order.
Then she’d scurry back to the kitchen with a notepad full of scribbles.
Throughout her life, she made fried chicken, pork chops, baked mac and cheese, collard greens, and even a whole roasted chicken filled with wild rice and two sticks of butter – everything that made her soul sing.
In her world, food was home.
Food was family.
Food was love.
But that was some pretty tough love.
In 2002, Ray was diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes.
Her father, grandmother, aunts and uncles all had diabetes.
She knew what it meant.
“For you to tell me I can’t have ice blue raspberry Kool-Aid was like you shut down my world,” Ray said.
She didn't dwell on the diagnosis and continued with life.
Her culinary career took her to Italy, where she learned and fell even more in love with food.
She returned to St. Louis, got married and became a mom to her husband’s two children ‒ “beautiful bonus babies,” as she described them.
Through the years, she continued to express love through cooking and eating.
In 2015, a stabbing chest pain sent her to the emergency room.
Doctors assured Ray she hadn’t had a heart attack, but they warned that her life was on the line.
At 5-foot-2, she weighed 334 pounds and had an A1C, a measure of average blood sugar of 11%, well above the 6.5% cutoff to be considered diabetic.
Her diabetes – and her diet – were out of control.
She and her primary care doctor decided she would pursue weight loss surgery.
But she also decided to use her culinary prowess to transform her diet.
She reconfigured favorite foods, substituting healthier ingredients: Collard greens cooked in smoked fats or ham hocks turned into a kale, turnip and rutabaga recipe flavored with natural chicken broth fat, oils and seasonings.
She fostered her feelings into new recipes and brought them to North Sarah Food Hub, which partnered with Barnes-Jewish Hospital to make packaged, pre-made meals for St. Louis residents with diabetes and limited access to fresh food.
“I became excited about food again, and food became a joy.”
It isn’t always easy, of course.
Ray admits to an occasional cookie craving.
But now she takes the time to think about how her body processes that cookie and whether it’s worthwhile.
She hopes her cooking can help other people make the same transformation she did.
Her staff at North Sarah helps her create new recipes for others.
She wants to provide nourishment that allows people to avoid illness and medicine.
The lifetime risk of developing Type 2 diabetes if a parent has it is 40%.
If both parents have it, the risk jumps to 70%.
He knew he was at risk, but he pushed his luck, he said, by eating poorly during the pandemic and falling out of his exercise routine.
With the luxury of working from home, walking to the kitchen and bathroom was often the extent of his daily activity.
On Feb. 14, 2022 – Valentine’s Day – he went to an urgent care clinic, concerned his breathing trouble meant he had bronchitis.
His blood pressure measured 210 over 110, well above normal levels that top out at 120 over 80.
A chest X-ray showed fluid filling his lungs, leading to congestive heart failure.
The clinic sent him straight to a local emergency room, where he was diagnosed with a blockage of the left descending artery – a clogged artery made worse by diabetes.
If he had waited any longer, he would have had a massive heart attack, his doctor later told him.
After his release from the hospital, he went to the drugstore to fill his new prescriptions.
The pharmacist told him she couldn’t fill one because it would cost $1,000.
He’d have to wait until his insurance approved it.
“Please fill it,” he said.
She stressed the cost.
“Fill it,” he pleaded, putting the charge on his credit card.
Medication helped him lose 70 pounds in three months.
When his local drugstore ran out of the weight-loss drug, he easily drove to another pharmacy and then another to find what he needed.
His 100 hours of high-quality cardiac rehabilitation were fully covered by insurance.
He could devote all his energy to getting well because he didn’t have to focus on how to afford his care.
When they finally show up in the emergency room, “because they will,” they will cost the system far more, he said.
On the day Haynes stepped on a rusty nail in 2019, he walked all day as the nail pierced the sole of his sneaker and then his foot.
By the time he took off his shoe that night, his foot was infected.
He landed in the hospital for two months as doctors and nurses tried, mostly unsuccessfully, to get the infection and Haynes’ blood sugar under control.
By the time he was released, he knew enough about Type 2 diabetes to realize his daily blood sugar levels – typically in the mid-400s – were four times above what he had been told to shoot for.
But nothing he did or ate seemed to make a difference.
He had long since traded ribs for salads, beer for water.
His wife, Angela, barely noticed when James started wearing multiple pairs of socks, pouring powder on his feet and buying bigger shoes.
His feet tingled a lot, he said, but he was coping with it.
James ended up in the emergency room again, dehydrated and in need of antibiotics.
The doctor amputated the baby toe on his right foot, leaving a large open wound.
“I didn't like that we're not going to try to save anything, we're just going to start cutting.”
James was fading.
Antibiotics left him looking sickly, his voice so weak Angela could barely hear him.
“I felt like I was watching my husband slowly dying,” she said.
She thought it would take months to get James in to see the heart disease specialist, but the office called and asked if they could come the next day.
“We started looking forward to these visits because there was always hope,” Angela Haynes said, though she felt guilty they were taking up so much of the important doctor’s time.
Haynes had blockages in blood vessels on both legs.
Once he got the blood flowing again, Haynes began to feel better.
His flesh returned to its normal color.
The wound started healing at last.
Walking became easier.
Then disaster struck again.
On July 2, 2022, Haynes caught COVID-19.
"Everything went downhill after that," he said.
During his 13-day illness, the bacteria in his foot raged out of control.
Every week, a surgeon would come to the door of his hospital room and before even stepping all the way in ask Haynes whether he had decided to get his leg amputated.
I was born with this.
He was worried about how he’d get around, how he’d be able to work to support his family if he had only one leg.
No one took the time to explain why they thought the leg needed to come off or how he’d cope without it, Haynes said.
In late November, he was finally sent home in a wheelchair.
Back at the hospital, Haynes was told his foot was broken, essentially beyond repair.
He agreed to a below-the-knee amputation.
Released right before Christmas, he spent the next three weeks in bed wondering how he’d manage the rest of his life.
Finally, it looked as if his luck might be turning around.
With the leg gone, his diabetes improved.
His blood sugar dropped into the 120s or one-teens.
His blurry vision cleared up.
During his long hospital stay, he befriended nurses and learned about a program for people who needed prostheses.
The man who ran it called early in the year and said he had received a donated leg.
If it fit Haynes, he could have it while waiting for insurance to pay for a personalized one.
Miraculously, it did.
Haynes spent the next six months teaching himself to walk again.
The donor leg was heavy and uncomfortable.
He wasn't mobile enough to hold down a job.
One late spring night, picking up dinner at a nearby restaurant, he headed to the bathroom for a pit stop.
A sink had been leaking all day and Haynes slipped in the puddle, falling backward.
He's still recovering from the resulting wrist surgery.
He and Angela are living – barely – off her part-time salary as a secretary and a church organist.
Haynes has tried "at least three or four times" to receive government assistance, but they keep losing his paperwork, or not believing he's disabled, though he once checked himself out of the hospital and arrived at an appointment in his wheelchair to prove he didn't have a leg.
Still, he clings to his faith and the positive attitude he has long used to cheer up himself and others.
These are his secret weapons against diabetes and everything else life throws his way.
"I try to put a smile on other people's faces," he said.
"It keeps my day going."
This story is part of a reporting fellowship sponsored by the Association of Health Care Journalists and supported by the Commonwealth Fund.
Our goal remains the same: Provide book lovers with the best, most accurate snapshot of what people are reading by showing which titles are selling.
It is a master list, unbound by genre and format, of what’s selling broadly across the U.S.
Her novel "It Starts With Us" claimed the No.
1 spot in its first week, her highest debut ever, selling more than 800,000 copies on its first day of sales.
It was her fourth book to hit No.
1 in 2022.
The USA TODAY list is a ranking of the top-selling titles each week from a broad range of businesses including major chains, independent bookstores and online retailers.
It reflects combined sales of titles in print and electronic format, if available.
Our data team weighs and compiles those numbers to generate the week's 150 top-selling titles.
The rankings reflect sales from the previous Monday through Sunday.
The full list will publish online at 6 a.m. Wednesdays, with the top 50 titles publishing in print Thursdays.
The list, which began in 1993, went on hiatus in December.
It is the longest-running USA TODAY data journalism project.
In our continued commitment to bring readers more books coverage, USA TODAY is also excited to announce a new content partnership with The Novel Neighbor, an independently owned and operated bookstore in St. Louis.
They are expert booksellers and passionate readers who are deeply connected to what their community is reading.
With the partnership will come regular profiles of independent bookstores across the country, highlighting the important role of these businesses in their local communities.
Novel Neighbor will also be sharing expert book recommendations and fun takes on book trends.
We can't wait to see what you've been reading!
Brief status updates with words of encouragement.
A picture of the beloved family dog, Tutsi.
Until no more messages came.
Four days after Hamas attacked Israel, more than 100 Israelis and possibly dozens of foreign nationals are thought to be held captive in the Gaza Strip.
Flash, 67, originally from St. Paul, Minnesota, is one of them.
"We need someone to come by the house right now."
She emigrated to Israel decades ago after a visit during college, when she fell in love with Israel's system of kibbutzim − collectives traditionally centered on agriculture but which have evolved to accommodate myriad interests, tastes and even businesses.
"No one deserves this."
Sobbing teenagers, reunited after days of having their worst fears confirmed, hugged one another tightly.
Small groups of people sat at tables hunched over laptops compiling lists of the missing.
Nobody knows for sure how many survived.
The couple had recently renovated it, which had required that they move away from the kibbutz for a few months.
And their daughter said that despite their proximity to Gaza, everyone in the family had always felt secure and reveled in their area's lush vegetation, tranquility and sense of community.
In fact, the extended Flash family had expected a very different Saturday from the one they got.
They had planned a family picnic.
And later that afternoon they were going to make and fly kites in the local soccer field as part of an annual community event.
Maybe, they thought, they'd have a little ice cream and relax after a hectic week of family life and work.
A DJ was going to play.
They leaped out of bed and dashed down the hall to grab their 1-year-old baby, Saar, and her bottle, diapers, water and a little food.
Then they locked themselves in a room of concrete and reinforced steel.
The bodies of civilians and militants were found scattered throughout the kibbutz.
One report, which USA TODAY could not independently verify, said that multiple people had been beheaded and that charred bodies had been found.
The Israeli death toll from the Hamas attack has passed 1,200.
But she had not lost hope they would be found.
"Anytime someone calls us, any authority from the kibbutz or anywhere, our hearts sink down, and then they say, 'We don't have any new information.'"
There was a crunching sound because the leaves have started to fall down because of the season.
We couldn't talk because we didn't want them to hear our voices, so we were signaling silently to each other.
She fled first to some nearby bushes, and then to an empty garden shed.
But then the baby woke up and began to cry, which attracted the attention of the attackers.
She could hear them walking toward her.
She feared they would shoot into the shed indiscriminately.
"I knew I had to run again," she said.
Moments later, a family with children sheltering in their home saw her and ushered her inside, risking their lives.
She stayed in this safe room for the next 27 hours, without food or water, and as the oxygen in the sealed safe room dwindled, before they were rescued by Israel's military.
Late Tuesday the news finally came.
I'm holding the door.
Keep up with developments from Gaza: Sign up for our Israel-Hamas War newsletter.
The U.S. government announced it will provide charter flights for American citizens and their immediate families looking to leave Israel.
The flights, which are set to begin on Friday, will operate to locations in Europe where there is more commercial capacity across the Atlantic.
U.S. citizens in Israel in need of assistance should complete the crisis intake form at travel.state.gov.
“We’re also exploring other options to expand the capacity of doing this including exploring whether it’s possible to help Americans leave by land and by sea.”
Kirby said that the State Department is still finalizing details of the plan and did not make more specifics available.
Travel disrupted:US airlines suspend flights to Israel as State Department urges caution
USA TODAY reached out to the State Department and will update this story as details become available.
The news moves quickly.
We break it down for you.
Sign up for USA TODAY’S Israel-Hamas War newsletter for a run-down of the day’s headlines.
You can reach him at zwichter@usatoday.com
It’s hard to wrap your mind around: The social justice warriors on college campuses around America have come out in support of terrorists who last weekend raped and murdered and beheaded innocent people (including children, women and the elderly) in Israel.
These are the same students who need safe spaces from those who may talk about race or gender in a way they find offensive, or who will shout down and demand the cancellation of speakers with whom they disagree.
Yet, some of them seem perfectly OK with defending the atrocities committed when Hamas invaded Israel in a surprise attack in which the terrorists murdered at least 1,200 Israelis; 27 Americans also died and more than a dozen are missing.
It seems the higher ed bubble has decided it’s “woke” to support Hamas and to shun Israel, regardless of how horrific the situation.
And even though many of these students believe “words are violence,” they defend real violence.
Supporting Israel:Biden's response to Hamas terror attack was weak.
US needs strong leadership to support allies.
Student organizations at more than a dozen prominent U.S. universities have issued statements pointing the full blame of the Hamas attack on the back of Israel.
Those include Columbia University, the University of Michigan Law School and Northwestern University.
And on Thursday, local university chapters of Students for Justice in Palestine are planning a “day of resistance” and “protest for Palestine.” In other words, they are standing in solidarity with Hamas terrorists who just slaughtered innocents in the name of “resistance.”
Perhaps the worst offenders – or at least the ones who have received the most attention – are the more than 30 student groups at Harvard University who signed on to a letter stating they “hold the Israeli regime entirely responsible for all unfolding violence.”
“Today’s events did not occur in a vacuum,” the students state.
Israeli officials promise to ‘open the gates of hell,’ and the massacres in Gaza have already commenced.
The statement has unsurprisingly attracted backlash, and the Harvard Undergraduate Palestine Solidarity Committee has since hidden the names of the other groups that signed on to the misguided missive.
You can't say that:Oberlin coach stood up for women in sports.
Then faced public shaming from her college.
The students haven’t apologized per se, however.
They simply seem taken aback that their outrageous views aren’t being welcomed with open arms.
For instance, some major CEOs and investors are calling on Harvard to release the names of the students who signed the statement – so that they can make sure they never employ these people.
As Texas Republican Sen. Ted Cruz (and Harvard Law grad) posited on X, formerly Twitter: “What the hell is wrong with Harvard?”
I am sickened.
As of this writing, the Harvard administration has refrained from directly condemning the student statement.
I’m a firm supporter of free speech, and I think the lack of open debate on college campuses is a huge problem.
While one can argue that these student groups have the right to say whatever they want, it’s certainly worth questioning why so many "top" institutions are defending such awful acts.
Canceling comedy:Hope for free speech?
It’s not just students who are to blame here.
They are learning this behavior from somewhere.
And college administrations that like to issue statements on pretty much everything else have been noticeably silent now.
Every single human life matters.
We are committed to that truth.
Ingrid Jacques is a columnist at USA TODAY.
Contact her at ijacques@usatoday.com or on X, formerly Twitter: @Ingrid_Jacques
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
"That’s a tough deal out there," Campbell said.
I don’t want to elaborate on anything, but he felt they were safe.
It’s just finding a way out, but that can’t − I know it’s not easy.
I know it’s not easy.
Hamas, a Palestinian militant group, invaded Israel on Saturday.
At least 22 Americans and more than 1,200 Israelis had died in the fighting as of Wednesday, according to USA Today.
An additional 17 Americans remain unaccounted for, and fighting is ongoing.
The Palestinian Ministry of Health says 900 people have died in the Gaza Strip since Israel began retaliatory attacks.
"Continue to pray for Israel and for this to be resolved as peacefully and quickly as possible," the post said.
Follow him on Twitter @davebirkett.
The UAW strike against the Ford Kentucky Truck Plant is a signal that hourly workers are willing to inflict − and sustain − increasingly serious financial pain to achieve their goals during labor negotiations, as the union and the Detroit Three approach a full month without resolution.
The financial impact of the surprise strike called Wednesday night was swift and immediate.
LAS VEGAS – The Green Bay Packers aren’t a talentless team.
They probably have as much or more talent than two of the three teams that have beaten them this year.
But, boy, are they a bad team.
Their offense is a mess.
Their defense can be pretty good but only to a point.
They are affected any time one of their starters can’t play because of injury.
And they have too many players who just do what they’re told and not whatever it takes to be a difference-maker.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
They also celebrated the end of a years-long battle against Greater Albany Public School District.
Their excitement to be a teen attending a Corvallis high school is a stark difference from their emotions as an Albany elementary school student.
Indigenous land acknowledgments are everywhere.
After taking hold on college campuses, they are recited with growing frequency at schools, sporting events and church services.
They are added as signatures at the end of emails.
They are being posted on the websites of museums, libraries, and other institutions as the era of racial reckoning and social justice that has followed the emergence of the Black Lives Matter movement and the killing of George Floyd continues to evolve.
"Just go with the flow," the "Thursday Night Football" senior coordinating producer ordered from the command truck at FedEx Field, not long after the Chicago Bears defeated the Washington Commanders.
They were about to play a game, he said, as celebrity chef David Chang rejoined the set.
It’s a simple premise.
Producers from the truck will put up a name on the screen.
The panel must answer whether that person played in the NFL or is a United States Congressperson – "On the Hill" or "On the Field" – all while chowing down on spicy chicken sandwiches from Chang’s restaurant.
"What can go wrong?"
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
But as Amazon became the league's first new media partner in nearly 30 years, the company also saw the opportunity of a blank canvas.
A streaming giant taking center stage for the NFL one night per week represented a chance to take another step toward the boundaries.
"But like, we want to take the swings and see where we land."
That type of segment likely would not have been flown at network television.
At Amazon, it’s encouraged.
Their willingness to pitch ideas makes the show that much better, he added.
"The show is better for it."
From there, the producers begin outlining a show ahead of a Monday afternoon production call in which the sketch becomes more of a rundown.
Reading the letters Fitzpatrick wrote to Johnson as a boy was one idea.
The crew brainstormed ways for Johnson to sign items for Fitzpatrick and how to place that into the segment.
Of course, it would have to be right before commercial break.
And they’d have to make sure Johnson sat next to the former quarterback.
When it was showtime 72 hours later, Fitzpatrick was all smiles as he unveiled his No.
32 Lakers jersey beneath his signature zany button-down shirt.
Through four weeks, "TNF Nightcap" is averaging 2.08M viewers, which is an increase of 24% over last year’s full-season average (1.68M), according to Prime Video.
(“TNF Tonight,” the pregame show, is averaging 500,000 more viewers per week compared to 2022.)
The morning of the Bears-Commanders matchup, the crew met in a hotel conference room to review the show rundown.
"And we've been shown we've been on parts of shows where not enough of that has happened as well."
Finding the sweet spot is the challenge of creating programming in 2023 for a streaming service.
Other market forces, like podcasts, have influenced the way they construct the show too.
So it's not a podcast, we don't want it to be a podcast.
That type of transition made it easier on the trio of Whitworth, Fitzpatrick and Sherman, all of whom went straight from the playing field to analysts’ chairs (Gonzalez and Thompson both had ample television experience prior to joining “TNF”).
Making sure they don’t lose their personality by improving for television is a fine line to walk.
And I think it's because there's so much content they're consuming in different ways.
During one of those sessions, it became clear that a "Quiz Bowl" for the Week 3 game between the San Francisco 49ers and New York Giants in the Bay Area would be the perfect setting.
Sherman went to Stanford.
Gonzalez is a proud Cal product.
Fitzpatrick famously graduated from Harvard.
"That would be the perfect amount of craziness," he realized.
Something political – but not polarizing – felt appropriate.
With the cameras rolling, Thompson – the only one who had prior knowledge of the game – accidentally gave away the answer to the first question.
No memes or viral posts came from the segment.
A few laughs for sure.
He said the segment featuring Fitzpatrick being honored at his high school the previous weekend was too much.
He hopes everyone else watching did.
Be careful what you wish for, Dallas Cowboys.
As fallout lingers from the blowout loss at San Francisco, the Cowboys are so deep into their feelings about the 42-10 result that it’s fair to wonder if they are capable of recovering – physically and mentally.
 "I just feel like he’s making it way more personal than it had to be," Parsons said Tuesday.
We got something for that.
Trust the Cowboys?
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
The Cowboys, 28 years and counting since the franchise’s last whiff of Super Bowl glory, have proven (again) that they cannot be trusted as a legitimate contender.
Maybe that changes by January.
But that needs to be proven in the flesh as they’ve over-promised so many times before in morphing from America’s Team to America’s Biggest Tease.
Such an identity remains intact about now.
At this point, any threats coming from the Cowboys about what they’ll do to the 49ers have zero credibility.
Remember, Dallas was supposed to use the prime-time showcase on Sunday night as a measuring stick.
And the 49ers basically took that stick and cracked the Cowboys on the butt with it.
The defense that Parsons leads?
The Cowboys went to San Francisco with the unit allowing the fewest points in the league, like 10 points per game.
They left as the defense that gave up six touchdowns and 421 yards and had a terrible time getting off the field on third downs.
So, again, any promises about what will happen if they see them again would be ill-advised.
"It was always personal before the game started," Samuel told Kay Adams on the "Up & Adams" podcast.
Or touchdown, 49ers.
Can we stick a fork in the Cowboys already and declare that this season is kaput?
Maybe not yet.
It’s the NFL, with its week-to-week reality checks.
Look at what happened to Buffalo, a week after destroying the Dolphins: They went to London to get served up by the Jaguars.
This is not the time of year to draw conclusions about what will happen in January – even though it seems clear that if they stay healthy, the 49ers and Eagles will be major factors.
And as long as Patrick Mahomes is in the lineup, the Chiefs have a shot.
"It’s been a wide range of performance, as wide a range that I could ever recall in a 5-week period," McCarthy said after the debacle on Sunday night.
On paper, the Cowboys are not done yet.
There are 12 games left.
Just one of Dallas’ next six opponents – Philadelphia (5-0) – currently has a winning record.
A path to get back into the race in the NFC East still exists, given the two matchups looming against the Eagles in November and December.
Then again, the Eagles will be just as eager as the 49ers to demonstrate a special kind of animosity toward Dallas.
In any event, the expectation correction for the Cowboys has just happened.
After showing that figuratively they don’t belong on the same field with the 49ers, the Cowboys find themselves facing a must-win predicament when meeting the Los Angeles Chargers at SoFi Stadium on Monday night.
It’s about survival, or at least rebounding to restore some confidence after absorbing so many blows during the humiliating loss on Sunday night.
It’s a striking pattern.
Including the playoffs, teams that played the 49ers last season were 0-15 in games the following week.
The Chiefs won their next game after facing San Francisco last October, but it came after Kansas City had a bye week.
And the Eagles had a bye week following the NFC title game, although it indeed lost in the Super Bowl.
Pittsburgh snapped the “next-week” streak last month.
Blown out by the 49ers in Week 1, the Steelers rallied to defeat Cleveland the following week.
The next three 49ers opponents, though, followed suit with last season’s pattern and lost the following week.
Now the trend is attached to Dallas’ challenge to get back on track after a grueling loss to the 49ers.
Tony Pollard, the Cowboys running back limited to 29 rushing yards at San Francisco, was upbeat on Sunday night when assessing how they can rebound.
"Get back to work," Pollard said.
You have to prepare.
You have to get ready and brush it off.
See the 49ers again?
Officially, that’s a maybe for the Cowboys this season.
No, the Cowboys likely can’t achieve the dream of winning a championship without getting past the 49ers.
But considering the way San Francisco has owned them in recent years, the Cowboys had better be careful of what they wish for.
NFL power rankings entering Week 6 of the 2023 season (previous rank in parentheses):
49ers (1): What else is there to say about a team that's been in the top spot since the season started?
S.F.’s +99 point differential is already 20 better than the next team.
Probably have the best defense (though that can be settled at Cleveland on Sunday).
Might have the best offense.
Stars on basically every unit.
And second-year QB Brock Purdy continues to effectively play mistake-free football, his league-leading 123.1 passer rating testament to that.
Eagles (3): They're 5-0 in successive seasons for the first time.
Next up, the Jets – a team Philadelphia has never lost to in 12 previous meetings.
Feels safe to slot the reigning NFC champs at 6-0 and look ahead to their Week 7 date with Miami.
Sunday, Montgomery became the first Detroit rusher to top 100 yards in consecutive games since … Kevin Jones in 2004.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Weird as this sounds, Milano might be the more valuable player to Buffalo's defense.
Dolphins (7): How fast is Miami?
Per Next Gen Stats, the Fins have produced the five top speeds among all plays this season and seven of the top nine.
Jaguars (14): The first team to play multiple international games in a season is now the first to win multiple – both coming against teams with winning records.
Stay in Europe, Jags – it seems inevitable, and you're apparently better for it.
Cowboys (4): Good thing they're not part of the NFC West … even if it would make more sense geographically.
In its two defeats (to Arizona and San Francisco), Dallas has lost by a collective 70-26.
Steelers (12): They've gained the third-fewest yards in the league and surrendered the third most, the delta more than 600 yards.
But 11 takeaways, 17 sacks and just enough clutch plays from QB Kenny Pickett can mask such warts … and propel you to the top of the AFC North.
Ravens (8): It's been an uneven start, to say the least, but it's also unusual to play four of five away from home so early in the season – and Baltimore's three-game roadie winds to a conclusion Sunday in London.
Rams (9): Sure, they're 2-3, but they've hung tough against the league's top teams, San Francisco and Philadelphia.
Seahawks (10): Coming off their bye, they're currently not scheduled to face a team with a winning record until November.
Time to make serious hay toward a playoff berth.
Buccaneers (16): This marks three times in four years that QB Baker Mayfield has won three of his first four starts.
His only 4-1 beginning led to a deep playoff run in Cleveland.
Saints (20): Great sidebar to Sunday's 34-0 runaway in New England.
Pretty cool story amid the NFL's annual "Crucial Catch" campaign for cancer screening.
Falcons (18): If you know anything about the NFL, and running backs in particular, best to appreciate their genius while you can.
Texans (11): No matter Sunday's outcome, this will be their best six-game start since 2019.
But it would help if Houston would run the ball better after cracking 90 yards just once so far this season.
Chargers (22): Did you know WR Keenan Allen owns the NFL record for most games – three – with at least 15 receptions?
With wingman Mike Williams down for the count, wouldn't be a shock if Allen extends that mark before this year is out.
Bengals (26): They'll only be on the road two more times before December, so maybe the comforts of home are good for QB Joe Burrow's calf and team focus with a brutal upcoming schedule (Seattle, San Francisco, Buffalo) for a Cincinnati club that may finally otherwise be turning the corner.
Raiders (28): If they're going to salvage their season and use Monday's win as a catapult, now is the time.
The Silver and Black face three one-win teams (Patriots, Bears, Giants) over the next four weeks.
Packers (19): No worse way to go into a bye week than off a terrible loss.
But Green Bay's next three opponents (Broncos, Vikings, Rams) have a combined four wins, so hopefully a good time for the Pack to get healthy figuratively and literally.
Vikings (25): Why is offensive balance often a virtue?
Consider one-win Minnesota, which has thrown more passes (204) than any team in the league while attempting the fewest runs (91).
Bears (32): The Justin Fields-to-DJ Moore Show has sparked Chicago's revival.
But look closer, and you'll also note a running game averaging better than 170 yards the past two weeks and some encouraging signs of life on defense at Washington.
Commanders (15): Only Denver has surrendered more points than Washington's 160.
Only Minnesota has turned it over more times than Washington's 10.
Some consolation for a team that hasn't run an offensive play with the lead yet and has now been outscored by a league-most 91 points.
Cardinals (27): No NFC team is blitzing less frequently – worth wondering if that's the right approach given the way Arizona's D has been torn up the past two weeks.
Patriots (23): If the dynasty wasn't already dead, then life support has officially been unplugged.
Panthers (31): The NFL's only winless team just turned in its worst defensive performance (42 points allowed) of the season.
A trip to Miami.
Follow USA TODAY Sports' Nate Davis on X, formerly Twitter @ByNateDavis.
Week 5 in the NFL provided needed perspective.
In all, the slate didn't provide too many stunning outcomes or last-second twists.
Here's our full rundown of the biggest winners and losers from Week 5 in the NFL:
What's scary about the 5-0 49ers is not solely the manner in which they thoroughly dismantled the Dallas Cowboys in a 42-10 blowout on Sunday night, but rather that it all seemed a little ordinary.
That's life as the clearly best team in football after five weeks.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Still, let's not let one of the most sterling performances of the early season pass by without giving it proper recognition.
With the rest of the October schedule filled by teams at or below .500, it could be some time before we see a meaningful challenge for a group that has tied a franchise record with 15 consecutive wins.
Is it too late for them to offer to take either the Baltimore Ravens' or Tennessee Titans' spot in next week's London tilt to go for the triple?
In handling the Buffalo Bills in a 25-20 win after last week's victory over the Atlanta Falcons, the Jaguars became the first NFL team to play consecutive games abroad.
But there were plenty of things Sunday that Jacksonville can take back home to Duval County.
Trevor Lawrence pushed past some miscues to establish the electric connection with Calvin Ridley (seven catches, 122 yards) that fans had been hoping to see since this summer.
And the defense kept Josh Allen off balance with consistent pressure via the blitz.
With a manageable schedule before the Week 9 bye, the Jaguars have a chance to create some distance in the AFC South race and set up a favorable outlook for playoff seeding.
Netting one offensive touchdown against what is far and away the league's worst defense is nothing to brag about, but Sunday was about far more than the stats for Hackett and the New York Jets.
No need to hold back anymore, however, after Sunday's 31-21 win over Denver.
But Hackett can now let the result – as well as the Jets' players and social media team – do all the talking for him.
This week, the second-year signal-caller was far more catalyst than caretaker in a last-second 21-19 comeback win against the Houston Texans.
Long-awaited connections with his top targets in tight end Kyle Pitts (seven catches, 87 yards) and wide receiver Drake London (six catches, 78 yards) finally materialized.
Maybe dispatching the Arizona Cardinals 34-20 in a get-right game doesn't completely undo the myriad setbacks the team suffered in its first four games, but the Bengals appear to be on a much steadier course now.
Burrow finally looked fluid and comfortable, with much of his mobility seemingly having returned after the quarterback was hampered by a calf injury since the start of the season.
And just one week after he explained in frustration that he's "always (expletive) open," Chase exploded for 15 catches, 192 yards and three touchdowns.
The squeaky receiver gets the targets.
For all the histrionics about Cincinnati's start, the Bengals now stand at 2-3 with their star players seemingly back in a good place.
There's still work to be done, but there's no reason to write this team off.
One of the more disappointing developments of September was the steadily building training camp buzz around Pickens – the Pittsburgh Steelers' ultra-promising second-year receiver – fading into a dull hum amid persistent woes plaguing his entire offense.
For one week, at least, fans got a glimpse of the dynamic downfield threat that Pickens can be.
Trailing by four with just over two minutes remaining against the Baltimore Ravens, Steelers quarterback Kenny Pickett found the 6-3, 200-pound target on a back-shoulder throw for a 21-yard gain.
Two plays later, Pickens dusted Ravens cornerback Marlon Humphrey – who was playing in his first game back after August foot surgery – for a 41-yard go-ahead touchdown in a 17-10 triumph.
It's probably not the kind of play that the Steelers faithful can routinely expect from oft-criticized offensive coordinator Matt Canada.
But incorporating Pickens more can only help invigorate what has been a languishing attack.
On Sunday, he got a reminder of what it's like to be on the other side of that dynamic.
It's not clear if the Cowboys could have done much differently to have had a semblance of a chance in Sunday night's catastrophic outing against the 49ers.
What is apparent: As both as a coach and a play-caller, McCarthy proved to be no match for Kyle Shanahan.
In what was clearly designed to be a statement game for the Cowboys after the 49ers ended their playoff hopes in the past two seasons, Dallas was outclassed in almost every facet.
What McCarthy can muster might be enough to beat up on the bottom and middle tiers of the NFC, but any notion of the Cowboys beating the 49ers – and potentially the Philadelphia Eagles – on the road in January seems like a distant dream.
That kind of carelessness is no doubt maddening to a coach who hammers fundamentals and sound ball security.
But this pairing is looking more tenuous with each week, and Jones might need to find mentorship elsewhere to get his career back on track.
Lamar Jackson unraveled late in the fourth quarter with an interception that paved the way for Pittsburgh's comeback and a fumble that deflated any hopes for Baltimore's own rally.
And prior to all that, a blocked punt for a safety helped spark a Steelers team that had been stagnant.
The slip-up could prove costly in the long run.
The Ravens had a chance to begin pulling away from the pack in the AFC North, but instead they fell into a first-place tie with Pittsburgh.
Whatever mojo they had from last week's statement win over the Miami Dolphins must not have made it through customs for the overseas showdown with the Jaguars.
The offense was imbalanced and error-prone.
The defense was trampled for 29 first downs and 196 rushing yards.
Most worrisome, however, were the mounting injuries.
If the Bills don't shore things up, this could be a harbinger of the franchise's fate against the AFC's contender class.
There's still no reason to sound the alarm on a No.
1 pick who's just four starts into his professional career.
Still, after the Detroit Lions' 42-24 win over the Carolina Panthers, it's difficult to watch Young operate in this offense without wincing.
The second of Young's two interceptions, however, was the real cause for concern, as cornerback Jerry Jacobs baited the typically discerning signal-caller into the kind of throw he avoided throughout his college career.
The signs are troubling in Carolina, as there's scant support from the offensive line or running game, and the coaching staff seems to be doing Young few favors.
While this season appears to be a write-off and one that should solely be measured by Young's development, substantial change might still be required at some point.
"Now is not the time to be attacking our ally," DeSantis told supporters at the New Hampshire State House.
Several Republicans noted that, after the 2020 election, Trump attacked Netanyahu for hailing Biden as the president-elect.
"It’s clear he’s angry at Netanyahu for recognizing Trump lost in 2020," said a statement from Never Back Down, a pro-DeSantis political action committee.
"Trump puts himself first."
DeSantis spoke after formally filing for January’s New Hampshire primary, a contest he declared “wide open” despite Trump’s huge lead in polls.
“If you want to change from Trump, I think I’m the best leader,” DeSantis said, adding that he gives Republicans “the best chance to be able to do well” in a general election.
DeSantis, who has seen his support erode after months of attacks from Trump, has gradually escalated counter-criticism of the former president throughout the campaign.
He has been more pointed in recent days, part of a strategy adjustment that includes more interviews with mainstream media outlets.
The Florida governor plans to spend Thursday touring the northern part of the state along with members of his political action committee, Never Back Down.
He is scheduled to participate Friday in traditional events, including a "Politics and Eggs" breakfast hosted by the New Hampshire Institute of Politics.
DeSantis and other Republican candidates are scheduled to address the state Republican Party's "First in the Nation Leadership Summit" in Nashua, N.H. this weekend.
An Oct. 4 Facebook post (direct link, archive link) claims the sons of two well-known politicians are in legal trouble.
It was later updated to attribute the information to Newsmax.
The post was shared more than 250 times in two days.
Another version of the post was shared more than 13,000 times on X, formerly Twitter.
Follow us on Facebook!
Like our page to get updates throughout the day on our latest debunks
This is wrong on multiple fronts.
And, accordingly, there is no evidence of any criminal investigation along those lines.
Some Republicans have claimed then-Vice President Joe Biden wrongfully used his power to force the removal of a Ukrainian prosecutor who was investigating the company, but a 2020 Senate investigation found no evidence of wrongdoing on the part of the president.
There is no evidence that the children of Utah Sen. Mitt Romney or former Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi were involved with the company.
And there's no evidence of any investigation involving the two.
There is also no evidence that Newsmax reported on the supposed probe into the two men.
Newsmax did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
The Facebook post is a new variation of a long-running claim of ties between Ukraine and the sons of various politicians.
Fact check: Mitt Romney announced he won't seek reelection in 2024, but he's not resigning
The allegation was made on the grounds that an advisor from Mitt Romney’s 2012 presidential campaign was on the company’s board of directors.
USA TODAY reached out to the Department of Justice and the offices of Mitt Romney and Nancy Pelosi for comment but did not receive a response.
Paul Pelosi, Jr., Nancy's Pelosi's son, has been involved with various companies throughout his business career, as mentioned in a 2012 Securities and Exchange Commission filing.
The company is based in Boston and also has an office in New York.
USA TODAY reached out to users who shared the post for comment but did not receive a response.
Thank you for supporting our journalism.
You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or e-newspaper here.
Our fact-check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook.
The former president said Israel now has to strengthen itself as it fights Hamas and other militant groups, including perhaps Iran.
Supporters of Israel said on social media said that the Soleimani operation was aided by Israeli intelligence, while others criticized Trump for criticizing Israel's government in the midst of a crisis.
Ron DeSantis, who is running against Trump for the Republican nomination, zeroed in on Trump's description of Hezbollah leaders as "very smart."
Noting that at least 1,200 Israelis and 22 Americans have been killed in recent days, DeSantis said on the X website that "it is absurd that anyone, much less someone running for President, would choose now to attack our friend and ally, Israel, much less praise Hezbollah terrorists as 'very smart.'
"You know, Hezbollah is very smart - they're all very smart," Trump said at one point.
Trump also criticized Netanyahu in an interview on Fox News Radio, saying Israel was ill-prepared for the Hamas attack earlier this month.
Trump even linked the Israel attack to his false claims of a "rigged" U.S. election in 2020, and said the attack on Israel would not have happened if he was president.
Several Republicans noted that, after the 2020 election, Trump attacked Netanyahu for hailing Biden as the president-elect.
Democrats denounced Trump’s comments.
White House spokesman Andrew Bates said that while “we don’t comment” on the 2024 races, “statements like this are dangerous and unhinged.”
Especially now as Israel is fighting back against one of the worst acts of mass murder in the country’s history.
Trump's comments came during a rambling 100-minute speech in which he didn't say anything about his involvement in the snagged House Speaker's race, but instead predicted he would succeed in next year's presidential election.
"Everyone knows what the result is going to be," the former president told supporters gathered in West Palm Beach, Fla.
Last week, Trump injected himself into the speaker's race by endorsing Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio.
He also said he would travel to Washington, D.C., to meet with House Republicans about replacing ousted House Speaker Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif.
Trump did not discuss any of this during his campaign speech.
He mentioned Jordan's name only in connection with his work in Congress.
He also praised Rep. Matt Gaetz, R-Fla., the most outspoken member of the eight House Republicans who triggered McCarthy's removal as speaker.
For the most part, Trump focused on his own 2024 presidential campaign before a group called Club 47 USA.
If Trump wins next year, he would be the 47th president, only the second to serve non-consecutive terms.
The standard campaign speech featured all-out attacks on President Joe Biden, with an emphasis to the ongoing Israel-Hamas war.
He also hit Biden over the economy, his son Hunter Biden, and border security.
Trump, as is custom, also bragged about poll numbers that show him way ahead of his Republican rivals for the 2024 presidential nomination.
He mocked his opponents for debating without him, and said Republican voters are not paying attention to them.
"Everyone knows what the result is going to be," Trump said.
He also complained about his legal issues.
He faces four criminal trials and three civil lawsuits The criminal cases include hush money, the handling of classified information, and efforts to overturn his 2020 election loss to Biden.
Nikki Haley Thursday evening.
She will take questions from voters at 6:30 p.m.
Doors open at 5:30 p.m.
The former governor and U.S. ambassador to the United Nations is trailing behind former President Donald Trump and Florida Gov.
Ron DeSantis in some polls among Republican voters, but she has led other GOP rivals, including former Vice President Mike Pence and former New Jersey Gov.
Ahead of her town hall, here are five things to know about Haley.
Haley served as a South Carolina state lawmaker from 2005 to 2011 and governor of the Palmetto State from 2011 to 2017.
She has frequently touted her local political credentials on the campaign trail.
As a state representative, Haley pushed for more transparency in local government and spearheaded efforts to require more roll call votes from state lawmakers, effectively forcing lawmakers' positions to be publicly recorded.
Haley, after becoming governor, eventually signed a law mandating more roll call votes.
At the time, the Confederate flag had flown on the South Carolina State House grounds for 77 years, but following the shooting, Haley signed a bill lowering the flag in one of her most significant acts as governor.
Haley also served as the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations under former President Donald Trump’s administration and has sought to make her foreign policy credentials front and center on the campaign trail.
At other town halls, Haley often says she took the “kick me” sign off America’s back in the United Nations.
And as skepticism about continued U.S. aid to Ukraine grows in the GOP, Haley is one of the Republican Party’s most vocal defenders of Ukraine, arguing that “a win for Russia is a win for China.”
On the debate stage Haley has been eager to hammer her opponents on foreign policy.
In a crowded presidential field dominated by Trump, Haley has sought to make the argument she is the candidate best fit to defeat President Joe Biden in a general election matchup.
In a race solely between Biden and Haley, the former South Carolina governor beat out the sitting president by 5 points, 41%-46%, according to a poll conducted by NBC News in September.
The poll had a margin of error of plus or minus 3.1 percentage points.
Haley’s campaign has not shied away from touting her polling performance against Biden.
“Nikki Haley stands apart as the only candidate who handily beats Joe Biden in the general election,” the campaign said in a statement in September.
The former South Carolina governor has run, as she described to USA TODAY in an interview in May, a “slow and steady campaign.”
I’m not concerned with where things are now.
“It’s slow and steady wins the race.”
She has seen her support among likely GOP voters surge after her debate performances.
In New Hampshire, a critical early voting state, Haley rose to second place behind Trump in a Suffolk University/Boston Globe/USA TODAY poll, at 19% support.
The former president still holds a commanding lead at 49%, but in the Granite State, at least, Haley appears to be Trump’s primary rival.
Following the second Republican primary debate, Trump went after Haley as “Birdbrain Nikki Haley,” on Truth Social, his social media platform.
It means we are in 2nd and moving up fast.
Haley also stands out from the rest of the pack as the only woman in the GOP presidential field.
She has occasionally mentioned that status on the campaign trail, telling voters that it is time to elect a woman to the White House.
The presidential hopeful has noted she is uniquely fit to reach out to women voters, compared to the other 2024 candidates.
I know whether they’re taking care of elderly parents because I’m doing that.
I know about their spouses in the military.
I’m a military wife.
“I know about raising children and the concerns you have.”
Consumer price increases stayed high in September after picking up over the summer as steady gains in rent and other services offset another decline in used car prices and a smaller rise in gasoline and food costs.
Consumer prices overall rose 3.7% from a year earlier, similar to August's increase, according to the Labor Department’s consumer price index.
On a monthly basis, prices increased 0.4% following a 0.6% rise in August that was fueled by a surge in pump prices.
Protect your assets: Best high-yield savings accounts of 2023
Core prices, which strip out volatile food and energy items and which the Federal Reserve watches more closely as it weighs interest rate changes, remained high.
They rose 0.3% last month after 0.2% bumps over the summer.
The advance still lowered the annual increase to 4.1% from 4.3% in August, marking the smallest gain since September 2021.
Annual inflation has slowed significantly after hitting a 40-year high of 9.1% in June 2022, including a sharp drop to 3% in the first half of 2023.
But since then, the cost of some goods and services has accelerated or pulled back more slowly, pushing up the yearly rise.
Prices for items such as used cars and furniture have dropped as pandemic-related supply-chain snarls have been resolved.
But the cost of services such as rent, car repairs and auto insurance, have continued to drift higher in part because of briskly rising employee wages.
As a result, driving down inflation to the Fed’s annual 2% target is becoming a tougher slog.
Barclays expects inflation broadly to dip to 3.3% in December and 2.6% at the end of 2024.
Core price gains are projected to drift down to 3.7% at the end of the year and 2.8% at the close of 2024.
Barclays expects the Fed to raise its key interest rate once more this year, by a quarter percentage point, after lifting it by 5.25 points in 16 months.
But other economists say tumbling wholesale costs will prompt a faster pullback in inflation.
"Overall, there is nothing here that will convince Fed officials to hike rates at the next...meeting, and we continue to expect a more rapid decline in inflation and weaker economic growth to result in rates being cut much more aggressively next year than markets are pricing in," says economist Andrew Hunter of Capital Economics.
Stocks were mixed in late morning trading as investors digested the uncertain odds of another Fed rate increase.
Households, meanwhile, are still struggling.
Although price increases are moderating, costs are still high and many Americans say they aren’t feeling much relief.
“We’re not seeing it easing at all.”
He says he pays $6.50 a gallon for gas in California and as much as $135 for weekly groceries for him and his wife, up from $100 before the pandemic.
“You just have to deal with it,” he says.
Pump prices are well below their $5 peak in summer 2022 and are likely move lower in the short term following the busy summer driving season despite the Israel-Hamas war, which has pushed up oil prices.
Grocery prices rose more modestly, inching up 0.1% and lowering the yearly increase to 2.4%.
The cost of commodities such as wheat and corn generally have fallen as major producers Ukraine and Russia have found alternative shipping routes that skirt their 18-month war.
Last month, the price of breakfast cereal fell 0.5%, while rice and fish both slid 1.3%.
But some proteins moved higher.
Bacon rose 4.8% following a 4% rise in August; uncooked ground beef increased 0.6%; and eggs jumped 0.9% after a string of declines.
Rent, which has been the biggest inflation driver, rose a sturdy 0.5% for the second straight month, though that’s down from a spate of stronger gains.
That nudged up the yearly rise to 7.4%.
Economists expect rent increases to pull back, based on new leases, but that shift has been slow to filter through to existing leases.
Generally, the pattern of rising service costs fueled by healthy wage growth and falling goods prices continued last month.
Car repair costs rose 0.2%; auto insurance climbed 1.3%; and hotel rates leaped 3.7%.
Meanwhile, used car prices fell 2.5%; clothing dropped 0.8%; and furniture declined 1.2% as supply chain troubles eased further.
USA TODAY explores the questions you and others ask about inflation and how it affects your life, from "What is inflation?"
For more answers to your questions about today's report and other economic trends, keep reading:
Social Security recipients will get 3.2% more in their checks next year, a cost-of-living adjustment, or COLA, based on Thursday's consumer price report showing that annual overall inflation remained at the same level as the previous month.
The 3.7% rise in overall prices is nearly twice the 2% target favored by the Federal Reserve.
But inflation has been mostly trending down, leading to the modest Social Security COLA increase.
Major differences, according to the Cleveland Fed, are:
The Fed raised its key rate at 10 meetings in a row starting in March 2022, the most aggressive run of rate hikes in four decades.
It paused that streak in June, leaving the benchmark federal funds rate where it stood, but implemented another increase the following month lifting the rate by a quarter point to a range of 5.25% to 5.5%.
The federal funds rate is what banks pay each other for overnight loans.
If that rate rises, banks typically pass along that extra cost, meaning it becomes more expensive to borrow as rates increase on services and items ranging from credit cards to home equity lines.
That’s why the funds rate is the primary tool used by the Federal Reserve to try and put the brakes on inflation.
The Fed’s policy arm meets next on Oct. 31-Nov. 1.
It will announce its interest rate decision at 2 P.M.
ET on Nov. 1.
The Fed’s final meeting of the year is Dec. 12-13.
But it’s still above the 2% target preferred by the Federal Reserve.
Here's where the U.S. inflation rate has stood each month since May 2022:
The Federal Reserve watches two key measures of the economy, price stability and maximum employment, which are its main considerations in interest-rate decisions.
CPI is also used to inflation-adjust things like Social Security payments and income tax brackets.
It’s also the reference rate for some financial contracts, such as Treasury Inflation Protected Securities (TIPS).
Core prices leave out volatile food and energy items and therefore are a more accurate reflection of longer-term trends.
September used car prices likely fell at least 2% from the prior month, while energy prices recorded a modest increase of 0.4% after a 5.6% jump in August, said Stephen Juneau, U.S. economist at Bank of America.
Retail gasoline prices, he said, were nearly flat last month.
Goldman Sachs economists forecast a 2.3% decline in used car prices and a 0.1% dip in new car prices last month.
Renters are still getting squeezed.
Goldman Sachs economists see rents up 0.48% on the month, rising at about a steady pace.
Shelter inflation, which includes home prices, rents and other lodging, comprises about a third of the consumer price index (CPI).
However, Goldman says
Airfares are also expected to post a gain, some economists noted.
It depends on the data.
The CME Fed watch tool that helps gauge the market’s expectation for a rate move puts the chances of a Fed rate hike at only 10%, but economists aren’t yet fully ruling one out, partly because the labor market remains strong.
A strong job market puts money in people’s pockets, which can fuel spending and inflation.
“With the surprisingly-strong September job report intensifying the debate on the further hikes, the near-term policy trajectory will be highly sensitive to Thursday’s CPI,” Deutsche Bank economists said in a note.
The last time the Fed met in September, it held rates steady at a 22-year high of 5.25% to 5.5% but signaled another hike is likely this year amid still elevated inflation and a sturdy economy.
“Broadly, stronger economic activity means we have to do more with rates,” Fed Chairman Jerome Powell told reporters then.
He also said, separately, “we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation, as well as the balance of risks.”
CPI measures inflation as experienced by consumers going about their day-to-day lives, while the PPI, or producer price index, measures the average changes over time in the sale prices received by domestic producers for their output.
Core inflation, which assesses inflation but leaves out the more volatile prices of food and energy, is the other key price metric.
In bonds, the 10-year Treasury yield, which tends to rise if inflation accelerates, was 4.64%, up a modest 0.046 points.
Social Security recipients found out Thursday how much of a raise they will get next year.
That’s because the consumer price index report contains data the Social Security Administration (SSA) uses to determine the cost-of-living adjustment or COLA for 2024.
Those payments will go up 3.2%.
The annual overall inflation rate is currently 3.7%, but is expected to have slid by a tenth of a point in September.
The cost of items and services ranging from health care, to gas, to groceries can shift depending on inflation.
When there are too few goods to meet the demand, prices are likely to rise, according to Investopedia.
That disparity is called demand pull inflation.
The Department of Labor has a tool that enables consumers to find out shifts in their buying power.
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) looks at the average change in prices for particular products and services over a period of time, according to the Bureau of Labor Services.
It’s one inflation measure that the Fed and the economist use as a barometer to gauge price stability.
The Fed’s preferred inflation gauge is the Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index, or PCE, prepared by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).
The next PCE report for September is due Oct. 27.
Mark your calendar:Why October 12 matters for Social Security recipients
Wages vs. inflation:US wage growth is finally outpacing inflation.
Many Americans aren't feeling it.
Most of us seem to know that the average American lives between 70 and 80 years: 73.5 years for men, 79.3 for women, to be exact.
Fewer of us understand that life expectancy rises with age.
An American man who turns 70 today will live to 85, on average.
A woman of 70 will live to 87.
That knowledge is called longevity literacy.
Many of us don’t have it, and ignorance may cost us.
Let's say a man retires at 65 with $250,000 in savings.
If he spends it down at a rate of $30,000 a year, the money might last him to age 73.5.
But longevity tables say he can expect to live another decade, to 84.
A large share of older Americans, and especially men, don’t know how long their own retirement is going to last: in other words, how long they are going to live.
Longevity literacy matters when it comes to retirement planning.
If your retirement budget assumes you will live to 75, and you make it to 85, you will probably run out of money.
“That filters back on how I’m managing my money, how I’m drawing it down.”
The TIAA Institute publishes widely read surveys on retirement finance.
When the institute asked Americans, in a recent survey, how long a man of 65 is likely to live, only one-third of the men gave the correct answer: 19 more years.
A larger share of men in the TIAA survey, 35%, underestimated the lifespan of a retirement-age male.
Another 23% said they didn’t know.
That response, in particular, left researchers bewildered: the question was multiple-choice.
Women seem to understand longevity somewhat better.
In the survey, 36% correctly answered that a woman of 65 can expect to live about 22 more years, to age 87.
Only 26% guessed low.
“The reality of most households, it’s the woman who focuses on the healthcare in the family and everybody’s wellbeing and caregiving issues.”
Their findings draw on a nationally representative survey of 3,503 adults.
If an American male reaches age 69, he can expect to live to 85, according to a simple longevity calculator from the Social Security Administration.
He credits good genes and the Mediterranean diet.
Those are the numbers most Americans learn in school, the ones reported in the newspaper every year.
But life expectancy goes up from there.
Simply put: The longer you do live, the longer you will live.
TIAA has made longevity literacy something of an institutional crusade, putting out reports that warn of dire consequences for older Americans who do not plan for the full span of their retirement.
“Some of those people are going to be alive at 100.”
The takeaway here is twofold, the researchers said: Figure out how long you are going to live, and make sure you have a retirement plan that covers those years.
The TIAA researchers have noticed that people with strong longevity literacy, about 12% of the population, are more likely than other adults to have a retirement plan.
Conversely, people with a solid retirement plan tend to understand how long they will live.
The two traits go hand in hand.
“There’s a very strong link between longevity literacy and retirement outcomes.”
Here are a few simple tips for retirement planning:
The scholars are alarmed that so many adults underestimate how long they will live.
If anything, people should err in the opposite direction.
If you are 65 now and expect to reach 85, plan for 90.
Roughly half of Americans have at least attempted to calculate how much money they will need to live comfortably in retirement, according to the Employee Benefit Research Institute's 2023 Retirement Confidence Survey.
And how much should you save for retirement?
One analysis, from the investment firm T. Rowe Price, suggests a savings target of seven to 13 times your annual salary by age 65.
The figure declined sharply over the past year.
Americans are worried about nagging inflation and sagging retirement savings, which took a hit in 2022.
The average 401(k) account lost about one-fifth of its value last year, according to Fidelity Investments data.
In decades past, many American retirees relied primarily on Social Security and defined-benefit pensions, funding sources that guaranteed steady payments until death.
Over time, the traditional pension has given way to the 401 (k) and other defined-contribution plans.
Upon retirement, the worker sets the schedule for withdrawing the money.
“Longevity,” Copeland said, “is the key factor in that equation.”
We all have to face the prospect of aging at some point.
We prepare for this reality for years in advance, starting 401ks, contributing to Medicare and Social Security as well as comparing insurance plans.
For many Americans, the goal is to have ample healthcare, a nest egg to retire on and the ability to age peacefully at home.
Conducted with 2,227 random Americans aged 50 to 80 online or via phone, the survey found that Black citizens were less likely to achieve aging in place.
This is thanks to a variety of factors, with the two most significant being self-reported disability status and income.
Social security changes:Why October 12 is a big day for Social Security recipients
Black adults experienced the highest rate of disability at 40% as well as higher rates of "fair" or "poor" physical health at 37.1% versus 20.9% overall.
Black households were also more likely to report having a family member with a disability present with 36.4% compared to the overall sample of 23.3%.
Half of Black households also reported an income lower than $30,000 a year, a significant discrepancy from the quarter of overall respondents who reported the same thing (23.3%).
Older Black Americans are also more likely to live alone, with 44.1% reporting they were the only one in their home versus a quarter of overall respondents.
This, paired with the aforementioned factors, cumulate in Black adults having lower rates of confidence in their ability to afford and find necessary in-home care.
How does all of this prevent Black Americans from aging at home?
First and foremost, said the study's authors, increased rates of disability mean more strain on already thinly stretched resources.
Older adults with disabilities often require some form of assistive device, human support or other accommodations.
The U.S. Department of Health & Human Services' Administration on Aging found that on average, 70% of people 65 and up need some type of long-term care, such as a nursing home or assisted living, at some point, while 20% will need that care for more than five years.
Women face microaggressions at work:We need to talk about the macro effect of microaggressions on women at work
In-home care is pricey as well, with median prices hovering between $4,957 to $5,148 per month for homemaker services or a home health aide, according to the same 2021 data.
In the same year, more than half of Americans had less than $250 left at the end of the month after paying necessary bills.
With older Black Americans more likely to shoulder the weight of higher healthcare costs due to disability, more likely to live alone without in-home familial assistance and more likely to grapple with an income under $30,000, they face multiple barriers to aging in their own home and communities.
Within the overall sample, 41.3% of respondents were not confident they could afford supportive care such as assistance with chores, shopping, personal care or finance management if needed.
Facing down the existing cost-of-living crisis, many older Americans have found themselves without means to live comfortably or access necessary resources.
In an already difficult fiscal climate, ethnic and racial discrepancies continue to impact quality of care for our older population.
According to the study's authors, healthcare facilities placing a focus on adapting and optimizing care to close these gaps is an important course of action to begin addressing the disparity.
"Aging in place requires a proactive individual and community-based approach that facilitates older adult independence and connects adults with the social, clinical, and environmental support needed to remain in one's home for as long as possible," the study said.
Your favorite Tex-Mex fast casual spot may no longer be much of a bargain compared to a sit-down restaurant meal.
Chipotle confirmed to USA TODAY that consumers will soon see a hike in menu prices, the fourth such increase in just two years.
“For the first time in over a year, we will be taking a modest price increase to offset inflation,” she said in an email statement.
Chipotle declined to comment further or clarify what or when menu items will be impacted.
The chain's last price increase came in August 2022 when some customers began paying $1 or more additional for the same menu items as before.
Thirty days of tacos deal:Taco Bell's Lover's Pass offers 30 back to back days of free tacos for just $10
Protect your assets: Best high-yield savings accounts of 2023
While inflation is finally moving in a better direction, consumer prices this month still rose overall 3.7% from earlier years after hitting a 40-year high of 9.1% in June 2022.
Over the last year, inflation has been cooling.
But from the gas pump to the grocery store, the overall price of living still feels stubbornly high for many Americans.
The Federal Reserve has tried to strike a fragile balance: bring inflation down by raising interest rates, without pushing the economy to the brink.
In August, consumer prices rose 3.7% from a year earlier, up from a 3.2% increase in July.
That’s the second straight rise after 12 consecutive declines in annual inflation.
The next consumer price index, or CPI report, will be published on October 12, 2023, at 8:30 a.m.
The monthly update provides key information on the prices of various consumer goods and services and how much they have risen over the past month and year.
The data also gives an idea of whether inflation is slowing again or accelerating.
While it is easy to see and measure those price changes, it is something else to actually understand them.
Inflation can impact many things besides costs, such as employment and wages.
So, what is inflation, and what causes it?
Ready to retire?
How much money do you need and when you should start to save
"Inflation, though, really is meant to only refer to all goods and services, together, rising in price by some common amount," he explained.
Inflation can be caused by several factors.
In this instance, more people are spending money on goods or services that are not readily available to meet those demands, so producers begin to raise prices.
Another cause of inflation is a lack of producers.
"Labor is the primary component of cost of producing anything," he explained.
There is also a level of "built-in inflation" within economies, where central banks try to get inflation to hover roughly at a certain level.
In the U.S., the Federal Reserve's target inflation is 2%.
This means businesses can increase prices by 2% each year, and it shouldn't impose a cost burden on consumers.
Workers can also ask for a 2% wage raise based on these increases, so they can still afford goods and services.
Rent inflation:Tenants struggle with rising rent as prices hit all-time highs
CPI stands for the consumer price index.
It is a metric used by the US Bureau of Labor Statistics to gauge how much the price of consumer goods and services has changed over time.
It can effectively measure inflation in an urban market and give government officials and everyday citizens alike an idea of the health of the overall economy.
The most recent CPI report, released in early August, showed that consumer prices in July rose 3.2% from a year earlier, up from a 3% annual rise in June but far below a four-decade high of 9.1% in June 2022.
Month over month, prices increased a modest 0.2%, similar to June.
In the most basic sense, inflation is measured by comparing the current price of goods and services against their recent history.
This is done by looking at a number of government-released data reports.
The CPI is the most prominent of these metrics.
Released by the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, the consumer price index measures the prices of goods in an urban market, which represents over 90% of the American public.
The CPI looks at a 'fixed basket' of some 80,000 goods and services to come up with these numbers.
What gets put in that basket depends on the consumer expenditures survey which polls Americans to determine which goods are important.
The importance of those goods then determines their weight in the CPI– for example, the price of something like gasoline, which forms an integral part of many people’s cost of living, will contribute more than other items.
The CPI does not just have one version though.
Another version – the chained consumer price Index for all urban consumers is used to adjust tax brackets.
The virtue of the chained CPI is that it takes into account the product substitutions shoppers make, which happens often when prices go up amid inflation.
In doing this, it provides a more accurate look at consumer spending and doesn’t overstate inflation.
Inflation can also be measured through the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE).
This metric, released by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, takes a more holistic view.
Rather than calculating the change in prices for goods paid solely out of pocket for consumers, the PCE takes into account all expenses, including health care coverage compensated by insurance or the government.
The PCE is what the Fed uses as its gold standard measure of inflation.
The final piece of the puzzle to factor in is ‘core inflation.’ This is a term used by economists to reflect the rate of inflation, excluding prices for food and energy which are notoriously variable.
"Inflation is sort of greasing the wheels of the labor market," he said.
"It is a way to do some adjustments without actually having to cut nominal wages, and the economy just seems to operate better like that."
If inflation goes beyond its target percentage, though, it can cause uncertainty within the market.
In order to control inflation, one of the Federal Reserve's main tools is the federal funds rate, which is the rate banks charge each other for overnight loans.
If that rate rises, banks generally pass on their additional cost to customers.
Even though the Fed does not directly control all interest rates in the country, when it raises the fed funds rate, other interest rates eventually follow, including adjustable-rate mortgages, credit cards, home equity lines of credit, and other loans.
Higher rates curb borrowing and spending, cool off an overheated economy and fend off inflation spikes.
Whoever is spending most on goods or services can be negatively impacted by inflation.
High inflation can cause consumers to cut spending and prompt the Fed to raise interest rates - both of which can lead to a downturn.
That can result in easing price increases.
"A big rise in the unemployment rate is going to put a lot of downward pressure on inflation," he said.
"As the economy slows, inflationary pressures tend to relent."
A recession isn’t determined by a negative quarter of gross domestic product or even two for that matter.
Rather, it’s a significant decline in economic activity resulting from several factors, including high unemployment, a slowdown of goods produced and sold, and wages falling in addition to negative GDP readings.
That’s according to the National Bureau of Economic Research, which gives the official ruling on when a U.S. recession starts and ends.
So, inflation could produce a recession, but it is not a definite outcome.
Consumers were rocked by surging food prices last year.
In July, the cost of groceries rose 0.3%.
This, however, still pushed down the yearly increase to 3.6%.
The price of rice and bread both rose 0.9%, uncooked ground beef increased 1.5% while cookies rose 0.8%.
Chicken and fish prices both fell 1.1%, bacon was down 0.7% and eggs declined 2.2%.
This was the fifth straight monthly decrease for eggs after a series of sharp bird flu-related increases, and costs are now down 13.7% over the last year.
Costs to dine out are up 7.1% over the past year.
Much like other aspects of the economy, inflation can cause a raise in prices for rent as well.
And in May, housing costs were the biggest contributor to inflation, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
However, increases have somewhat slowed down.
Annually, rent eased to 8%, according to the CPI report.
The consumer price index, or CPI, measures the average change over time in the prices paid by consumers for a variety of different consumer goods and services, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Core prices exclude volatile food and energy items and generally provide a better measure of longer-term trends.
They were up 0.2% in July.
This left the annual increase at 4.7%, down just slightly from June’s 4.8% increase and well above the Fed's 2% target.
"I was always the one to be very on the edge, very adventurous, and I don't think that's ever disappeared," the 33-year-old says.
"I've always liked to imagine a lot."
This imaginative nature has manifested throughout DPR IAN's life, making its mark in his work as a singer-songwriter, director and creative.
IAN's latest EP "Dear Insanity...", out now, captures his essence as a storyteller, diving deeper into the expansive universe he creates within his music.
"For me, this whole EP just encompasses a journey into your consciousness," he says.
IAN was born and raised in Australia.
Though he is currently based in Los Angeles, IAN is one of several artists under Dream Perfect Regime, or DPR, which based in Seoul, South Korea.
Since its inception, the collective has become known worldwide for its dynamic multimedia work and roster of talent, with IAN serving as its chief director and editor.
IAN's ethos is personified by his creativity.
Through his releases, IAN has meticulously constructed his own universe, which he calls "The Other Side."
He has come to represent his mental health through the personas "MITO" and "Mr. Insanity," with the former serving as the "the main attraction" of his discography, says IAN.
His second EP "Dear Insanity..." expands the story of MITO and Mr. Insanity, chronicling the artist's introspection.
The seven tracks on "Dear Insanity..." detail IAN's journey as each acts as a "snapshot" into certain moments of his life.
When IAN was a teenager, he was diagnosed with bipolar disorder.
This has influenced his creative work, with it serving as an outlet and extension of himself.
He likens this to Batman and the Joker.
"You understand the Joker more by looking at Batman and seeing it through his eyes of how he sees the Joker and vice versa," IAN says.
He wanted to do the same for MITO and Mr. Insanity, building a foundation between the two.
"For me, it's to have people further understand who MITO is," he says.
"I had to show them what he was fighting up against."
Storytelling is a key aspect to IAN's work, whether it be visually or sonically.
With this, he opens the door for deeper understanding of his past.
"The deeper you go in, I sometimes feel like there are certain things that you unravel, that you had no idea about," he says.
IAN portrays this unraveling in a fanciful, inventive way with bright visuals, as well as via distinct tones and genres.
This underscores the intricate approach of IAN's art.
Everything has its link and can be drawn back to an earlier point.
"I've always loved being taken on a journey because essentially that means you're linking so many things," he says.
"I thought, 'Why just make a concept that's going to change every single time?'"
IAN hasn't shied away from vulnerability.
But he recognizes the responsibility that comes with being open.
"If you've been vulnerable, you can't always share the goods," he says, adding he remains careful of what he speaks about.
With his work, IAN believes he provides something to relate to.
"It's just that comfort in knowing, 'Oh my artist also feels exactly what I'm feeling.'"
"With my understanding and knowledge of learning as I go, I can also just give my two cents of what I'm discovering," he says.
Grab your American flags because Veterans Day is almost here!
Similar to the Fourth of July in that it's a celebration of patriotism, Veterans Day is a day to honor American history and spend time with loved ones.
Whether it's a BBQ outside or hanging out indoors with family, hopefully you get to enjoy this federal holiday off with people you love.
Whether you regularly celebrate the holiday or not, you might be wondering when is Veterans Day 2023, and what is the history behind the celebration?
Learn more about the national holiday and its importance to the country.
On May 13, 1938, an Act made the 11th of November a legal holiday each year, according to the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA).
This holiday was known as “Armistice Day,” a day set aside to honor the veterans of World War I.
Over 15 years later in 1954, World War II deployed the largest number of soldiers, sailors, Marines and airmen in the Nation’s history.
The 83rd Congress strongly urged the Veterans service organizations to amend the holiday name by switching “Armistice” with “Veterans,” according to the DVA.
On June 1, 1954, November 11 became the national holiday dedicated to honoring American Veterans of all wars.
On October 8, 1954, the first Veterans Day Proclamation was issued by President Dwight D. Eisenhower, according to the DVA.
World War I ended with the signing of the Treaty of Versailles on June 28, 1919, according to the DVA.
Seven months earlier the fighting ceased when a truce between the Allied nations and Germany went into effect causing a ceasefire on the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month.
November 11, 1918, is regarded as the end of “the war to end all wars,” according to the DVA.
The observance of Veterans Day on Nov. 11th honors the historical importance of the date but also celebrates and honors American veterans for “their patriotism, love of country, and willingness to serve and sacrifice for the common good.”
Here at Just Curious, we're looking into all of your questions.
From "How old is my cat?"
Make sure to check out USA TODAY's Just Curious section for more trivia, tidbits and information you might want to know.
Favorite foods are often the centerpiece of holiday gatherings.
Pumpkin bread and caramel apples at Halloween, turkey and stuffing on Thanksgiving, and honey-glazed ham and gingerbread cookies at Christmastime.
No holiday dishes would be complete, however, without a host of herbs and spices flavoring them.
These often include herbs like rosemary, sage and thyme; and spices like peppermint, nutmeg and pumpkin.
Such trees are native to Sri Lanka and India, but they are also found in Indonesia, China, Vietnam, and South America.
Cinnamon is unique because, unlike the many spices that come from the root, stem, or leaves of a plant, cinnamon comes from the inner bark of a tree.
After being cut from young cinnamon trees and peeled, the bark curls into the familiar rolls people associated with cinnamon.
These rolls are called quills or sticks.
Cinnamon is often sold as these bundles, but it's also commonly ground into powder or processed into pill or oil form.
Depending on its form, cinnamon can be used as a spice in cooking, for aromatherapy, or as a health supplement.
Though cinnamon has been studied extensively for many purported health benefits including ones involving diabetes, insulin resistance, and irritable bowel syndrome, collectively the studies don't show that cinnamon clearly supports any health condition.
Some such studies are certainly promising, but results have been mixed and inconclusive overall.
Still, cinnamon has been associated with some general health benefits.
As aromatherapy, for instance, cinnamon can be relaxing and stress reducing.
Cinnamon is also known to have anti-inflammatory properties, which could matter because inflammation is linked to a host of medical conditions including heart disease.
Also promising are studies that show that cinnamon may lower LDL cholesterol, known as "bad" cholesterol, though such research is ongoing.
What's more, "some studies have also found a positive effect of cinnamon on metabolism," she says.
She also warns anyone taking cinnamon for the purpose of improving insulin resistance to remember that, "its effects on blood sugar can vary, so cinnamon should never replace medical treatment for these conditions."
Even though cinnamon may not have all the health benefits it's purported to, it's also not likely to do harm in modest amounts.
In high quantities, cinnamon is also associated with side effects like gastrointestinal issues, mouth sores, or allergic reactions.
It’s hard to wrap your mind around: The social justice warriors on college campuses around America have come out in support of terrorists who last weekend raped and murdered and beheaded innocent people (including children, women and the elderly) in Israel.
These are the same students who need safe spaces from those who may talk about race or gender in a way they find offensive, or who will shout down and demand the cancellation of speakers with whom they disagree.
Yet, some of them seem perfectly OK with defending the atrocities committed when Hamas invaded Israel in a surprise attack in which the terrorists murdered at least 1,200 Israelis; 27 Americans also died and more than a dozen are missing.
It seems the higher ed bubble has decided it’s “woke” to support Hamas and to shun Israel, regardless of how horrific the situation.
And even though many of these students believe “words are violence,” they defend real violence.
Supporting Israel:Biden's response to Hamas terror attack was weak.
US needs strong leadership to support allies.
Student organizations at more than a dozen prominent U.S. universities have issued statements pointing the full blame of the Hamas attack on the back of Israel.
Those include Columbia University, the University of Michigan Law School and Northwestern University.
And on Thursday, local university chapters of Students for Justice in Palestine are planning a “day of resistance” and “protest for Palestine.” In other words, they are standing in solidarity with Hamas terrorists who just slaughtered innocents in the name of “resistance.”
Perhaps the worst offenders – or at least the ones who have received the most attention – are the more than 30 student groups at Harvard University who signed on to a letter stating they “hold the Israeli regime entirely responsible for all unfolding violence.”
“Today’s events did not occur in a vacuum,” the students state.
Israeli officials promise to ‘open the gates of hell,’ and the massacres in Gaza have already commenced.
The statement has unsurprisingly attracted backlash, and the Harvard Undergraduate Palestine Solidarity Committee has since hidden the names of the other groups that signed on to the misguided missive.
You can't say that:Oberlin coach stood up for women in sports.
Then faced public shaming from her college.
The students haven’t apologized per se, however.
They simply seem taken aback that their outrageous views aren’t being welcomed with open arms.
For instance, some major CEOs and investors are calling on Harvard to release the names of the students who signed the statement – so that they can make sure they never employ these people.
As Texas Republican Sen. Ted Cruz (and Harvard Law grad) posited on X, formerly Twitter: “What the hell is wrong with Harvard?”
I am sickened.
As of this writing, the Harvard administration has refrained from directly condemning the student statement.
I’m a firm supporter of free speech, and I think the lack of open debate on college campuses is a huge problem.
While one can argue that these student groups have the right to say whatever they want, it’s certainly worth questioning why so many "top" institutions are defending such awful acts.
Canceling comedy:Hope for free speech?
It’s not just students who are to blame here.
They are learning this behavior from somewhere.
And college administrations that like to issue statements on pretty much everything else have been noticeably silent now.
Every single human life matters.
We are committed to that truth.
Ingrid Jacques is a columnist at USA TODAY.
Contact her at ijacques@usatoday.com or on X, formerly Twitter: @Ingrid_Jacques
Think of the limited prosecutions following the 2008 financial crisis as proof.
First, some history.
In the 1980s after the savings and loan crisis, the Department of Justice convicted more than 1,000 bankers.
This aggressive approach reached its apex with 2006’s Enron trial.
Since then, though, the number of white-collar prosecutions has dwindled.
One reason may be that the financial machinations at the center of white-collar schemes became so complex that prosecutors hesitated to try to explain them to juries.
Whatever the reason, frustration is mounting.
Populist movements have blossomed on the right and left, sharing a distrust of the rich.
Faith in institutions has plummeted.
If SBF is convicted, it will be Enron for millennials − a generational case that could resuscitate the practice of white-collar convictions.
Set aside the complexity of margin loans, digital currency and cross-border regulations.
The question facing SBF’s jury is simple: Did he lie to − did he intend to trick − his customers and use their money as his own?
Proving intent is hard.
We cannot crawl inside the mind of a defendant.
Prosecutors instead use circumstantial evidence, such as altered financial statements, to connect the dots.
I’ve seen plenty of white-collar investigative files, and proving intent will be particularly challenging here.
SBF’s defense is that he was an absent-minded professor who lost track of how much money was going in and out of a booming crypto exchange.
Showing intent is even harder when words such as “blockchain” also have to be explained to the jury.
And the stakes for winning are high.
Forbes once called SBF the “richest self-made newcomer in Forbes 400 history.” For my parents, I’ve explained it as the equivalent of indicting Warren Buffett.
For those of us who work in white-collar law enforcement, we’re watching closely.
Prosecutors make decisions about what they think a jury will believe based on what they think society will accept.
Will a jury of 12 folks − a teacher, a physician assistant, a train conductor − be able to wade through abstruse finance terms and find SBF guilty?
If so, it may imbue other prosecutors with confidence to take on similar cases.
Was this the wrong case for such a gamble?
If so, law enforcement will have another piece of evidence that financial fraud trials in the age of crypto (and collateralized debt obligations and every other complex instrument) may not be worth trying.
Shad White is the state auditor of Mississippi.
This week, the movie version of Taylor Swift’s record-obliterating Eras Tour opens in theaters around the world.
It will be easier than ever to watch Taylor Swift perform.
Really, watching Taylor Swift do anything seems to be our national pastime.
When she was photographed eating a chicken strip with ketchup and “seemingly ranch,” it made so many headlines that Heinz and the official Empire State Building entered the conversation.
Swift has reached an unfathomable level of fame.
One reason we can’t stop looking at her, perhaps, is that her career has always been built around relatability and identification.
When we look at her, we see ourselves.
The concept of Taylor Swift’s Eras makes this even easier.
As each of her albums has become associated with a distinct personality − a hairstyle, color and vibe − people can look to Swift to express who they are and who they are not, as well as how those categories shift over time.
It’s a message about killing the old self and reinventing your identity to survive.
The Eras Tour performance of “Look What You Made Me Do” says something new.
Instagram post registers record voters:Taylor Swift has power to swing the presidential election.
What if nothing else matters?
Through visual performance cues, Swift speaks to the experience of being misunderstood and misrepresented by others and the disorienting experience of letting yourself become defined by those outside assertions.
Even as we accept those identities in an attempt to appease others, all too often we’re left only with self-loathing.
Ultimately, her performance speaks to the things we do to ourselves when we let our identities become defined by the judgments of people around us.
It is much easier said than done to refute or even ignore the identities the dominant culture expects us to perform.
To use the parlance of “Look What You Made Me Do,” we are all made to play a role, like it or not.
They also put us on display, easy to see, as tokens of freedom and progress, while still being stuck.
But we are not yet fully free.
We are given options of predetermined identities – ones that make sense to patriarchy – and asked to choose.
Who do you want to be?
Madonna or whore?
Career woman or wife and mother?
Pretty or smart?
Sporty or flirty?
Carrie, Samantha, Charlotte or Miranda?
In some ways, the zeitgeist has attempted to turn Swift’s eras into another one of these metrics.
Are you the romantic "Fearless," the upbeat "1989" or melancholic "Evermore"?
We accept these categories, use them to sort ourselves and let those categories set the expectations of how we should behave.
In some ways, this itself is somewhat liberating.
Taylor’s eras offer women other markers of growth and identity beyond getting married and/or having children.
As a single woman in her 30s with no children, my life is sometimes seen by others as stagnant or empty.
It’s an untrue assessment, but one that’s pervasive still.
Patriarchy looks first at how a woman is related to others, typically men, to determine who she is.
I appreciate that Taylor Swift’s eras offer new ways of presenting aspects of my identity.
Swift is also an unmarried, childless woman in her 30s, and her eras take seriously life changes, interests, milestones and identifications that are often dismissed or overlooked.
Who do you want to be?
Miss, Mrs. or Ms.?
As women learn to navigate gender roles and try to remain intact while navigating unfriendly systems, we are not only expected to choose a box, to select a label, but also to eschew any other version ourselves that falls outside that box.
Working mothers still face the "motherhood penalty" at the office.
Full-time working moms make 74 cents to every working father’s dollar.
Working mothers of color make even less.
Attempts to exist in two boxes at once – even if both boxes are “approved options” by the dominant culture – are still punished.
Taylor Swift has punk ethics:Rerecording albums to own her masters is infinitely more punk rock than I am
This sort of celebration of nuance – an acceptance of and rejoicing in the fullness of female identity – is healing.
As our lives become more and more restricted, as the government rolls back women’s rights and our ability to choose what roles we will and will not play, the Eras Tour rolls forward with a glimmer of hope.
We can, at least, be nice to ourselves.
And we can only ever dismantle oppressive ideologies if we cease trying to make ourselves acceptable to those ideologies.
Together, but rooted in our own self-actualized identities, we can stop playing along with what patriarchy makes women do.
Juliette Holder is a Ph.D. student studying rhetoric at Texas Woman’s University, where she also teaches writing.
As an Iranian American political scientist and author of books on Iran, Islam and the Middle East, I am horrified by the cold-blooded slaughter and kidnapping of hundreds of Israeli citizens by the Iran-backed Palestinian groups, Hamas and Islamic Jihad.
What Hamas did with its massacre of innocent civilians was to rob the Palestinian movement of its moral rightness.
Those who praise these acts of terror have no conscience.
Iran must use its influence to gain the freedom of Israeli hostages.
I also fully support the United Nations secretary-general’s call for an immediate end of Gaza’s siege.
The latter have now exposed Iran to potential retaliatory strike by Israel, which has done absolutely nothing to Iran, except helping Iran fight its Iraqi invaders during the eight-year Iran-Iraq war, without which Saddam Hussein might have prevailed and wrested away a large chunk of Iranian territory.
And has he a short memory and forgotten that when the Iran-Iraq war ended, there were upwards of 15,000 Palestinian prisoners of war in Iran's camps, as many Palestinians volunteered in Hussein's army invading Iran.
Said's answer shocked me.
"I am an Arab nationalist, what do you think?"
The Iranian government has not been installed in power to represent the Palestinians or any other nation, only the Iranian nation, which has a proud historical legacy related to Cyrus the Great's liberation of Jews and allowing them to return to their homeland and rebuild their temple.
So, should in the next days or weeks, Israeli bombs begin to fall on Iran's nuclear facilities in retaliation, Iran's ruling clergy have only themselves to blame.
He is the author of several books – on Iran, Islam, ecology, Middle East, UN reform, as well as poetry and fiction – and numerous articles in international newspapers and journals.
Cardi B crying while eating a painfully spicy chicken wing.
Jack Harlow dodging a pointed question about his type while sipping a juice box.
Mark Cuban attempting a Pittsburgh accent.
Though these shows' setups vary, their strategy seems the same: Place a celebrity in an extremely awkward situation and capture as many candid moments as possible.
Cringeworthy clips from these shows regularly go viral on TikTok and Instagram, begging the question: What is it about celebrities and excruciating awkwardness that makes us feel like we can't look away?
"There's a reason we are obsessed with this, and much of it has to do with the fact that, whether we mean to or not, we put celebrities on a pedestal," says Henna Pryor, a workplace performance expert and author of "Good Awkward: How to Embrace the Embarrassing and Celebrate the Cringe to Become The Bravest You."
Pryor defines awkwardness as the emotion experienced when the person we believe we are isn't the person who is being perceived.
"For a moment in time, that external reality doesn't match the identity we painted for them, and we find that fascinating," she says.
By watching other people's social blunders, he says, we learn what not to do.
"It's a great opportunity for us to learn about social life and social expectations and social behavior without having to risk any of our social capital," he says.
"It's a real advantage to be able to learn vicariously from watching other people's awkward moments."
People love seeing celebrities in uncomfortable situations in particular, he says, because of a phenomenon called downward social comparison.
"Hot Ones," which shows celebrities struggling to eat chicken wings dipped in extraordinarily spicy hot sauce, capitalizes on this to great effect, he says.
"At that moment, we're actually doing better than the celebrity is," he says.
By showing their awkward side, celebrities give the impression of vulnerability, which endears them to fans even more.
As a result, a sweaty interview over hot wings may do more to bolster a celebrity's public profile than a traditional news interview.
Who hasn't been stuck in an awkward conversation that has no graceful way out?"
Awkward interviews are also more prone to go viral, because they fit into the unfiltered aesthetic that's currently popular on social media.
"I think it's great, whether it's in these shows or podcasts, to create these more genuine and real moments."
Favorite foods are often the centerpiece of holiday gatherings.
Pumpkin bread and caramel apples at Halloween, turkey and stuffing on Thanksgiving, and honey-glazed ham and gingerbread cookies at Christmastime.
No holiday dishes would be complete, however, without a host of herbs and spices flavoring them.
These often include herbs like rosemary, sage and thyme; and spices like peppermint, nutmeg and pumpkin.
Such trees are native to Sri Lanka and India, but they are also found in Indonesia, China, Vietnam, and South America.
Cinnamon is unique because, unlike the many spices that come from the root, stem, or leaves of a plant, cinnamon comes from the inner bark of a tree.
After being cut from young cinnamon trees and peeled, the bark curls into the familiar rolls people associated with cinnamon.
These rolls are called quills or sticks.
Cinnamon is often sold as these bundles, but it's also commonly ground into powder or processed into pill or oil form.
Depending on its form, cinnamon can be used as a spice in cooking, for aromatherapy, or as a health supplement.
Though cinnamon has been studied extensively for many purported health benefits including ones involving diabetes, insulin resistance, and irritable bowel syndrome, collectively the studies don't show that cinnamon clearly supports any health condition.
Some such studies are certainly promising, but results have been mixed and inconclusive overall.
Still, cinnamon has been associated with some general health benefits.
As aromatherapy, for instance, cinnamon can be relaxing and stress reducing.
Cinnamon is also known to have anti-inflammatory properties, which could matter because inflammation is linked to a host of medical conditions including heart disease.
Also promising are studies that show that cinnamon may lower LDL cholesterol, known as "bad" cholesterol, though such research is ongoing.
What's more, "some studies have also found a positive effect of cinnamon on metabolism," she says.
She also warns anyone taking cinnamon for the purpose of improving insulin resistance to remember that, "its effects on blood sugar can vary, so cinnamon should never replace medical treatment for these conditions."
Even though cinnamon may not have all the health benefits it's purported to, it's also not likely to do harm in modest amounts.
In high quantities, cinnamon is also associated with side effects like gastrointestinal issues, mouth sores, or allergic reactions.
When most people quip that they're "a bit OCD," they probably just mean they're a neat freak.
Though the "America's Got Talent" judge didn't receive his diagnosis for obsessive-compulsive disorder until his 40s, the 67-year-old says OCD has had a profound impact on most of his life.
"The word 'suffer' is not even strong enough," he says of his experience with the condition, while speaking over a Zoom call from Las Vegas.
I just have to get that germ off my hand.
That wall has gotten easier to deal with, he says, thanks to a combination of medication and therapy, but it's still something that's always there − which is why it's frustrating when well-meaning fans claim they experience the same thing, when it's clear they don't.
OCD is not that uncommon:Understand the symptoms of obsessive compulsive disorder.
According to Mayo Clinic, OCD involves persistent patterns of unwanted thoughts and fears, known as obsessions, that lead to repetitive behaviors, known as compulsions.
Ignoring or trying to stop these obsessions can worsen anxiety, so people with OCD are often driven to perform compulsive acts in an attempt to relieve stress.
These patterns can be time-consuming, interfere with day-to-day life and cause significant impairment.
Examples of obsessions include fear of contamination and intense stress when objects aren't orderly or facing a certain way.
Compulsions can take the form of hand-washing to the point of damaging the skin, repeatedly checking the stove to make sure it's off or counting in certain patterns.
"It's just this vicious, dark circle, and it makes you... unproductive, unhappy, depressed," he says.
The comedian says he coped with the added stress the way he has with many hardships: with humor.
Still, he says, laughter can only do so much.
"For somebody who was triggered by germs, COVID was not helpful," he says.
He says the two got the idea for the project while finding ways to cope with the stress of early COVID life.
'America needs you':82nd Airborne Division Chorus wins over judges, lands spot in 'AGT' finale
He also praised his co-judge Simon Cowell, 64, for recently revealing he went to therapy to help treat his depression.
He hopes that by speaking out he can help change that stigma.
"I think the younger you are, the easier it is to be open about mental health," he says.
"The reason I have that strength is because not only me, not only my daughter, but a lot of people are expanding the ability to share."
Plus, he says, the more people acknowledge their imperfections, the more they acknowledge their humanity.
"I feel broken ... but I don't know what perfection is," he says.
I think that everybody's got a little break in them.
I think some people aren't aware of it.
A seismic ground shift that will overtake movie theaters on Thursday, but first trembled Wednesday night, when Taylor Swift's "The Eras Tour" concert film made its world premiere.
More:Watching the world premiere of 'Eras Tour' movie with Taylor Swift felt like a dance party
After popping in to visit invited moviegoers in 13 of the theaters, Swift arrived at the one offering Dolby sound – the most effective presentation of this faithful-to-the-live-show movie – with a casual, "Hi, guys."
Swift stood at the front of the theater for a few minutes to express how much fun she's had performing during her Eras Tour and praised her backup singers and dancers, several of whom sat alongside her, pumping fists and singing along as the film unfolded.
"We pranced on that stage grinning because of what met us on the other side," Swift said.
Fans enthralled by the Eras concert will undoubtedly thrill at the opportunity to relive the magic and enjoy "The Eras Tour" as a communal concert experience more than a staid movie.
More:Taylor Swift rewards fans with 44 songs at Eras Tour opener: Inside her triumphant return
At just under three hours, the celluloid version of Swift's live spectacle is about 30 minutes shorter than her in-person performances throughout her six-month U.S. tour (her overseas dates kick off in November).
Her live shows offered an incredibly fulfilling set list of 45 songs – once she added "Long Live" to the rundown in July – and the film, directed by Sam Wrench, shaves off only a handful of tunes for a more efficient run time.
The concert footage comes from Swift's final U.S. shows of 2023 at SoFi Stadium in Inglewood, California – she played an astounding six nights at the 70,000-capacity venue – and the film pulls from her Aug. 4 and Aug. 5 dates for her customary "surprise" songs.
Swift opted for "Our Song" to "thank the people who liked me when I was a little teenager writing songs for my ninth-grade talent show," she says on stage in the film.
The entire film offers a front-row seat to the grandeur.
The staging is so massive that even the best seats in a stadium – and the King Kong-sized video screens – could provide only so much detail.
But on the big screen, the close-ups are glorious, whether zooming in on Swift's cat-eye makeup outlining her crystal blue eyes, the moss covering her piano and the sweat sticking to her bangs during "Champagne Problems" and her meticulous table setting at the start of "Tolerate It."
Among the performances, "Look What You Made Me Do" sizzles.
The detailed shots of the various Swift incarnations in glass cases spotlight the intricacy of the number, while Swift is in her snarling, sexy glory as the camera whirls around her.
"Blank Space" – already one of the meatiest songs in her extensive catalog – also receives a boost from Swift's uncanny ability to find the camera for a coy wink and to unleash her long-legged strut.
At the premiere, it was difficult to tell the screams from the crowd on film from the cheers in the audience, and throughout, several fans stood to sing and dance along.
By the time the show-closing "Karma" rolled out, the atmosphere felt like the encore at a concert, a joyful encounter full of love that indicated Swift isn't the only one having a blast at her shows.
More:Taylor Swift surprises fans with global premiere for upcoming Eras Tour movie
The fifth season of "Love is Blind," and the romantic journeys of the members of the cast, are coming to an end.
The singles who entered the pods at the beginning of the season have seen many twists and turns in their journey to find love.
The show centers around singles who "want to be loved for who they are," as Netflix says.
They contestants signed up for a "less conventional approach to modern dating," as they choose someone to marry without ever meeting them.
The group of singles that participated in Season 5 includes a stylist, firefighter, petroleum engineer and a minister.
Here's everything you need to know about the "Love is Blind" Season 5 finale and how to watch it.
The hour-long finale is set to hit Netflix on Friday, Oct. 13.
The previous nine episodes are also available to stream on the platform.
Season 5 of the show returns to Texas, with the season being filmed in Houston.
Season 3 was filmed in Dallas and Season 4 took place in Seattle.
Now, it's officially the "Renaissance Era."
In a show of legendary pop stars supporting one another, Beyoncé appeared as a guest at the world premiere of Taylor Swift's concert film "Taylor Swift: The Eras Tour" in Los Angeles on Wednesday.
Beyoncé, 42, posed alongside the "Lavender Haze" singer, wearing a chrome breastplate over a black bodysuit, in true Renaissance fashion.
The "Karma" singer shared a Boomerang video with the "Virgo's Groove" singer on Instagram as they enjoyed each other's company over a tub of popcorn.
"The way she's taught me and every artist out here to break rules and defy industry norms."
The 33-year-old pop star continued to praise her peer for "her generosity of spirit" and "her resilience and versatility."
The multi-Grammy award winners each headlined two of the biggest tours of the year, both of which are getting the concert movie treatment.
It's unclear when Beyoncé plans to have her concert film premiere, but we can only guess Swift will be a guest.
Taylor Swift 'Eras' movie review:Concert film a thrilling revisit of her live spectacle
At just under three hours, the film version of Swift's live spectacle is about 30 minutes shorter than her in-person performances throughout her six-month U.S. tour (her overseas dates kick off in November).
Her live shows offered a set list of 45 songs – once she added "Long Live" to the rundown in July – and the film, directed by Sam Wrench, shaves off only a handful of tunes for a more efficient run time.
Inside the 'Eras Tour' movie premiere:Watching with Taylor Swift felt like a dance party
“She is not able to breathe on her own,” Kelley continued.
Out of respect for her and her privacy, I will not disclose all details.
She is getting incredible medical care!
Kelley has not replied to repeated messages from USA TODAY Sports seeking comment.
They divorced in 2018.
She spoke for 20 minutes to an audience of about 500, Hartman said.
Most of her speech centered on her experiences at the 1984 Olympics, which were held in Los Angeles.
She said the amount of money that will come from the relief fund will be kept confidential.
We all hold her in our hearts during this challenging time and are hopeful for her to make a full recovery.
Our thoughts and best wishes are with her and her family.
The Royal Oak watch itself normally would cost about $30,000 from Swiss manufacturer Audemars Piguet.
But this particular watch is different.
The point was to make it more attractive and turn heads long before it recently became the main accessory in a signature move that has triggered a small cultural wave of sorts in American sports, including imitators in the NBA and NFL.
It's called the watch flex.
It's become far more conspicuous than the watch itself.
Their next performance comes Friday night against Stanford (1-5) on ESPN.
Is he just having fun and smartly bringing attention to himself to boost his own earning potential?
For example, his online store already sold out of some hooded black sweatshirts that depict the watch flex.
They cost $100.
Or is this gesture unsportsmanlike and excessive, as many on social media have said?
The opinions are polarized.
In some cases, race might play a role in how this watch move has been perceived negatively, experts told USA TODAY Sports.
Then he did it again the same night during an interview on ESPN.
But it’s not a marketing move for the watch manufacturer, at least not yet.
He is my son.
Certain celebrities have embraced it.
 "That’s the new move," rapper Rick Ross said on social media last month as he flashed his own watch to the camera.
“It’s hilarious to me, because he and I joke about it on a daily basis.”
But many have the opposite reaction.
They might not have known that fans for Arizona State (1-5) had chanted "overrated" at his team before that.
"Corny," said another.
"No class, like his dad."
"Bragging about money is trashy."
"This is why everyone hates Colorado."
Brash, wealthy young athletes have that effect, depending on fan loyalties and standards of sportsmanship.
History adds additional context when that brash young athlete is Black.
Johnson was part of a long line of Black athletes who effectively thumbed their noses at these racist notions by showing off their affluence.
In that sense, he’s very much like a young, brash (boxer) Cassius Clay or Muhammed Ali.
Last week he said it was something that originated spontaneously.
"It just happened," he said at a news conference in Boulder.
He said he "took it and ran with it."
His father said it goes back further and remembers him wearing jewelry and nice watches in high school.
But he conceded that "we’re on a bigger stage" now, drawing more attention nationally.
He’s a former defensive back and assistant coach at South Florida.
Forty years of adoration is a lot of years and a lot of love.
I have been fortunate to witness it all as a journalist, to interview and catch up with Mary Lou on the phone, at social events, at subsequent Olympics.
But it all goes back to those early days in 1984, summed up so succinctly and presciently by a copy of Sports Illustrated I pulled out of a cabinet Wednesday morning, one of my many mementos from the L.A. Olympics, which were my first.
She was lovable from the get-go.
We actually met before the L.A. Games.
I looked it up in my diary: it was June 3, 1984, the morning after she qualified for the U.S. Olympic team at the gymnastics trials in Jacksonville.
Mary Lou told me she wished she was taller.
She was 4-9.
“I wish I was 5 feet tall,” she said.
“That would be perfect.”
Her parents used to tell her they were going to give her hormone shots to help her grow but never did.
So short jokes became a big part of her young life.
Her favorite: “Stand up, Mary Lou,” when she already was.
Her father, Ronnie, a veritable giant at 5-7, was an athlete as well.
He was the sixth man, a guard, on the West Virginia men’s basketball team that was led by Hall of Famer Jerry West.
Mary Lou was a natural athlete who was unstoppable inside the house.
Her mother, Lois, said she finally put Mary Lou into a gymnastics class when far too many lamps were overturned.
“I was a tomboy,” Mary Lou told me.
She said all this with a smile.
Everything about this teenager, unknown to me until that week, screamed out fun, joy, happiness.
Bill had an idea for a photo and asked if anyone had any bubble gum.
I actually did, so I handed it to Mary Lou, who started chewing and then blew a massive pink bubble that covered her entire face.
This made quite a picture, with her grandmother standing beside her, looking on with a wry smile, both of them in bathing suits.
She should be going to proms and ball games.
I feel like I’ve lost her to the world.
She did, just much more famous.
Mary Lou of course became the darling of those Olympics, a household name, a role model for several generations of young female athletes — and someone I would seek for perspective when writing about little girls in big-time sports.
She has one of my favorite quotes on the subject:
“While other kids were reading about the Great Wall, I was walking on it.”
It’s worth remembering exactly what happened at those 1984 Olympics.
She won five medals altogether in L.A., including silvers in the team competition and on the vault, and bronze medals on the uneven bars and floor exercise.
Considering that no American woman had ever won an individual Olympic gymnastics medal of any color, she was a revelation.
She also knew luck was on her side.
The strong Soviet gymnasts, including the reigning women’s individual all-around world champion, were not in L.A., having boycotted those Games.
What happened next was a dream.
She was everywhere, from the front of the Wheaties box to SI’s Sportswoman of the Year.
She appeared on gymnastics tours, on TV shows and in the movies.
She has been a constant presence at the Olympic Games and is one of the most sought-after speakers and celebrities in the U.S. Olympic movement.
She also has four daughters, all of whom have been involved in gymnastics.
She got a kick out of relating how she tried to remain anonymous when taking one of her daughters to a gymnastics class.
That didn’t last long.
“They knew it was me,” she said with a hearty laugh.
In the same week that the sports world continues to celebrate the greatness of Simone Biles, there’s now an outpouring of concern over the woman who started it all.
Who are some of those clients?
That Sports Illustrated cover had it right all those years ago.
Mary Lou, it has always been only you.
"Just go with the flow," the "Thursday Night Football" senior coordinating producer ordered from the command truck at FedEx Field, not long after the Chicago Bears defeated the Washington Commanders.
They were about to play a game, he said, as celebrity chef David Chang rejoined the set.
It’s a simple premise.
Producers from the truck will put up a name on the screen.
The panel must answer whether that person played in the NFL or is a United States Congressperson – "On the Hill" or "On the Field" – all while chowing down on spicy chicken sandwiches from Chang’s restaurant.
"What can go wrong?"
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
But as Amazon became the league's first new media partner in nearly 30 years, the company also saw the opportunity of a blank canvas.
A streaming giant taking center stage for the NFL one night per week represented a chance to take another step toward the boundaries.
"But like, we want to take the swings and see where we land."
That type of segment likely would not have been flown at network television.
At Amazon, it’s encouraged.
Their willingness to pitch ideas makes the show that much better, he added.
"The show is better for it."
From there, the producers begin outlining a show ahead of a Monday afternoon production call in which the sketch becomes more of a rundown.
Reading the letters Fitzpatrick wrote to Johnson as a boy was one idea.
The crew brainstormed ways for Johnson to sign items for Fitzpatrick and how to place that into the segment.
Of course, it would have to be right before commercial break.
And they’d have to make sure Johnson sat next to the former quarterback.
When it was showtime 72 hours later, Fitzpatrick was all smiles as he unveiled his No.
32 Lakers jersey beneath his signature zany button-down shirt.
Through four weeks, "TNF Nightcap" is averaging 2.08M viewers, which is an increase of 24% over last year’s full-season average (1.68M), according to Prime Video.
(“TNF Tonight,” the pregame show, is averaging 500,000 more viewers per week compared to 2022.)
The morning of the Bears-Commanders matchup, the crew met in a hotel conference room to review the show rundown.
"And we've been shown we've been on parts of shows where not enough of that has happened as well."
Finding the sweet spot is the challenge of creating programming in 2023 for a streaming service.
Other market forces, like podcasts, have influenced the way they construct the show too.
So it's not a podcast, we don't want it to be a podcast.
That type of transition made it easier on the trio of Whitworth, Fitzpatrick and Sherman, all of whom went straight from the playing field to analysts’ chairs (Gonzalez and Thompson both had ample television experience prior to joining “TNF”).
Making sure they don’t lose their personality by improving for television is a fine line to walk.
And I think it's because there's so much content they're consuming in different ways.
During one of those sessions, it became clear that a "Quiz Bowl" for the Week 3 game between the San Francisco 49ers and New York Giants in the Bay Area would be the perfect setting.
Sherman went to Stanford.
Gonzalez is a proud Cal product.
Fitzpatrick famously graduated from Harvard.
"That would be the perfect amount of craziness," he realized.
Something political – but not polarizing – felt appropriate.
With the cameras rolling, Thompson – the only one who had prior knowledge of the game – accidentally gave away the answer to the first question.
No memes or viral posts came from the segment.
A few laughs for sure.
He said the segment featuring Fitzpatrick being honored at his high school the previous weekend was too much.
He hopes everyone else watching did.
A stabbing attack that left three people hospitalized temporarily shut down the security line at Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International Airport’s domestic terminal on Wednesday evening.
Posts on X, formerly known as Twitter, first documented the incident at around 5 p.m.
The Atlanta Police Department and Atlanta Airport confirmed the incident on X about a half hour later.
Three people were injured in the attack, according to a statement by the Atlanta Police Department.
Learn more: Best travel insurance
All victims are conscious and have been taken to the hospital.
The suspect has been taken to the airport precinct, and an investigation is underway.
TSA firearm detections are on the rise:Here's what we saw at one of the airports with the most cases
A spokesperson for the Atlanta Airport told USA TODAY that impacts to operations are minimal and there is no threat to public safety.
Updates will be posted to the airport’s social media.
Kathleen Wong is a travel reporter for USA TODAY based in Hawaii.
You can reach her at kwong@usatoday.com
We have a winner!
She has even earned a reputation among fellow bears.
“She often preemptively confronts and attacks much larger bears – even large and dominant adult males – in order to ensure her cubs are safe.”
“She's huge, just huge.”
Fat Bear Week’s champion isn’t necessarily the fattest bear at Katmai.
The March Madness-style bracket competition is based on popular vote, cast online by fans all over the world.
All the contenders are winners because they’ve all packed on pounds, gorging themselves on the Brooks River’s bountiful salmon before hibernating for the winter.
Disney fans who may have been holding off on booking their vacations may have to pay a little more than expected.
Prices for parking and annual passes rose overnight at both Walt Disney World and Disneyland.
Some ticket prices and other costs also increased Wednesday at Disneyland.
The changes come on the same day as a long-awaiting announcement about park hopper rules at Disney World.
Here's what Disney World and Disneyland visitors should know.
Starting Jan. 9, Disney World guests will once again be able to park hop at any time of day during park hours, pending capacity, the Florida resort announced Wednesday.
Currently, guests must wait until 2 p.m to change parks if they've purchase the park hopper option for their tickets.
The change will take effect the same day as two other highly anticipated moves, the lifting of reservation requirements for most Disney World guests and the return of the prepaid Disney Dining Plan.
As of Wednesday, standard parking prices costs $30, instead of $25, at Disney World’s theme parks.
That’s the same price as the starting parking price at SeaWorld Orlando and regular parking price at Universal Orlando Resort.
Parking is free for guests staying at Disney’s resort hotels.
It’s also free for Disney Springs guests while they are visiting the shopping, dining and entertainment complex – not theme parks.
The prices of all four annual passes also jumped overnight.
Existing annual pass holders can renew at special, reduced prices.
There are no changes to prices for standard, dated tickets, which are the kind of tickets most guests have at Disney World.
Disney World previously announced the introduction of “good-to-go” dates, when annual pass holders and cast members may visit parks without reservations.
The resort has now revealed that “good-to-go” dates will begin rolling out in January and be released on a periodic basis after that.
The starting price of one-day, one-park adult tickets remains $104 at Disneyland, as it has been for several years.
However, prices of higher-tier tickets rose by $5 to $15 on Wednesday.
Ticket prices now top out at $194 for one day at Disneyland or Disney California Adventure.
That's $15 more than the previous price of $179 for the highest-demand dates at the Southern California resort.
For comparison, the most expensive one-day, one-park tickets at Disney World cost $189 for Magic Kingdom.
The price of multi-day tickets also jumped on Wednesday.
Park hopping costs extra.
It's still $65 to add park hopping to a one-day ticket.
However, on Wednesday, the park hopper add-on rose between $5 to $15 for multi-day tickets.
Disneyland is offering limited-time discounts on kids' tickets next year.
From Jan. 8 through March 10, the price of a child's ticket will be "as low as $50 per child, per day," the resort announced last week.
Only kids between 3 and 9 qualify for children's tickets.
Guests aged 10 and up count as adults, while children under 3 may enter parks for free.
Story continues below.
Disneyland's version of annual passes, known as Magic Keys, also rose Wednesday as much as $150.
The price of theme park and hotel parking rose by $5 across the board on Wednesday.
Hourly rates, however, remain flat for guests visiting Downtown Disney and not the parks.
The cost of pre-purchasing Genie+ also rose Wednesday from $25 to $30.
That's the same as the starting price of purchasing Genie+ on the day of a park visit.
Day-of pricing varies by demand.
Starting Wednesday, the service also includes Disneyland's newest attraction, Mickey & Minnie's Runaway Railway.
Ariel's Undersea Adventure will be included in Genie+ in November.
UPDATE: This story has been updated with news that within hours of publication of USA TODAY's investigation, MSU suspended Coach Mel Tucker without pay.
Two years ago, one of the nation’s star college football coaches and a prominent rape survivor teamed up to fight the culture of sexual violence in sports.
Their partnership should have been a force for good.
Instead, it has devolved into scandal, with the activist accusing the coach of the same misconduct that both of them preached against.
Accusing him is Brenda Tracy, a rape survivor who has made educating athletes about sexual violence her life’s work.
Over eight months, they developed a professional relationship centered on her advocacy work.
Tucker invited Tracy to campus three times – twice to speak to his players and staff and once to be recognized as an honorary captain at the team's spring football game.
But their relationship was upended during a phone call on April 28, 2022, Tracy says in a complaint she filed with the university’s Title IX office in December that remains under investigation.
According to her complaint, Tracy sat frozen for several minutes while Tucker made sexual comments about her and masturbated.
His violation, she said, reopened 25-year-old wounds from her rape by four men – two Oregon State University football players, a junior college player and a high school recruit.
“The idea that someone could know me and say they understand my trauma but then re-inflict that trauma on me is so disgusting to me, it’s hard for me to even wrap my mind around it,” she told USA TODAY.
“It’s like he sought me out just to betray me.”
In his statements to the Title IX investigator, Tucker acknowledged masturbating on the call but said Tracy grossly mischaracterized the episode.
According to him, they had consensual “phone sex.”
Michigan State hired an outside Title IX attorney to investigate the complaint.
She finished her investigation in July.
A formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated the school’s policy banning sexual harassment and exploitation is scheduled for Oct. 5 and 6, during the Spartans’ bye week.
The stakes are high for everyone.
Tracy says Tucker is following through on a threat to ruin her career and reputation by painting her as a woman who mixes professional and personal relationships and files false reports.
She fears he will undo her legacy.
Tucker, who signed one of the most lucrative contracts in college sports history two years ago, could lose out on the roughly $80 million he is owed if Michigan State fires him for cause, which would be a stunning fall from the elite ranks of college coaches.
Reached by USA TODAY on his cellphone Saturday night, Tucker hung up after a reporter mentioned the case.
Hours after USA TODAY published its investigation, the university suspended Tucker without pay, pending a resolution of the Title IX case.
“This step, suspending Mel Tucker without pay, is … necessary and appropriate for today's circumstances,” Interim President Teresa Woodruff said at a Sunday evening press conference.
“These actions are not taken lightly.”
USA TODAY typically does not identify people who allege sexual harassment.
Tracy agreed to be identified and shared more than 1,200 pages of case documents.
Title IX, the federal law banning sex discrimination in education, requires schools to investigate allegations of sexual harassment that took place in the context of a school program or activity.
Such claims are inherently difficult to adjudicate because of many of the factors at issue in this case: a lack of eyewitnesses and recordings, the passage of time and the thorniness of litigating consent.
Adding to the uncertainty, the institution tasked with sorting out the facts is perhaps best known for missing repeated opportunities to stop one of the most prolific sexual abusers in American history.
Gymnastics and campus physician accused of sexually assaulting more than 300 female athletes under the guise of medical treatments.
He has been sentenced to a minimum of 100 years in prison.
Amid its efforts to rebuild trust among students, employees, alumni and the East Lansing community, Michigan State's leaders must now decide whether the face of its prestigious football program is guilty of sexually harassing one of the country’s most influential advocates against gender-based violence.
For some, how the university navigates the crisis will send a clear message about its commitment to progress.
“This goes beyond coach Tucker and Brenda Tracy,” said Jennifer Gomez, a Boston University professor who researches the effects of interpersonal trauma and violence.
“What happens here has the potential to be very healing or very harmful for lots and lots and lots of other people.”
Tracy and Tucker met in August 2021 during her first visit to Michigan State, after a mutual acquaintance introduced them.
Standing before a packed auditorium in the Spartans’ football operations building, Tracy told a gut-wrenching story of turning her pain into purpose two decades after filing a police report saying she had been gang-raped as a 24-year-old mother of two.
At the end, she challenged the “good men” in the room to use their privilege and influence to educate themselves and call out bad behavior.
By then she had delivered versions of the speech more than 100 times to at least 40,000 athletes and coaches.
Michigan State paid her a $10,000 speaking fee.
Tucker was in his second season as head coach.
A former University of Wisconsin-Madison defensive back, he had spent two decades coaching defenses for 10 college and NFL teams before landing the top job at the University of Colorado in late 2018.
Michigan State lured him away a year later by doubling his salary.
Mel Tucker's career at Michigan State: A timeline
Tucker and Tracy “hit it off” immediately, they would both later tell the Title IX investigator.
They bonded over their love of Jordan sneakers, shelves of which lined Tucker’s office walls.
Tucker had been moved by her speech, and she had been a big hit with players, he told the investigator.
They discussed her coming back to campus in the future.
Tracy left East Lansing feeling she had found a champion in Tucker, she told the investigator.
He seemed engaged with her cause, leading his players in signing her pledge to, among other things, obtain “ongoing, affirmative consent” before engaging in sexual acts with another person.
During that time, the two also talked on the phone at least 27 times, Tracy’s phone bills show – an average of once every two weeks for a half hour.
They often spoke at night to accommodate their work schedules, they said.
They chatted about their jobs and eventually more personal matters, such as their families, mental health and daily lives.
In November, Michigan State signed him to an unprecedented 10-year, $95 million deal that came fully guaranteed, even if it fired him for poor performance.
The only way he could lose out on the money, the contract said, was if he materially breached it, was convicted of a crime or engaged in “conduct which, in the University’s reasonable judgment, would tend to bring public disrespect, contempt or ridicule on the University.”
It was around then that Tucker, who had been married for more than two decades, started becoming interested in Tracy romantically, they both told the investigator.
Whether Tracy reciprocated is where their accounts diverge.
Tucker told the investigator that he and Tracy developed a romantic connection and talked openly about it.
They frequently made flirtatious comments about each other’s looks and bodies, Tucker said.
Tracy told him she wanted a “sugar daddy” who would pay her a monthly amount to be his girlfriend, he said, and that she would be “all over” him if he wasn’t married.
Tucker said they had acknowledged their mutual desire for a romance but agreed it would be “too messy” because of his marriage and the physical distance between them.
By contrast, Tracy told the investigator that Tucker’s romantic interest in her was entirely one-sided.
She said she came to feel he was less interested in her cause than in her.
Tucker messaged her photos of herself that he had found on her Instagram page, making comments such as, “This is the one,” or complimenting her eyes, Tracy said.
Once, Tucker called Tracy via FaceTime.
He was in bed, shirtless.
He talked about his unhappy marriage, describing himself as “more or less single.” Then, during a Nov. 9, 2021, call, she said he asked her, “If I wasn’t a football coach and if I wasn’t married, would you date me?”
Tracy said she responded that she would not because they worked together – one of several times she recalled trying to set boundaries.
She said she made clear to Tucker on a Dec. 1 call that they would only be friends, and he seemed to agree.
Then, after the spring game, Tucker called her four times, phone records show.
Tracy said he repeatedly asked her to meet him alone, without her assistant, and even suggested slipping into her hotel through a back door so no one would see him.
She said no.
Twelve days later came the call.
Tracy was in her home office in Oregon.
Tucker, who was in a hotel in Florida, called her at 12:39 a.m. EST, phone records show.
The call lasted 36 minutes.
According to Tucker, he became aroused when Tracy made a comment about needing to hit the gym more to look better without clothes on.
“Unequivocally, there’s no doubt about it,” Tucker told the investigator, case documents show.
“She was the one who said we’ll do it.”
Tracy denies all of that.
The call started off normal, she said.
But when she sent Tucker a photo of them together from the spring game, she said he responded by commenting on her buttocks and calling himself an “ass man.”
She remembered Tucker’s voice getting deeper and weirder as he continued talking about her buttocks.
She asked him what he was doing, and he said he had a “hard dick” and was touching himself.
“You’re touching yourself?” Tracy asked, according to the investigation report.
Tucker responded, “Yes.”
Tracy said she thought to herself, "Oh my god, this is happening, and I can’t stop it."
Eventually she said something along the lines of, “If you do this, I don’t ever want to hear about it, we are only friends, that’s it.”
When he finished, Tracy said, Tucker told her, “Thank you, good night, sweetheart.” She responded, “Yeah,” and he hung up.
Then she sat at her desk for a while, staring at her phone and crying.
Three months passed between the call and the next time Tracy and Tucker spoke.
At first, Tracy tried to pretend to herself that nothing had happened.
Tucker, however, was not responding to her text messages.
And he abruptly canceled her in-person training, planned for July 25, three days before it was supposed to take place.
A team staffer told her they had double-booked, but Tracy believed she knew the real reason.
When Tracy finally got Tucker on the phone about a week later, he was angry, she said, accusing her and her assistant of gossiping about his marital problems.
Tracy recalled that Tucker made comments such as, “I can’t trust you,” “If you say anything about this, I’ll hear about it,” and “I’ll be fine, it’s you that I am worried about.” She viewed it as a threat to destroy her reputation if she spoke out about him.
Tucker at one point told her he had done nothing wrong.
According to Tracy, she started to say, “Well, something…” referring to his masturbation, and Tucker interrupted, saying, “But nothing happened.”
Tucker recalled the Aug. 2 phone call much differently.
He told the investigator that Tracy apologized to him for discussing his marriage with her assistant, and he accepted.
Although they ended the call on good terms and discussed postponing her visit until next year, Tucker said he had lost trust in Tracy.
The training was never rescheduled, and they never spoke again.
Tracy initially stayed quiet about Tucker for the sake of her career, she said.
Ultimately, she decided that if she let it slide, she wouldn’t be the person she claimed to be – the one who encourages people to speak up about sexual misconduct and hold others accountable.
She filed her complaint in December – eight months after the call.
In dry and bureaucratic language, the record of that complaint begins: “The specific allegations of prohibited conduct against Respondent are as follows …” A notification was delivered to Tucker the following day.
Tucker was “absolutely shocked,” he would tell the university’s investigator.
In subsequent correspondence, he and his attorney suggested Tracy’s motive: She held a vendetta against Spartans athletics because of its history of sexual misconduct scandals and falsely accused him for financial gain.
“To say that I have learned from this situation is an understatement,” Tucker wrote in a letter to the investigator on March 22.
“I will never again allow myself to be duped by kindness.”
A former Indiana sex crimes prosecutor who now heads a private practice, she also previously worked in the Title IX offices at Michigan State and the University of Michigan.
Jacqueline Swanson, Tracy’s attorney who is also her friend, turned over a copy of the notes she took from their conversation on a yellow legal pad.
She shared a screenshot of a Dec. 2 text message in which Tracy told her she had just spoken with Tucker, who had agreed they could only be friends.
“I’m glad it didn’t get weird,” Tracy wrote.
Tracy provided phone bills and emails that corroborated her timeline of events and showed Tucker had been calling her from his personal cellphone.
Tracy said no.
In January, they sent a 12-page letter to the school arguing it lacked jurisdiction to investigate Tucker's “purely personal” relationship with Tracy.
“How far does MSU intend to go in policing the private conduct of its employees, and how does it expect its 20,000+ employees to react when they find out that they no longer have private lives outside the reach of their employer?”
Michigan State was not persuaded.
The alleged conduct would be covered by school policy, it concluded, because it took place in the context of Tracy’s work as a vendor for the school and affected their ongoing business relationship.
The case would go forward.
Tucker sat down for his interview on March 22.
He said he wanted to be transparent and set the record straight.
For instance, Tucker claimed he had made the phone sex call from home in East Lansing – not in a Florida hotel.
He had just returned from a trip to Florida, he said, where he had been doing charity work unrelated to his employment with the school.
An expense report Tucker submitted to Michigan State for his hotel and meal costs showed the trip's purpose was “administrative” and did not involve any personal travel.
The costs were paid by the Spartan Fund, the athletic department’s fundraising arm; he had flown to Florida on a donor’s private plane.
The information, Tucker said, made him question how Tracy “goes about her business.”
“I’m perplexed that Mel Tucker would respond to a complaint of sexual harassment by involving me or ESPN.”
Tucker did not identify any witnesses who could support his version of events, including his associate, whom he said he had promised anonymity.
That same associate, Tucker said, told him that Alvarado, Tracy’s assistant, had been gossiping about his marriage – a claim Alvarado denied.
Along the way, she had learned that one potentially rich source of evidence was missing: Both Tracy and Tucker had deleted their text messages with each other.
Tucker would tell her that he deletes his messages regularly because he receives so many; Tracy said she did so in a panic after their last phone call, feeling she needed to cut all ties with him.
At the hearing, planned for October, both sides will have the opportunity to present evidence and make arguments.
Another outside Title IX attorney hired by the school will then decide whether the evidence shows that Tucker likely violated school rules.
Among the witnesses who will be missing from Tracy’s witness list is her assistant and best friend, Alvarado.
She died in a car accident in June.
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
It was a private event thrown by the school to promote its migrant student services program, which provides financial aid and support to farmworkers seeking college degrees.
After the April 28, 2022, tour, disclosed in records obtained by USA TODAY this week, Tucker met with community leaders and alumni.
That night, Tucker would make the now-infamous phone call from his hotel room in nearby Naples, during which he is accused of masturbating and making unwanted sexual comments to Brenda Tracy, a prominent rape survivor and activist he had hired to speak to his team about sexual violence.
Yet, when Tucker met with the university’s outside investigator in March for his interview in the sexual harassment case against him, he insisted the trip was not work-related – a claim the investigator would disprove in her report.
It’s just one example of Tucker failing to keep his story straight at the most consequential moment of his career.
With his job, reputation and the roughly $80 million left on his contract at stake, Tucker repeatedly made false statements to the investigator and misled her about basic facts, such as his location during the phone call and the date it occurred, a USA TODAY review of more than 1,200 pages of case documents found.
Michigan State suspended Tucker without pay on Sept. 10, hours after Tracy went public for the first time with her story in USA TODAY.
On Monday, the school informed Tucker it plans to fire him for cause based on the conduct he had admitted to and the embarrassment he had caused the school.
Investigation:Michigan State football coach Mel Tucker accused of sexually harassing rape survivor
Although Tucker denied sexually harassing Tracy, he acknowledged masturbating on the call, saying he and Tracy had been in a romantic relationship and had consensual “phone sex.” Tracy said Tucker’s romantic interest in her was completely one-sided and that she had tried to set boundaries multiple times during their yearlong business partnership.
Per his contract, Tucker has until Tuesday to make a case for keeping his job.
Regardless, a formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated school policies against sexual harassment and exploitation is expected to proceed on Oct. 5 and 6.
He accused the school of conducting a “sham” hearing and having “ulterior motives.” Yet even in these written statements, the central details of his story changed entirely.
Tucker, who previously hung up on a reporter who called him on his cellphone asking about the case, did not respond to a message seeking comment for this story.
Tracy declined to comment for this story.
“Very often you’re weighing credibility based on little bits and pieces of information.”
“I believe a fact finder could assess these pieces of evidence about credibility and make a determination that Brenda is more credible than Mel,” she said.
“In my experience, a clear sign of a lack of credibility is generally taken very seriously.”
The school had informed him of Tracy’s complaint on Dec. 22, the day after she filed it.
Tucker was the only holdout.
Rather than tell his side of the story right away, Tucker and his attorney spent three months trying to stop the investigation, case documents show.
They wrote legal arguments urging Michigan State to drop the case and twice approached Tracy’s attorney proposing a settlement agreement.
Tracy said no, and the school pressed forward.
Only a handful of text messages remained; he and Tracy both told the investigator they had deleted their texts with each other in the months after the April 2022 phone call.
In his interview, which lasted 3 ½ hours, Tucker questioned whether Tracy had mixed up the date of the call.
He said he recalled being at his home in East Lansing when it occurred, but his own records showed that he had been in Florida on April 28, attending a charity function that was “absolutely not a University-sponsored event.”
His seven-page account told a different story – that he had called her while he was “alone in a hotel room.”
But by then she knew what he told her in the interview was untrue: she had already obtained records proving he had not been home in East Lansing.
An expense report he had submitted to the university for reimbursement of his hotel and meals shows Tucker flew to Naples, Florida, to attend a golf fundraiser hosted by The Greg H. Montgomery Jr. Foundation for Ultimate Growth, which raises awareness for suicide prevention.
It showed he stayed at the Hilton from April 27 to 29, that the trip’s purpose was “administrative” and that it did not involve personal travel.
He had flown there on a donor’s private plane.
The event was titled “Working to make dreams a reality,” according to an agenda obtained from the university by USA TODAY through a public records request.
The agenda features Tucker’s name prominently.
Tucker posted photos from the tour on his Twitter account.
That Tucker was on a university-sponsored work trip during the incident was a contributing factor in the university’s determination that it had jurisdiction to investigate, the investigation report shows.
Tucker’s lists of calls and text messages also were missing an important detail: They did not show any communication with Tracy on April 28.
He acknowledged in the interview, however, that he had not reviewed the lists before submitting them and that they may have been incomplete.
Tucker and Tracy did not speak in the three months after the April 28 call.
Meanwhile, their assistants were planning Tracy’s third visit to campus – an in-person training with coaches and players scheduled for July 25.
Tucker canceled that training three days before, the investigation report shows.
When Tracy spoke to him by phone on Aug. 2 seeking to find out why, she would tell the investigator in her interview that Tucker insinuated he would harm her career if she spoke about his conduct.
He never rescheduled her visit, and they never spoke again.
The cancellation became a key focus of the investigator – one of a series of alleged incidents that taken together would meet the definition of sexual harassment, which can include pressuring someone into engaging in sexual behavior for an employment benefit and threatening that rejecting such behavior will carry a negative consequence.
Tucker tried to distance himself from the cancellation in a public statement on Sept. 11, the day after Michigan State suspended him without pay.
“I never cancelled any presentation,” he wrote.
But that statement contradicts what he told the investigator.
Such timing would not make sense, he added, because most of his new players would not yet be on campus.
Tucker also told the investigator why he canceled the visit, blaming it on a scheduling conflict.
He said he had recently hired a mental conditioning coach, Ben Newman, who needed to implement his new program on short notice.
There was limited time in fall camp, Tucker said, and he didn’t want to “overwhelm” the players.
He said he decided to yield the time to Newman.
He had been meeting with them weekly since June 6, the records showed but held no meetings between July 15 and July 28.
One of Tucker’s assistants, who is a witness in the case, also told the investigator that Tucker asked him via text message to cancel it.
He said he was never instructed to reschedule.
Tucker confronted Tracy about the alleged gossiping during the Aug. 2 phone call, they both told the investigator.
Tracy said he berated and bullied her, repeatedly saying he could not trust her.
She said she told him she did not know what he was talking about.
During the Aug. 2 call, Tracy said she pressed Tucker to identify his source – the associate.
In her report, she wrote that he said he had “given (his) word that (he) wouldn’t divulge their name.”
Tucker never revealed the associate’s name to the investigator, nor did he identify anyone who could support his version of events.
In his Sept. 11 public statement, however, he lamented that the hearing would not afford him the opportunity to “offer any substantive evidence of innocence.”
It was not the only claim he attributed to his anonymous associate.
It turned out to be yet another falsehood.
“Neither the organization nor Tracy is or has been the target of any investigative reporting.”
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
Contributing: USA TODAY reporter Steve Berkowitz.
The bullets came in plywood crates.
Any given box was about the size of a small microwave oven.
The printed label stuck to each one demonstrated a militaristic brevity.
“CARTRIDGES FOR WEAPONS, INERT PROJECTILE,” next to a bright yellow hazmat sticker, “EXPLOSIVES.”
Inside the boxes: drab green steel cans of .50-caliber ammunition.
Each round was giant, more than 5 inches long, built to be fired from a gun so big it is typically bolted to a truck.
The bullets were clipped together in long strands for rapid, machine-gun fire.
By the time Bill Brown got to the boxes, they sat double-stacked eight high atop wooden pallets inside a Missouri warehouse.
The pallets went on, row after row.
Three million bullets in all.
It was enough ammunition to feed a single machine gun – if fired nonstop at its rated speed eight hours a day, seven days a week – for almost six months.
Brown’s job was to get it out of there and toward the Ukrainian front lines.
The faster, the better.
“War is bad,” Brown said.
There would be virtually no public record of this Ukrainian arms shipment.
As a weapons dealer, Brown’s company would deliver the bullets under a system known as a direct commercial sale.
Instead, it was part of a shadowy system of brokers, exporters, arms dealers and country-to-country transfers that has become one part of the race to meet demand on distant battlefields.
President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said the effort was delayed in part by the wait for more arms.
Most of America’s $44 billion in documented support to Ukraine came in the form of old U.S. military stock, donated directly by the federal government.
In general, commercial sales over $14 million, and sales of military-grade weaponry like mortars or missiles, require State Department approval and congressional notification.
But other aid comes via private sales.
More than 14,000 U.S. entities are registered to conduct defense trade activities.
Their deals are monitored by an alphabet soup of agencies including Departments of Homeland Security, Commerce, Defense and the Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
Trade secrecy clauses in federal law mean this flow of gear, weapons and ammunition is almost never revealed to the public.
Brown, who works for a small Nevada-based logistics company called Battle Born Munitions, provided USA TODAY with a rare look behind the curtain of these private sales.
Details about the shipment were verified by his employer and the European government that made the purchase.
State Department officials declined to answer questions about the specific shipment Brown described.
This March sale and the secret number of other shipments like it fuel Ukraine’s fight against a Russian invasion.
Those sales also release an unknown amount of weaponry into the world.
What becomes of that weaponry after it’s sold – and especially after it’s delivered – is difficult to track.
As Brown surveyed the warehouse in Missouri, a crew steered forklifts and skid lifts among the stacks of plain wooden boxes.
From high in the trusses, suspended lamp fixtures bathed the boxes in artificial daylight.
Brown lifted his camera and started snapping photos.
In just a few hours, he and his cargo would be boarding a jumbo jet.
From Ukraine:War crimes in Ukraine may be unprecedented.
So is the country's push for swift justice.
The bullets had once been bound for Saudi Arabia.
Lot number SMQ19K401L026 had rolled off the assembly line in 2019 at Lake City Army Ammunition Plant near Kansas City.
Lake City, owned by the government and run by a contractor, sprawls across nearly 4,000 acres of green Missouri farmland.
Roads curve past World War II-era bunkers known as igloos, spaced out amid the countryside – far enough apart that an explosion in one won’t trigger a chain reaction in the others.
Lake City has been pumping out ammunition almost without pause since 1941.
It is the largest small-arms manufacturing plant in the world.
And in 2019, Saudi Arabia was stocking up on weapons during the Trump administration, fueling the war in Yemen and other conflicts that drew criticism from congressional Democrats.
The plant manufactures .50-caliber ammunition on a rolling basis, for both military and commercial buyers.
That’s a testament to just what a legend the bullet – and the gun that shoots it – has become.
In 2019, the technology was already a century old.
The .50 caliber was the brainchild of American gunsmith John Browning during World War I.
Built to respond to German anti-tank rifles, the M2 was first tested in 1918, and it entered widespread service in 1923.
It earned the nickname “Ma Deuce” and has served in combat ever since, bolted to trucks, ships, planes and handheld stands on the battlefield.
The .50-caliber rounds – named for their diameter, about half an inch – can easily hit targets more than a mile away.
At closer ranges, they will blast through solid concrete or armored vehicles.
The gun can fire at a sustained rate of about 40 shots per minute.
Military setups use strings of “linked” ammunition to feed into machine guns.
Spaced out after every fourth bullet, so-called tracer rounds have small pyrotechnic charges that illuminate the line of fire, aiding in targeting.
The gun’s longevity and versatility made it popular for militaries the world over.
But this particular batch of bullets wouldn’t end up being sold to Saudi Arabia.
The Biden administration put a temporary freeze on sales to the Saudi government in 2021 as it reviewed weapons deals approved under Donald Trump.
Instead, Brown said, the bullets were sold to a U.S. ammunition provider, only to be held up again.
Ultimately, they were mothballed.
Then, in spring 2023, the bullets found a buyer, or actually two: first Battle Born; ultimately, the Netherlands.
The European country, a NATO ally, needed a big supply of ammunition.
It wouldn’t be keeping the bullets but giving them to Ukraine.
Its purchase, essentially a donation, would count toward the country’s required NATO contribution.
Brown had a line on exactly what they needed.
It was sitting in the warehouse in Missouri.
He arrived in March to personally oversee the shipment.
As he prepped for delivery, Brown dropped tiny black tracking devices onto several of the pallets.
Just $55 apiece, the units use GPS and cell signals to keep tabs on the load.
The idea was to ensure it wouldn’t fall into the wrong hands.
But packing up the bullets was just the beginning.
As with anything that’s deadly and made of metal, the shipping costs can be extreme.
Forty-five to 60 days on a ship?
Brown – or Chief Bill, as he prefers – is a no-nonsense 35-year veteran of the U.S. Army and former helicopter pilot.
He retired as a chief warrant officer and lives in Orlando.
Now 59, he still spends a lot of time on the road – 10 international trips this year.
He says his arms logistics work takes him to places most Americans would rather avoid – near the Syrian border or to unstable regions of Iraq.
He’ll travel halfway around the world, he quips, “have some soup, and go back to Warsaw to head home.” The trips aren’t really about the destinations.
They’re about the cargo.
On that spring day in Missouri, forklifts carefully loaded 107 pallets of the ammo onto 18 flatbed semitrailers.
They’d all make the eight-hour drive to O’Hare International Airport.
In Chicago, two Boeing 747-400s operated by National Airlines would be ready for the freight.
Four pallets each were stacked and shrink-wrapped to create “air pallets” or “cookie sheets” weighing 12,800 pounds.
Each plane could carry up to 17 of the pallets that ran the length of each plane secured by white cargo netting.
Flight records Brown provided show the two planes departed about seven hours apart, one in early afternoon, one after dark.
The flight would take nine hours.
Brown wasn’t going to the Netherlands, even though it was the buyer.
The planes were bound for Rzeszów, Poland.
The ancient city sits at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains in southeastern Poland.
It has a gleaming modern airport next to a major east-west freeway.
From there, it’s barely 60 miles to the border with Ukraine.
It was an expensive journey.
The trucking company’s bill for those 18 semis?
Chartering the two 747s?
But this shipment of .50-cal rounds was profitable for Battle Born Munitions, according to Brown.
The company purchased the 3 million rounds from Northrop Grumman at a bargain and resold them for more than double the price.
(In subsequent interviews, representatives at BBM disputed the specific totals Brown mentioned, saying the accurate figures were protected by “various commercial and government non-disclosure agreements.” They did not dispute the other specifics of the deal he provided.)
Retail prices for .50-caliber ammunition run roughly $5 per bullet.
At that rate, the whole shipment would have been worth $15 million.
The pricing might also be elastic.
The Dutch mark up the price of the bullets and count it toward their NATO contribution, pegged to a percentage of gross domestic product, Brown said.
The Netherlands has contributed about $15 billion to NATO this year, or about 1.7% of its GDP and just under the NATO mandate of 2%.
Representatives of the Dutch military confirmed the shipment to USA TODAY but declined to comment further about the pricing or details.
The war in Ukraine has only increased the demand for private deals.
The State Department signed off on more than $154 billion in commercial arms deals directly to foreign countries in 2022, a 48% increase from the previous year.
Direct commercial sales represent a modest portion of the contribution to Ukraine compared with the $44 billion donated by the U.S., but they still amounted to more than $600 million in sales from U.S. companies to the Ukrainian government last year alone.
That doesn’t include sales to other countries that also support Ukraine – sales like the one Brown described.
Jim Bartlett, an attorney with expertise in the specialized international arms transactions, said private U.S. businesses are playing a small but important role in the conflict.
“American companies are happy to export defense articles to foreign buyers approved by the U.S. State Department,” Bartlett said.
Those sales also come with risks.
Direct sales face fewer regulatory controls, oversight and enforcement, said Robert Nichols, an international military sales expert and attorney at the law firm Nichols Liu.
“You can imagine the range of characters involved in supplying a war effort,” Nichols said.
So far, the Department of Justice has indicted just a handful of arms brokers over deals related to the war in Ukraine.
They allegedly lied to Commerce Department agents and told them the parts were bound for Turkey.
Both pleaded not guilty to the charges this summer.
A State Department spokesman declined to provide details of enforcement actions but said, “The United States takes seriously our responsibility to protect American military and dual-use technologies and prevent their diversion, including through strong enforcement actions.”
NATO said it oversees allied arms deliveries, and that those arms generally reach Ukraine.
NATO itself technically only provides non-non-lethal aid, like fuel, medical supplies and generators.
Brown, of Battle Born, says he fields calls weekly from “clowns” without the proper licensing, whom he reports to the State Department for potential violations.
Some raise red flags when they approach him about transactions that include payment via diamonds or gold.
He prefers traditional wire transfers with approved sales partners since he knows government officials are watching.
He validates the contracts and checks certificates for the final users.
That’s part of why he traveled with the ammunition.
He would be meeting a Dutch military official for the official handoff.
“My job is to keep us all out of jail,” Brown said.
The two 747s touched down in Poland, one before the sun, the other in late morning.
Brown exchanged paperwork with a young Dutch military staffer who signed for the delivery, he said.
They traded military patches as souvenirs.
They snapped a photo together.
The bullets bought by the Netherlands would never touch Dutch soil.
U.S. aid:Billions from the US flows to Ukraine.
Here's where it comes from, and how it adds up
Despite playing a small role proportionately in the war, $600 million in direct commercial sales can buy a lot of small weaponry.
Put another way: It’s hard to sneak away an F-16 or a missile launcher the size of a tractor-trailer.
But a bunch of guns or a pallet of ammo?
Much easier to resell.
After Russia invaded Ukraine in 2014, the Small Arms Survey, a Swiss arms research project, estimated that within a year, battlefield seizures and other forms of diversion led to 300,000 small arms and light weapons going missing, including 100,000 in Crimea alone.
When small arms go missing, they can go missing into another country, maybe one led by a despot or even a terrorist organization.
The U.S. government says diversion of American donations has been widely absent so far in Ukraine.
That could be a combination of intensive “end-use-monitoring” programs and the reality of the battlefield, where supplies are rapidly put to use.
But even if not now, unused ammo could be resold someday.
“These are commodities with very long shelf lives.”
Florida-based Global Ordnance, another State Department-licensed exporter, is a competitor in the direct weapons sales business.
General counsel Bryan Van Brunt said the company has extensive protocols in place to track shipments and make sure the end-users are federally approved, though he declined to provide specifics about those systems.
Brown, with Battle Born Munitions, says the company employs a mix of simple and sophisticated tracking technology to ensure his shipments are tracked to end users.
The black GPS devices he dropped onto his cargo tracked the ammo all the way across the globe.
But that system only works as long as Brown is actually tracking.
“Technically, my role ends when I deliver it to NATO,” he said.
Sometime after the 747s touched down in Poland, along with signing the paperwork and snapping a selfie with the Dutch official, Brown found the tiny black GPS trackers and lifted them off the pallets.
Ukrainian trucks would arrive at the airport to pick up the ammunition.
They would point toward the border, and onward to Lviv, and some distant battlefield.
Brown would point in the opposite direction.
Just like one of his quips: Fly in, have soup, get home.
He headed toward Warsaw, with the GPS trackers in his bag.
Contact him at npenz@usatoday.com or @npenzenstadler, or on Signal at (720) 507-5273.
The geography professor didn’t hide his clown fetish or the fact that he sometimes indulged his urges by recruiting students as subjects.
He posted regularly about it on social media.
He submitted his resignation the same day their story was published.
His interactions with students and open discussion of his fetish happened in both mainstream and tailored digital spaces.
He popped into Facebook groups geared toward new students and niche forums on websites like Reddit.
He posted videos on YouTube.
Over the years, two students reported him to campus police; others complained online.
He left Kent State University after pleading no contest to something different: a theft charge that involved entering his peers’ offices without permission and taking a USB drive.
Nicholls State, for example, told USA TODAY Network reporters it does not routinely check social media for new hires.
The money was appealing but the interactions soured.
“I thought maybe they could prevent anything bad from happening since other girls would go with him.”
She said there was never any followup from campus police – or anyone else.
The two who expressed public concerns on social media told USA TODAY they never heard from their campus officials either.
She said she would pass along that reporters were trying to reach him.
He said his contract was not renewed because he was the target of a “grade inflation task force.”
She has seen the pattern often in her work maintaining a database of publicly documented sexual misconduct by faculty and staff.
As for grad students?
“I don’t on purpose,” she said, “because that’s information that almost never comes out.”
He was working toward his doctorate and researched fading businesses.
His work about shopping malls in the Rust Belt won several awards.
Like many graduate students, he also taught classes.
“I will literally pay you!”
What’s more, she figured out that he was a graduate student, a fact she said he didn’t disclose in his posts.
It arrived at midnight and contained no message, although writing on his shirt read: “I'm not a failure.”
“It’s definitely burned into my mind.”
He would send “get to know you” messages, the police report said, and then ask the student if she was “interested in having her face painted for one of his class projects.”
“She does not have any concerns for her safety, but just wanted this documented,” the police report read.
In July 2017, another student had retweeted a message from Kent State’s Twitter account that asked for Kent State love stories.
She said she tweeted to draw officials’ attention to it and moved on but now wishes she had reported it officially.
College campuses are supposed to offer students special protections from sexual harassment even when it falls short of criminal behavior.
Title IX, often associated with equity in women’s sports, also addresses “sex-based harassment, which encompasses sexual assault and other forms of sexual violence” at schools that receive federal funding.
Colleges infrequently and unevenly enforce the rule, however.
A 2022 USA TODAY investigation found just one of every 12,400 students was suspended in connection with sexual misconduct.
The student who shared her story online said the only response she received was from a graduate student in the geography department, who contacted her on Oct. 1, 2018.
In an email, he wrote that he had seen her post and suspected he knew which faculty member had asked her about face painting.
“I brought it to the attention of some of our faculty because I was pretty sure I knew who it was, but they were certain it wasn’t that individual and that you probably just meant geology,” he wrote.
He went on to reference another student being “approached in (at least by just looking at your tweet) a much more aggressive way.” The grad student asked the undergraduate for more information, but, she told USA TODAY, she didn’t respond.
She said she started drafting a reply, but a year had passed.
She wanted to move on.
Kent State would not say whether any actions were taken after the students’ reports, but Eric Mansfield, a spokesman for the university, said the police department confirmed that the students who filed police reports were provided with “university resources, which would include other non-criminal avenues to pursue (Counseling Services, Title IX, Center for Sexual and Relationship Violence Services, etc.)
Mansfield also said that the university monitors social media but that colleges “can’t always see or track every mention on social media.”
A blotter item in the local newspaper shows police obtained an arrest warrant in connection with a third-degree felony burglary charge.
“Also, we do not comment on personnel matters.”
In more recent years, Buckley has become critical of the law and how schools interpret it.
He told the Columbus Dispatch in 2010 that “the law needs to be revamped.”
Survivors of sexual violence and students accuse universities of using the law to avoid negative media coverage.
Students with a history of bad behavior may jump from one school to another without the public ever knowing about their histories.
One case involved Brandon Austin, who was accused of sexual assault at Providence College in 2013 while on the school’s basketball team.
But Providence College initially said Austin was suspended for violating the school’s code of student conduct and declined to share further details with the Providence Journal, citing federal privacy laws.
Austin denied wrongdoing and was not charged with a crime.
Austin was able to transfer to the University of Oregon, where he was again accused of sexual assault, along with other players.
Police investigated the claims, and the local district attorney declined to press charges.
And it doesn’t apply when a student is “seeking or intending to enroll” at another college.
He blamed the overuse of the law on fear of being sued.
While most U.S. employers conduct background screening, according to trade group data, those inquiries typically focus on criminal history.
Social media receives far less attention even though that is where people are most likely to share their unguarded thoughts.
Undertaking a full review of a person’s social media presence is more difficult than just checking an applicant’s Facebook page.
Does an applicant have an account on X, formerly Twitter?
How about an account with Discord, an online platform frequented by gamers, where leaked Pentagon documents were recently shared?
Or what about a Telegram account, a messaging platform popular among white nationalists?
Further complicating things, it’s common on sites like Reddit for users to adopt usernames and describe experiences with little to no ties to reality.
A little digging, however, can turn up a lot of dirt.
His time as a student and instructor at Kent State is absent.
That is the same handle used on Reddit by someone with a special interest in face paint.
Other posts mention a “clown fetish.” In a forum titled “Creepy,” he wrote, “I convince pretty girls to let me paint their faces,” along with a photo with multiple women in white face paint.
That and other similar posts remained live for years until they were taken down after the Nicholls students published their story in late March.
USA TODAY Network reporters captured screenshots before they disappeared.
With dates in 2019, the posts feature a young woman wearing a Kent State T-shirt.
The material would have been available to administrators at Northern Illinois before the start of the fall 2019 semester.
Joe King, a spokesman for Northern Illinois, said departments hiring new graduate students are “not required to check social media or investigate a disciplinary history.” He added some departments may reach out to the graduate students’ former advisers.
But there are signs the behavior continued.
She said she declined to do it but was aware that other Northern Illinois students had participated.
She asked, had anyone complained?
Many students would find a reason to complain, as Nicholls State student journalist Sally-Anne Torres learned firsthand.
It started in January when one of her fellow reporters picked up an odd rumor: a professor was offering extra credit for students willing to paint their faces like clowns.
Initially, Torres dismissed it because it seemed too unusual and there weren’t a lot of leads to follow.
He blamed his departure on giving too many A’s.
That seemed suspicious to Torres.
“It wasn’t just this innocent thing that a lot of these girls thought it was,” Torres said.
Some, she said, were followed on Twitter by him while others opted into an extra credit assignment he offered.
The women told Torres he sometimes giggled and laughed as they painted their faces in his office.
It seemed unusual at the time, Price said, because his friend wasn’t in the class.
It became more concerning to him on reading the student newspaper’s report.
“I feel frankly disgusted and disappointed that Nicholls couldn’t do a proper background check on this professor, because this is unacceptable,” Price said.
Ramos learned that the person behind the account was likely a professor at the university.
She posted about the behavior in January 2022, but nothing came of it.
On March 27, the same day the student newspaper published its piece, Ramos posted screenshots of her discoveries on Twitter with the message, “Found a Nicholls state university professor on Reddit.”
“I wish the university had acted sooner because all this information was public on the internet,” she told USA TODAY.
No one from the university, she said, has ever reached out.
He can be reached at CCampo@gannett.com.
"Now is not the time to be attacking our ally," DeSantis told supporters at the New Hampshire State House.
Several Republicans noted that, after the 2020 election, Trump attacked Netanyahu for hailing Biden as the president-elect.
"It’s clear he’s angry at Netanyahu for recognizing Trump lost in 2020," said a statement from Never Back Down, a pro-DeSantis political action committee.
"Trump puts himself first."
DeSantis spoke after formally filing for January’s New Hampshire primary, a contest he declared “wide open” despite Trump’s huge lead in polls.
“If you want to change from Trump, I think I’m the best leader,” DeSantis said, adding that he gives Republicans “the best chance to be able to do well” in a general election.
DeSantis, who has seen his support erode after months of attacks from Trump, has gradually escalated counter-criticism of the former president throughout the campaign.
He has been more pointed in recent days, part of a strategy adjustment that includes more interviews with mainstream media outlets.
The Florida governor plans to spend Thursday touring the northern part of the state along with members of his political action committee, Never Back Down.
He is scheduled to participate Friday in traditional events, including a "Politics and Eggs" breakfast hosted by the New Hampshire Institute of Politics.
DeSantis and other Republican candidates are scheduled to address the state Republican Party's "First in the Nation Leadership Summit" in Nashua, N.H. this weekend.
The U.S. government announced it will provide charter flights for American citizens and their immediate families looking to leave Israel.
The flights, which are set to begin on Friday, will operate to locations in Europe where there is more commercial capacity across the Atlantic.
U.S. citizens in Israel in need of assistance should complete the crisis intake form at travel.state.gov.
“We’re also exploring other options to expand the capacity of doing this including exploring whether it’s possible to help Americans leave by land and by sea.”
Kirby said that the State Department is still finalizing details of the plan and did not make more specifics available.
Travel disrupted:US airlines suspend flights to Israel as State Department urges caution
USA TODAY reached out to the State Department and will update this story as details become available.
The news moves quickly.
We break it down for you.
Sign up for USA TODAY’S Israel-Hamas War newsletter for a run-down of the day’s headlines.
You can reach him at zwichter@usatoday.com
In less than a year, the 118th Congress has already made history.
But the upper and lower chambers have also prompted more offbeat headlines, from marathon votes for House speaker to bribery and fraud charges.
Here’s a recap of history-making moments:
Kevin McCarthy's marathon election: A hold-out faction among House Republicans stalled the vote for House speaker for four days − and 15 rounds of voting − in January.
George Santos indicted on fraud charges: The New York Republican faces a 23-count indictment accusing him of stealing campaign donor identities and using their credit cards to for unauthorized charges.
Who wore it best?
A minor rule change that allowed for casual dress in the Senate sparked an immediate backlash.
Senators went on to pass a resolution codifying a formal dress code for lawmakers.
Gold bars and bribes?
He was indicted again today.
Read more here:4 unusual ways this Congress has made history
🗺️ Keep up with developments from Gaza: Sign up for our Israel-Hamas War newsletter.
An Oct. 4 Facebook post (direct link, archive link) claims the sons of two well-known politicians are in legal trouble.
It was later updated to attribute the information to Newsmax.
The post was shared more than 250 times in two days.
Another version of the post was shared more than 13,000 times on X, formerly Twitter.
Follow us on Facebook!
Like our page to get updates throughout the day on our latest debunks
This is wrong on multiple fronts.
And, accordingly, there is no evidence of any criminal investigation along those lines.
Some Republicans have claimed then-Vice President Joe Biden wrongfully used his power to force the removal of a Ukrainian prosecutor who was investigating the company, but a 2020 Senate investigation found no evidence of wrongdoing on the part of the president.
There is no evidence that the children of Utah Sen. Mitt Romney or former Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi were involved with the company.
And there's no evidence of any investigation involving the two.
There is also no evidence that Newsmax reported on the supposed probe into the two men.
Newsmax did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
The Facebook post is a new variation of a long-running claim of ties between Ukraine and the sons of various politicians.
Fact check: Mitt Romney announced he won't seek reelection in 2024, but he's not resigning
The allegation was made on the grounds that an advisor from Mitt Romney’s 2012 presidential campaign was on the company’s board of directors.
USA TODAY reached out to the Department of Justice and the offices of Mitt Romney and Nancy Pelosi for comment but did not receive a response.
Paul Pelosi, Jr., Nancy's Pelosi's son, has been involved with various companies throughout his business career, as mentioned in a 2012 Securities and Exchange Commission filing.
The company is based in Boston and also has an office in New York.
USA TODAY reached out to users who shared the post for comment but did not receive a response.
Thank you for supporting our journalism.
You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or e-newspaper here.
Our fact-check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook.
The attacks came by land, sea, air – and online.
Some Hamas officials have since walked back the threat.
The videos and images from the deadly attacks posted by Hamas-affiliated accounts were shared by Hamas allies and unwitting participants around the globe, Clarke said.
“This is the nature of asymmetric warfare – you've got to utilize tools that are going to make you seem bigger and more powerful than you are,” Clarke said.
“For Hamas, it costs them nothing to videotape something and send it out there, and now everyone thinks that they're creeping around every corner.”
Hamas fired off posts from official accounts on the encrypted messaging and social media app Telegram that ricocheted to X, formerly Twitter, and beyond.
Telegram – which allows messaging between users but also has a “Channel” function that works similarly to X – has a long history of being used by terrorists, among them the Islamic State, or ISIS.
X, which gutted its trust and safety teams under new owner Elon Musk, was unprepared for the wave of terror propaganda that then spread to other social media platforms and messaging apps like WhatsApp.
This week, X said it was removing newly created Hamas-affiliated accounts and coordinating with industry peers “to try and prevent terrorist content from being distributed online.” It also recommended that people adjust their sensitive media settings if they don’t want to see disturbing content.
The U.K. summoned social media executives Wednesday to demand platforms remove violent content of the Hamas attacks on Israel.
Telegram and X did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
If social media sites continue to erode guardrails and safeguards, Clarke warned, what is happening today will get worse.
“This is just the facet of what’s called ‘fourth generation warfare,’ or ‘modern warfare’ in this era,” he said.
“So, whatever the next conflict is, it doesn't really matter, you're going to see this on steroids.”
Once propaganda and disinformation reaches X, the platform is allowing it to be shared and even monetized, a report from the Tech Transparency Project found.
The report, an advance copy of which was provided exclusively to USA TODAY, found several premium subscriber accounts – which pay a fee of $8 a month to the platform – sharing Hamas propaganda including violent and graphic images of the attacks on Israel.
It also appears to violate an X policy stating that the platform will remove accounts sharing content produced by terrorists, the report states.
It also notes that in some cases, X ran advertisements in the comments under the video posts.
The TTP report found several instances of “verified” X users, some with more than 500,000 followers, spreading uncensored Hamas propaganda videos.
One clip posted to X shows bodycam footage of Hamas militants going room-to-room in an Israeli military base firing automatic weapons.
Bloodied bodies lie on the ground in the video, which has been watched more than 60,000 times.
“The amount of content is going to be more than any team, whether it’s at a platform or a research team like mine, or a journalism outlet or organization could possibly sift through,” he said.
“This includes the possibility that a range of terrorist and violent extremist networks and groups may seek to exploit the conflict for their own purposes, as we have seen in past events.”
Facebook, YouTube and TikTok say they have poured resources into moderating content from the Israel-Hamas war.
“After the terrorist attacks by Hamas on Israel on Saturday, we quickly established a special operations center staffed with experts, including fluent Hebrew and Arabic speakers, to closely monitor and respond to this rapidly evolving situation,” Meta said in a statement.
The major platforms prohibit content produced by terrorist organizations including Hamas as well as footage showing hostages.
Apple’s fall device drop gets all the love, but Google wants you to remember it’s here, too – with lots of shiny new tech and some seriously impressive artificial intelligence upgrades coming soon to a phone near you.
Let’s break down everything Google just announced and see how the Pixel 8 stacks up against the new iPhone 15.
That’s how much the Google Pixel 8 Pro costs (OK, it’s $999) – up $100 from the top-tier 7 model.
For a grand, it includes Google’s zippy Tensor G3 chip and a camera good enough to rival the iPhone 15.
Neat feature: Zoom Enhance lets you go in and add details after you’ve taken the shot and want to zoom in on a pic.
The other random but excellent addition is a temperature sensor that can accurately measure how hot or cold a surface, object and even your forehead is.
It comes in black, porcelain and light blue – shipping is expected on Thursday.
Speaking of Google … 20 Google Search tricks, hidden utilities, games and freebies
What about the non-Pro?
The Pixel 8 is going up $100, too.
It’s faster and slightly smaller than the 7 – and gets access to Google’s sweet new AI photo editing tools (along with the 8 Pro).
◾ Magic Editor uses AI to change the scenery in a photo, remove distracting elements and even move people around.
◾ Best Take is a group-shot game changer.
The idea is you take several pictures, and then you can choose the best face for each subject and merge them into one final image.
Finally, everyone looks good!
◾ Audio Magic Eraser tones down distracting sounds in audio tracks that are ruining your video.
The 8 is $699, or $799 if you’re buying from Verizon.
It comes in rose, black and hazel and is expected to ship on Thursday too.
Updates till 2030
Hey, at least if you spend all the money, you know your phone will work for many years.
Google says the 8 and 8 Pro get seven years of “OS, security, and Feature Drop updates” for both phones.
Security 101: Your phone tracks everywhere you’ve been – See (and delete) it
How do they stack up against the new iPhones?
For most people, it comes down to what ecosystem you prefer.
If you’ve been using one or the other for years, you know exactly how they work and are comfortable with the OS.
Perhaps you’re not so brand loyal.
Let’s compare some specs, shall we?
We’ll stick with the base models.
iPhone 15 vs. Pixel 8
◾ Cost: $799 to $1,099 (iPhone); $699 to $749 (Pixel)
I’ll let you draw your own conclusions, but on specs alone, the Pixel models are totally solid for the price.
(And yes, I say that as an iPhone devotee.)
Beyond the phones, here’s what else Google is working on.
More battery life, better sensors
The Pixel Watch 2 looks like the original, but the insides got a significant upgrade.
The improved Qualcomm Snapdragon W5 processor means up to 24 hours of battery life, even with the always-on display enabled.
You’re looking at $349.99 for the GPS version or $399.99 for LTE.
Pick from silver and blue, silver and white, gold and hazel, or all-black.
Can you hear me, Buds?
The Pixel Buds are Google’s answer to the AirPods.
The upgraded Buds Pro get light blue and porcelain options to match the new phones, along with audio upgrades for “fuller and clearer” sound.
Assistant gets smarter
It wouldn’t be 2023 if there weren’t some AI talk.
Google Assistant is getting a Bard AI upgrade “in the coming months.” It’ll connect with your Google apps – like Gmail, Drive and Calendar – to plan trips, caption pictures, make lists and find that dinner reservation you forgot about.
Keep your tech-know going
Search for it wherever you get your podcasts.
For your convenience, hit the link below for a recent episode.
Plus, heading back to the office?
Here's what to know about bosses tracking you.
I chat with caller Sharon from Oregon about finding good animation software for her grandson.
Plus, high-speed police drones, and a heads-up: hackers are targeting travelers.
Listen to the podcast here or wherever you get your podcasts.
Kim takes calls and dispenses advice on today's digital lifestyle, from smartphones and tablets to online privacy and data hacks.
For her daily tips, free newsletters and more, visit her website.
I really like the new Apple Watch Series 9.
It reminds me a lot of my Apple Watch Series 8.
I’ve been evaluating the latest smartwatches from Apple, Samsung and Google.
And at first blush, separating this year’s models from their predecessors seems a little like deciphering whether that SUV in the parking lot is a 2019 or 2020 Chevy Tahoe.
That’s good news if you splurged for a new smartwatch last fall, because your investment is anything but obsolete.
By the same token, there’s more to this year’s models than powder-coated wheel finishes and trim decals.
So if you’re considering an upgrade after a few years – or even switching teams – there’s plenty to consider.
Apple and Samsung have turned it up to … 2,000.
That’s 2,000 nits, a measure of brightness, Which is, like, really bright.
The Google Pixel Watch 2 (starting at $349.99, $399.99 as tested with LTE) checks in at 1,000 nits, the same as the inaugural Pixel Watch as well as last year’s offerings from Samsung and Apple.
Although it pales in comparison to the 2,000-nit displays, I can still read the 1,000-nit screens outside.
And if you’re more likely to read a message in Scarsdale than Scottsdale, then the new 2,000-nit options may not have the same appeal.
Apple Watch Series 9 (iOS)
Apple also upgraded the Watch’s internal processors, which the company credits for a few new features, like “Double Tap.” The Double Tap hand gesture – the Watch detects when you quickly press your thumb and middle fingers together – can help control the device when you can’t reach over with your other hand to answer a call or scan alerts.
In my beta-testing of the feature, it worked a lot like “Assistive Touch,” which Apple introduced two years ago, only a bit snappier.
The added horsepower also gives Siri offline capabilities that improve the voice assistant’s speed and accuracy.
iOS updates again?
Why you should do it now.
Samsung Galaxy Watch 6 Classic (Android)
The Watch 6 Classic is livelier and more responsive than the Watch 5 Pro, with better graphics for alerts and more engaging apps.
And sleep tracking seems to be more reliable, accurate and – as a consequence – relevant.
Although the processor and sensors are largely identical, the Watch 6 Classic is easier to visually identify because Samsung brought back a popular engagement tool: the rotating bezel.
Google Pixel Watch 2 (Android)
The Google offering, available Thursday, endured the most substantial changes year over year, by far.
But it is just the second iteration of a formidable undertaking to meld the popular fitness platform from Fitbit, which Google bought four years ago, with the premium Wear OS smartwatch ecosystem.
It’s already spawned a worthy contender.
But there’s still a lot to do.
It has an upgraded processor and more durable glass.
It also runs the new Wear OS 4, just like Samsung’s Watch 6 series.
The Fitbit/Wear mix-and-match journey is most evident when the two platforms have a different approach to the same task.
For example, Fitbit’s all-in-one app is at odds with how Wear OS – and other vendors as well, for that matter – on-board and configure hardware.
That has made it challenging for Fitbit to add Google features to its devices, just as it has been for Google to add Fitbit’s app to its devices.
It is also making it challenging to swap back and forth between the Pixel Watch 2 and the original Watch or – more difficult – traditional Fitbit devices.
I’m juggling three wearables right now – the new Fitbit Charge 6 as well as the two Pixel Watches – and it can be downright aggravating.
Conversely, that process is automatic and hassle-free for those swapping Apple or Samsung devices.
Samsung’s relative ease at handling the task is particularly illustrative, given that Google’s own Wear OS is managing the handoff.
I wish Google would offer two sizes, as Apple and Samsung do.
Hopefully Google will get around to that in future revisions.
I also wish Google would offer better battery life.
But I’m not holding my breath.
Online hate surge:Online hate surges after Hamas attacks Israel.
Why everyone is blaming social media.
Unfortunately, Big Tech seems content to offer mediocre battery life for their pricey, high-powered smartwatches.
Apple has never promised more than a waking day between charges on full power.
That obviously hasn’t hurt Apple – and Samsung has taken a cue.
The Watch 6 Classic simply matches Apple battery life, rather than beating it with 36- to 48-hour battery life, as in previous generations.
Most disappointing is Google, which is foregoing Fitbit’s multiday battery legacy by providing up to just 24 hours of power in the Pixel Watch 2.
Multiday battery life would be a major upgrade.
It’s not only more convenient.
It also makes smartwatches more engaging.
For one thing, it dramatically boosts the likelihood of tracking sleep, one of the most crucial health indicators.
Battery life aside, these are three very good watches to choose from.
So if you’re kicking the tires on a new model, don’t let the recycled styling dissuade you.
The Apple Watch and Samsung Galaxy Watch series are both locked in after years of refinement.
And while it’s comparatively early on for the Pixel Watch series, Google has done a good job so far combining two very established platforms.
Reach him at mikef@feibustech.com.
The concept that we are all computer-generated characters occupying a world as real as the ones gamers explore on their PlayStation consoles isn't exactly a new one.
As far back as 1999, Morpheus was entering "The Matrix" to break Neo and a few other chosen few out of a simulated reality created by advanced machines in order to use humans as an energy source.
That's what happened this week when a physicist at the University of Portsmouth in the United Kingdom proposed that a new law of physics could support the theory that what we see as our reality is in fact a complex virtual simulation running on a cosmic computer.
"Any normal person will think, could it be that maybe we already are in some kind of digital virtual reality world?"
Psyche mission, explained:What to know about NASA's long-awaited trip to a strange metal asteroid
In principle, anything can be simulated with a computer with sufficient power.
The theory is popular among many notable figures, including Elon Musk.
The Tesla founder and CEO weighed in at a 2016 conference, stating that in his opinion, the odds that we're living in what he called "base reality" — in other words, the real universe as opposed to a simulated one — are “one in billions.”
So are we not unlike the characters we oversee in the Sims, confined to a superficial, restricted sandbox while more advanced beings are spectators to our existence?
In fact, 2020 research authored by David Kipping, an astronomer at Columbia University, found that the odds of us living in a base reality are pretty much 50-50, with the odds only slightly in favor of our universe not being simulated.
Prada in space:Famed Italian fashion house will help design NASA's spacesuits for mission to the moon
"My questions was, where is that information going when the bit is at equilibrium and is stored information?"
"Energy can't exist on its own, it needs to be in some form."
That law essentially dictates that any naturally occurring process will result in a loss of energy and increase in a system's measure of disorder, or entropy (think of an ice cube that gradually melts when placed in a cup of water at room temperature.)
In short, it's a process he said could support the idea that we may be living in a Matrix-style artificial reality akin to a computer simulation, where we and anything else we perceive is nothing more than a virtual facsimile.
"It underpins the concept through empirical evidence, but it doesn't mean necessarily that is totally the consensus that is happening; it is one possibility."
Reach him at elagatta@gannett.com
The movie "Snakes on a Plane" dramatized perhaps the worst things to encounter on a flight, but imagine being stuck on a real-world plane with a swarm of mosquitos.
It happened to a local flight in Mexico, which was delayed for more than two hours from its scheduled departure time of 4:30 p.m., due to a mosquito infestation, local media reported.
Cabin crew and ground staff tried to get the situation under control by spraying mosquito and insect repellent in the cabins.
It eventually took off at 6:59 p.m., according to the flight's history.
Stop clipping your toenails:These are the 'most offensive' airplane behaviors
Don't bring bedbugs back home:How to avoid the bloodsuckers while traveling
Video footage from the incident, recorded by a passenger, shows the airplane's cabin filled with fumes as flight attendants spray insect repellent to counteract the swarm of mosquitoes buzzing around the cabin.
The flight appeared to be ready for takeoff, with all passengers seated.
Some of them could be heard screaming in the video, while others swatted the insects away.
As the airlines staff sprayed the mosquito repellent, the insects became more agitated reported the local media outlet El Sol de León.
This is not the first time that a swarm of mosquitos attacked a flight taking off from the Guadalajara International Airport.
A similar incident took place in 2019.
El Sol de León said that the area in which the airport is located is close to contaminated water bodies and vegetation, both of which are ideal breeding grounds for mosquitoes.
Favorable weather conditions also contribute to increasing mosquito populations.
Airport authorities have recognized this as a problem, reported El Sol de León, and have taken steps such as draining water, pruning grass and spraying insecticides to curb the problem.
'It's a party plane':Young man and woman caught having sex on flight to Ibiza
Pray or move?40% of surveyed Americans experience 'unexplained' phenomena in homes
Reach her at sshafiq@gannett.com and follow her on X, the platform formerly known as Twitter @saman_shafiq7.
Gallegos said around seven members of the community were already onboard because they saw the movie together and were in on the plan from the beginning.
The house concepts include:
Photos:Barbie's Malibu dream house is back on Airbnb, but this time Ken is hosting for free
We have historically gone pretty big for Halloween.
Kenzie, worked with the residents of Daybreak, as the creative director of the setup, sourcing decorations and props for them including a life-size horse, signs for the houses and other custom-built items.
In fact, there is a gravestone dedicated to Ruth Handler, the founder of Mattel, the company that produces Barbie dolls.
"Some people were very much into Halloween, and they didn't want to lose sight of it, so they went with themes like haunted Barbie and graveyard Barbie," Kenzie said.
Daybreak is a housing community in South Jordan, with one part of it situated on an island and surrounded by a moat.
"I mean, we knew that people in Daybreak would care because they love Halloween," said Gallegos.
She said that she posted a few videos on TikTok on the suggestion of her friends, and they soon went viral, with people sending in requests to come and see the setup.
At least two of the videos hit more than 2 million views on TikTok.
"I feel like it's a landmark or something," said Gallegos.
Gallegos said that the local police force was also taken aback by the number of people and traffic jams.
However, Gallegos and her neighbors do not mind the attention or influx of people.
"It honestly makes me so happy because there's a lot of really sad stuff in the world right now," Gallegos shared.
A new record:Costumes, candy, decor fuel $12.2 billion Halloween spending splurge in US
'Come on Barbie, let's go party':Will Ferrell is surprise DJ at USC frat party during parents weekend
Reach her at sshafiq@gannett.com and follow her on X, the platform formerly known as Twitter @saman_shafiq7.
A fishing trip became a life-changing event for Phil Garner when he came across an orphaned duck.
Phil was at a fishing pond with his son when a bedraggled duckling latched onto them.
With no sign of the duck’s family, Garner was encouraged by the pond owner to take the bird home as otherwise it would most likely have died.
After 18 months of living with them, Freda disappeared.
But a few months later, she returned with a big surprise for her owners.
Watch the video below to see what Freda brought back when she returned to her home
Humankind is your go-to spot for good news!
Click here to submit your uplifting, cute, or inspiring video moments for us to feature.
Also, click here to subscribe to our newsletter, bringing our top stories of the week straight to your inbox.
A birthday party is a treat many kids can take for granted.
With a limited income and four children to provide for, Ángel's mom said she'd never had the money to throw him a party.
Together with Ángel's classmates, they hatched a plan to surprise him with a birthday party at school.
His heartfelt reaction was priceless!
Watch the video below to see a young boy shed tears of joy at his first-ever birthday party.
Humankind is your go-to spot for good news!
Click here to submit your uplifting, cute, or inspiring video moments for us to feature.
Also, click here to subscribe to our newsletter, bringing our top stories of the week straight to your inbox.
The former president said Israel now has to strengthen itself as it fights Hamas and other militant groups, including perhaps Iran.
Supporters of Israel said on social media said that the Soleimani operation was aided by Israeli intelligence, while others criticized Trump for criticizing Israel's government in the midst of a crisis.
Ron DeSantis, who is running against Trump for the Republican nomination, zeroed in on Trump's description of Hezbollah leaders as "very smart."
Noting that at least 1,200 Israelis and 22 Americans have been killed in recent days, DeSantis said on the X website that "it is absurd that anyone, much less someone running for President, would choose now to attack our friend and ally, Israel, much less praise Hezbollah terrorists as 'very smart.'
"You know, Hezbollah is very smart - they're all very smart," Trump said at one point.
Trump also criticized Netanyahu in an interview on Fox News Radio, saying Israel was ill-prepared for the Hamas attack earlier this month.
Trump even linked the Israel attack to his false claims of a "rigged" U.S. election in 2020, and said the attack on Israel would not have happened if he was president.
Several Republicans noted that, after the 2020 election, Trump attacked Netanyahu for hailing Biden as the president-elect.
Democrats denounced Trump’s comments.
White House spokesman Andrew Bates said that while “we don’t comment” on the 2024 races, “statements like this are dangerous and unhinged.”
Especially now as Israel is fighting back against one of the worst acts of mass murder in the country’s history.
Trump's comments came during a rambling 100-minute speech in which he didn't say anything about his involvement in the snagged House Speaker's race, but instead predicted he would succeed in next year's presidential election.
"Everyone knows what the result is going to be," the former president told supporters gathered in West Palm Beach, Fla.
Last week, Trump injected himself into the speaker's race by endorsing Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio.
He also said he would travel to Washington, D.C., to meet with House Republicans about replacing ousted House Speaker Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif.
Trump did not discuss any of this during his campaign speech.
He mentioned Jordan's name only in connection with his work in Congress.
He also praised Rep. Matt Gaetz, R-Fla., the most outspoken member of the eight House Republicans who triggered McCarthy's removal as speaker.
For the most part, Trump focused on his own 2024 presidential campaign before a group called Club 47 USA.
If Trump wins next year, he would be the 47th president, only the second to serve non-consecutive terms.
The standard campaign speech featured all-out attacks on President Joe Biden, with an emphasis to the ongoing Israel-Hamas war.
He also hit Biden over the economy, his son Hunter Biden, and border security.
Trump, as is custom, also bragged about poll numbers that show him way ahead of his Republican rivals for the 2024 presidential nomination.
He mocked his opponents for debating without him, and said Republican voters are not paying attention to them.
"Everyone knows what the result is going to be," Trump said.
He also complained about his legal issues.
He faces four criminal trials and three civil lawsuits The criminal cases include hush money, the handling of classified information, and efforts to overturn his 2020 election loss to Biden.
On the Week 6 schedule, 40% of the games tilt heavily toward the favorite before the first kickoff of the week tonight between the Denver Broncos and Kansas City Chiefs.
The Chiefs-Broncos match up is emblematic of much of the week ahead.
The Chiefs are favored by 10.5 points over the one-win Broncos.
There haven't been this many lopsided games from Vegas's vantage point since the last week of the 2022-23 season when most teams' postseason fates had been set.
Five of touchdown-or-more favorites are among the top six of USA TODAY's Week 6 power rankings where all stand least a dozen rungs above their opponents.
Since last season, most weeks included four games with lopsided odds.
The favored team in those games have covered the oddsmakers point spread about half the time, 47% to exact, based on the final spreads collected by Pro Football Reference.
Assuming Thursday night's Prime Video game at 8:15 p.m.
ET goes as expected, gamblers might be better off taking the over on the number of times Taylor Swift is mentioned.
A touchdown and at least a field goal separate the teams in three match ups this week.
ET time slot.
New York Giants at 5.
Buffalo Bills: The 1-4 Giants are giving up more than 30 points a game while scoring just over 12.
That's practically a mirror image of the 3-2 Bills who have scored 79 more points than their opponents.
The Bills are also looking to bounce back from an upset loss to the Jacksonville Jaguars in London.
Carolina Panthers at 2.
Miami Dolphins: The Panthers have been outscored by 10 or more points in all but one of their games this season.
Both 4:25 p.m.
ET games of the week on FOX also have one-touchdown spreads, while the struggling New England Patriots travel to Las Vegas to play the 2-3 Raiders who defeated the Green Bay Packers on Monday night.
Philadelphia Eagles vs. 21.
New York Jets: This isn't the match up NFL schedule makers expected before Aaron Rodgers went down with Achilles tendon tear in Week 1.
Even with Rodgers, this would have been a major test against the undefeated Eagles who haven't lost to the Jets in their 12 previous meetings.
San Francisco 49ers vs. 13.
Cleveland Browns: The 49ers, the NFL's other undefeated team, have outscored their opponents by about 20 points per game.
Cleveland comes off their bye week at .500, but will two weeks of preparation even be enough to stop this 49ers team's roll?
1 – and scored the second most points only to Miami, of course.
On the other end of the spectrum this weekend, a trio of 1 p.m. games boast first-place implications as the NFL completes the first third of the season.
Indianapolis Colts vs. 7.
Jacksonville Jaguars: There's nothing like a trip to London to turn your season around – at least for the Jaguars.
This Sunday they're in a battle for first place in the AFC South with the Colts who lost rookie quarterback Anthony Richardson to a shoulder injury.
Detroit Lions vs. 14 Tampa Bay Buccaneers: Both teams could solidify their holds on first place in their respective conferences with wins.
Tampa Bay is another team returning from their bye week to face a top five team in USA TODAY's power rankings.
Seattle Seahawks vs. 23.
Cincinnati Bengals: One-loss Seattle also comes back from its bye and finds itself as an underdog to the resurgent (at least for a week) Bengals.
A win could get Cincinnati fully back into the mix within the AFC North.
The searchable list below shows each upcoming scheduled and unscheduled matchup.
For example, if you just want to see the Kansas City Chiefs' remaining schedule, just type "Chiefs" into the search bar.
Or, if you'd like to see the Week 9 games, just type WK 9.
Click on a logo below to see the changes in a single team's power ranking this season.
Click on additional logos to see how they compare.
Contributing: Nate Davis
People on Social Security will receive a much smaller bump of 3.2% in their benefits checks next year, as the cost-of-living adjustment, or COLA, after government data on Thursday showed inflation steadied in September from the prior month.
Annual inflation was 3.7% in September, matching August’s increase but off a 40-year high of 9.1% in June 2022.
Without the volatile food and energy sectors, the so-called “core” inflation rate fell to 4.1% from August’s 4.3%.
Although inflation remains about double the Federal Reserve’s 2% target, it remains mostly lower, which means Social Security recipients will see a lower COLA.
The 3.2% increase in 2024 is about one-third of the four-decade-high 8.7% COLA in 2023.
And while the hike in benefits remains higher than the 2.6% average over the past 20 years, older adults are pessimistic about their finances and the growing possibility of Social Security benefit cuts, according to the latest retirement survey of 2,258 people by The Senior Citizens League, a nonprofit seniors group.
Protect your assets: Best high-yield savings accounts of 2023
“Worry that retirement income won’t be enough to cover the cost of essentials in the coming months is a top concern of 56% of survey respondents,” said Mary Johnson, Social Security and Medicare policy analyst at The Senior Citizens League, in a release.
“Social Security benefit cuts are an even bigger concern.”
Various reasons the COLA is falling short include:
◾ Inflation: 68% of older adults say their household expenses remain at least 10% higher than one year ago, although the overall inflation rate has slowed, according to the League’s survey.
They said this situation has persisted over the last year.
◾ Benefit cuts: Nearly 6 out of 10 respondents rank this as their top worry.
“Significant numbers of lower-income older households have lost access to some safety net programs over the past 12 months,” Johnson said.
Some faced a double whammy.
◾ Taxes: Because Social Security recipients received the highest COLA in 40 years in 2023, Johnson expects more beneficiaries to owe federal income taxes on their Social Security benefits for the first time in the upcoming 2024 tax season.
Up to 85% of Social Security benefits can be counted as taxable income when income exceeds certain thresholds.
Unlike other parts of the federal income tax code, the income thresholds that subject Social Security benefits to taxation have never been adjusted for inflation.
CPI - when will rents go down?CPI report live updates: Inflation stays high as used car prices fall, rent climbs again
A few states want some too:These states want a cut of your Social Security check.
Do you live in one of them?
Congress could pass legislation to allow income tax thresholds for taxing Social Security to be adjusted annually for inflation, the same way the IRS adjusts tax brackets.
Here’s an example of what that might mean for someone:
◾ Current law says if an individual’s income is between $25,000 and $34,000, you may have to pay income tax on up to 50% of benefits, and if it’s more than $34,000, up to 85% of benefits may be taxable.
◾ If those thresholds were adjusted for inflation to 2023 dollars, then the individual filing status of $25,000 would be about $74,614, and $34,000 would be about $101,475, Johnson said.
Congress also could change how the COLA is calculated to better reflect how seniors spend their money.
“If that was the law today, the COLA in 2024 would be higher – about 4.2%,” Johnson estimates, using the government’s consumer price index for the elderly.
Social Security Administration bases its COLA each year on average annual increases in the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers from July through September.
The index for urban wage earners largely reflects the broad index that the Labor Department releases each month but differs slightly.
Last month, while the index remained at 3.7%, the index for urban wage earners was 3.6%.
The Seniors Citizens League uses the most recent inflation data to keep a running projection of what COLA might be next year.
September is particularly important because it makes up the final month SSA officially uses to calculate 2024’s COLA.
About 70 million Americans receive benefits from programs administered by SSA, with retired workers and their dependents accounting for 76.9% of benefits paid in 2022.
Nearly 9 out of 10 people aged 65 and older received a Social Security benefit as of Dec. 31.
Among them, 12% of men and 15% of women rely on Social Security for 90% or more of their income.
In August, the average monthly check for Social Security beneficiaries was $1,705.79, according to SSA.
A 3.2% COLA would mean about an extra $54.58 each month.
The new COLA will be effective starting in January.
You can reach her atmjlee@usatoday.com and subscribe to our free Daily Money newsletter for personal finance tips and business news every Monday.
A person was arrested late Thursday morning after he exchanged gunfire with police officers in a small town in Minnesota.
Parties on both sides sustaining injuries, authorities said.
It's unclear if the person accused of firing at police was the intended recipient of the warrant.
The Benton County Sheriff Troy Heck didn't immediately respond to USA TODAY's request for comment.
"The suspect was injured in the incident and was transported for treatment," according to the post.
"The cause and extent of his injuries are unknown at this time."
He said none of the injuries appeared to be life-threatening.
Video from the scene showed law enforcement converging on a rural area with homes surrounded by farm fields.
The state Bureau of Criminal Apprehension confirmed to the AP it was responding to the scene.
Contributing: Associated Press.
Cardi B crying while eating a painfully spicy chicken wing.
Jack Harlow dodging a pointed question about his type while sipping a juice box.
Mark Cuban attempting a Pittsburgh accent.
Though these shows' setups vary, their strategy seems the same: Place a celebrity in an extremely awkward situation and capture as many candid moments as possible.
Cringeworthy clips from these shows regularly go viral on TikTok and Instagram, begging the question: What is it about celebrities and excruciating awkwardness that makes us feel like we can't look away?
"There's a reason we are obsessed with this, and much of it has to do with the fact that, whether we mean to or not, we put celebrities on a pedestal," says Henna Pryor, a workplace performance expert and author of "Good Awkward: How to Embrace the Embarrassing and Celebrate the Cringe to Become The Bravest You."
Pryor defines awkwardness as the emotion experienced when the person we believe we are isn't the person who is being perceived.
"For a moment in time, that external reality doesn't match the identity we painted for them, and we find that fascinating," she says.
By watching other people's social blunders, he says, we learn what not to do.
"It's a great opportunity for us to learn about social life and social expectations and social behavior without having to risk any of our social capital," he says.
"It's a real advantage to be able to learn vicariously from watching other people's awkward moments."
People love seeing celebrities in uncomfortable situations in particular, he says, because of a phenomenon called downward social comparison.
"Hot Ones," which shows celebrities struggling to eat chicken wings dipped in extraordinarily spicy hot sauce, capitalizes on this to great effect, he says.
"At that moment, we're actually doing better than the celebrity is," he says.
By showing their awkward side, celebrities give the impression of vulnerability, which endears them to fans even more.
As a result, a sweaty interview over hot wings may do more to bolster a celebrity's public profile than a traditional news interview.
Who hasn't been stuck in an awkward conversation that has no graceful way out?"
Awkward interviews are also more prone to go viral, because they fit into the unfiltered aesthetic that's currently popular on social media.
"I think it's great, whether it's in these shows or podcasts, to create these more genuine and real moments."
As schools and parents contend with uncomfortable and increasingly unavoidable truths about persistent learning loss, new data out Thursday points to a key source of the problem: Scores of students have in recent years missed so much school that catching up seems nearly impossible.
Chronic absence typically refers to missing at least 10% of the school year, and the analysis considers a school’s levels to be high or extreme if at least a fifth of its students are chronically absent.
Overall, roughly 30% of students were chronically absent during the 2021-22 year.
It was an era still reeling from the devastation of COVID-19 – quarantines were frequent, health needs were vast and hardship was widespread.
But as in-depth reporting by USA TODAY revealed earlier this year, attendance challenges persisted into the subsequent school year – the one that was, at long last, supposed to feel normal.
A separate recent analysis by Attendance Works of 11 states’ data found only a slight decline in chronic absence from 2021-22 to 2022-23.
Last school year, 28% of those state’s students were chronically absent, down from 30% the year prior.
“An unprecedented wave of chronic absenteeism has spread across the country,” the analysis notes.
“Not only is teaching and learning more challenging when large numbers of students are frequently missing class, such elevated levels of chronic absence can easily overwhelm a school’s capacity to respond.”
Kids who are chronically absent have lower odds of graduating and, especially when they miss school in the early grades, of learning how to read.
And while chronic absence generally is more common at the high school level, the latest report shows the increases were especially pronounced at elementary schools.
The rate jumped from 7% in 2017-18 to 38% in 2021-22.
In fact, the number of elementary schools with extreme levels of chronic absence – more than 30% of kids missing 10% of the year – far exceeded that of high schools.
“She is not able to breathe on her own,” Kelley continued.
Out of respect for her and her privacy, I will not disclose all details.
She is getting incredible medical care!
Kelley has not replied to repeated messages from USA TODAY Sports seeking comment.
They divorced in 2018.
She spoke for 20 minutes to an audience of about 500, Hartman said.
Most of her speech centered on her experiences at the 1984 Olympics, which were held in Los Angeles.
She said the amount of money that will come from the relief fund will be kept confidential.
We all hold her in our hearts during this challenging time and are hopeful for her to make a full recovery.
Our thoughts and best wishes are with her and her family.
They wrapped their arms around each other, and Roberts whispered in his ear, congratulating him on his season.
They stood by the indoor batting cage, just the two of them, and talked privately, spending exactly five minutes trying to make sense out what just transpired, trying to wrap their minds around the fact they were just swept out of the playoffs by the Arizona Diamondbacks.
But there were no answers.
I don’t know, there’s no real cause for what happened.
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
This is a team that won 100 games, cruised to the NL West title by 16 games over the Diamondbacks, and then suddenly forget how to hit, how to pitch and how to win.
The Diamondbacks completed their sweep with a 4-2 victory over the Dodgers in front of a sellout crowd of 48,175 at Chase Field, sending Arizona to the NLCS for the first time since 2007.
But the three-game sweep doesn’t come close to adequately describing just how lopsided this series was from first pitch to last.
The Dodgers never led a single inning.
They trailed in 25 of the 27 innings.
They were outscored by a score of 19-6.
The Dodgers were down 6-0 in the first inning of Game 1.
They were down 3-0 in the first inning of Game 2.
And they were down 4-0 in the third inning of Game 3 with the Diamondbacks setting a postseason record by hitting four homers in the inning.
"It was almost unbelievable, right?"
"We were embarrassed by the way the whole series went," Dodgers infielder/outfielder Enrique Hernandez said.
No team is going to win a series when its starters last a total of 4 ⅔ innings.
It was the fewest innings by a starting rotation in the first three games of a postseason in history.
The Diamondbacks hit nine home runs in the series, including 1,626 feet worth of homers in the fourth inning alone, while the Dodgers hit just one.
The Dodgers, who scored more than 900 runs for the first time since the franchise was in Brooklyn, never scored more than two runs in any game.
"A horrible way to end it, personally."
"It’s hard to find words right now," Freeman said.
Me and a lot of us didn’t play the way we wanted to.
We didn’t do it for three days.
They pitched the ball really great.
Didn’t score very many runs.
I can’t speak for all of us, but I know for sure I did absolutely nothing to help us win.
This is a team that has won 211 regular season games the past two years, but have now gone 1-6 in the postseason.
They finished 22 games ahead of the San Diego Padres a year ago, but lost in four games in the Division Series.
They finished 16 games ahead of the Diamondbacks this year, and were brutally swept.
This is the first time the Dodgers have been swept in a postseason series since 2006, which was 118 postseason games ago.
They have also lost six consecutive postseason games for the first time since 1995-1996 when they were swept in back-to-back years in the division series.
The Dodgers did not.
They outplayed us in every facet of the game.
But the last couple of postseasons, it just hasn’t gone well for us.
It’s ironic that these are teams that we’re familiar with.
So why when you get in a series, it gets flipped on its head?
No one did.
The Dodgers, despite winning at least 100 games in four consecutive full seasons, need to make changes to assure they don’t have another short October.
Not everyone is coming back in 2024.
All the Dodgers know for sure is that they’re sick of losing to teams they dominate during the regular season, only to lose when the stakes are the highest.
"I don’t think there’s a magic answer," Dodgers outfielder Chris Taylor said.
It’s as simple as that.
When you get to this late in the season, usually the hot team wins.
"And we were probably playing our worst baseball we’ve played all year."
It’s an easy and lazy excuse to blame it on the five-day layoff, the reward for winning the NL West with the second-best record in the league, and there wasn’t a single Dodger player who used it for an excuse.
The AL East champion Baltimore Orioles were bounced in three games, too, after their layoff.
Atlanta, the NL East champion with the league’s best record, is on the brink of elimination.
But it sure didn’t hurt the Houston Astros, who took down the Minnesota Twins in four games.
"I hate to say that the break got us swept," Hernandez said.
The Diamondbacks, of course, had something to do with the Dodgers’ failures.
They privately believed that when the Dodgers clobbered them in August, outscoring them 23-5 in a three-game sweep at Dodger Stadium, the Dodgers were picking up their pitches.
This time, the Diamondbacks changed their routine, and made sure they weren’t tipping their pitches.
You got to change locations.
You got to change speeds.
You got to start on the chalk lines, you’re (working) your way in, and just get a feeling for what they’re doing per at-bat.
And you just hope they make a swing mistake or a bad decision and get themselves out.
"It was a well-executed plan, and maybe we just caught them at the right time."
After upsetting the Milwaukee Brewers in the wild-card round and the Dodgers in the Division Series, the D-backs know they’ll be heavy underdogs whether they play the Philadelphia Phillies or Atlanta.
They finally slayed the dragon, and, man, did it ever feel good.
"But that’s our pool."
Yep, after the Dodgers jumped into the D-backs pool and celebrated their division title in 2013, the D-backs finally got sweet revenge a decade later, with their whole team taking a late-night swim.
POOL PARTY:D-backs celebrate NLDS sweep over Dodgers with a splash!
So, go ahead, feel free to count the D-backs out in the NLCS like everyone else.
They dare you.
So we got some momentum in our favor.
We recognize that mistakes may happen – or that new information can emerge after a story is published – and we pledge to address all concerns quickly, fairly and transparently.
If a correction or clarification is warranted, we will highlight that in the original file and explain to readers why the change was made.
Any correction or clarification would also be published on our corrections log.
To report corrections & clarifications, contact:
Please indicate whether you're responding to content online or in the newspaper.
The following corrections & clarifications have been published on stories produced by USA TODAY's newsroom:
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated who is affected by this rule.
The story has been updated to reflect the proposed rule affects satellite and cable providers.
Money: A previous version of this story misstated the number of people 62 and older who have student debt loans.
Sports: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed the locations for Big Ten games.
"5 Things" podcast: On the Oct. 5 show in our segment about school psychologists, we misstated the ratio of counselors to students at a school in Hershey, Pennsylvania.
At 1 to 1000, it is half of the recommended ratio.
Money: An earlier version of this story mischaracterized the competitiveness of Capital One's savings-account interest rates.
The reference has been removed.
Jarrett Payton covers the Chicago Bears.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the amount of Fox Corp.'s settlement with Dominion Voting Systems in a defamation lawsuit.
Money: The UAW strike affects 38 locations across 20 states.
An earlier alert undercounted the number of states affected.
See the list.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly identified an organization.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified the Higher Education Advisory Group.
Sports: A headline on the story incorrectly described Christian Coleman's winning time in the men's 100 meters.
He won with a time of 9.83 seconds, tied for the world's fastest time this season.
News: This article was updated to remove incorrect details about math courses and departments at the University of California, Santa Cruz.
News: A previous version of this video misstated the Longwood Garden's distance from the prison.
His personal security guard ran onto the field to restrain the person.
A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the name of the home team.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified Chester County Prison.
It's the University of Pennsylvania.
News: A previous version of this video misstated how many co-defendants had been booked.
Money: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed among states with no Social Security tax Minnesota, which expanded in May 2023 a state tax exemption for benefits without eliminating the tax.
News: An earlier version of this story contained inaccurate or incomplete facts about the history of language.
Social media: A previous version of this post graphic contained a name misspelling of Scooter Braun.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the extent of the standing water around Dodger Stadium.
Sports: The USA TODAY Sports’ MLB power rankings in the Aug. 15 edition misstated the leader of the American League Central Division.
The Minnesota Twins lead the division.
News: A previous version of this video misidentified USA TODAY’s National Political correspondent, David Jackson.
Entertainment: The location of the bookstore in an earlier version of this story was incorrect.
Wild Geese Bookshop is located in Franklin, Indiana.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the next opponent for the U.S. women should they advance from their Round of 16 game vs. Sweden.
The Americans would then play the winner of Japan vs. Norway in the quarterfinals.
Money: Due to a typo, an earlier version of this story misstated total U.S. sales of the Kia Stinger.
The automaker has sold more than 65,000 Stinger sedans in the U.S. since the model's launch.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees between Madrid, Spain, and a mountainous area in Spain.
It also misstated a temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees in reference to average temperatures in Tunisia.
News: An earlier version incorrectly identified Victoria McQueen's title at her high school.
She is student body president.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified the Norwegian Gem.
It is a Jewel-class cruise ship.
News: A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the origins of Blue Moon.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the Iowa State teams being investigated by the Iowa Racing and Gaming Commission.
The school does not have a baseball program.
News: This article has been updated to include additional nonpartisan sources of data and research.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated 10-year-old J'Adore's diagnosis date.
News: In a 1A story on July 5 about primary care doctors, the relationship between physicians and health professionals such as nurse practitioners and physician assistants was unclear.
Paraprofessionals generally work under the supervision of a licensed physician.
Entertainment: A photo included in an earlier version of this report was misidentified as The Beatles.
The new record featuring John Lennon’s vocals will be a song.
Graphics: A previous version of this story misstated the number of competing teams in the Tour de France.
News: This story has been updated to clarify how many people died on the Titanic.
Money: This story has been updated to clarify details about local liquor laws.
News: A June 19 article on Page 2A misstated the year the 13th Amendment was passed.
Life: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated when the rescue was made.
Travel: A previous version of this story incorrectly described the Airbus A321 with new livery.
The aircraft is part of JetBlue’s existing fleet.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the number of states under red flag warnings.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly named ISR courses.
The courses are called Infant Swimming Resource courses.
News: This story has been updated to correct how far away the body was found from where the missing doctor was last seen.
News: An earlier version of this story did not make clear which versions of the AP African American Studies course framework excluded the word "queer."
It has been updated to clarify that versions in May 2022 and February 2023 did not include the word.
Travel: An earlier version of the story incorrectly listed how police resolved the case.
News: A previous version of this article incorrectly referred to the tornado data provided by the Storm Prediction Center of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Sports: A story on the documentary movie “It Ain’t Over” in the May 12 edition misstated the number of league MVP titles won by Yogi Berra.
The Yankees legend won three.
The information has been updated.
Those portions have been removed.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the Australian Open women's singles champion.
News: In some editions, the March 30 1A story about attackers targeting schools misstated the partners in the mass killing database.
They are USA TODAY, The Associated Press and Northeastern University.
News: This story originally included an inaccurate detail related to one woman's application for a domestic violence restraining order.
The information on Alison Kessler has been updated.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the comparative price between electric vehicles and gas-powered vehicles.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the year of Paul Walker's death.
News: A previous version of this article misstated Terry Wilson's employment status.
He remains a Fresno State employee but was granted leave from the position to serve as a staff-wide union representative.
News: An earlier version of this podcast incorrectly stated that USA TODAY ran the Dilbert comic strip.
It was the USA TODAY Network, not USA TODAY.
News: USA TODAY did not publish the Dilbert comic strip.
A previous version of this article was incorrect.
Facebook: A previous version of this post contained photos from other events earlier this month in Florida.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated salary figures of bartenders and pharmacists.
News: A story on Page 1A Feb. 16 about corporate diversity gave the incorrect date of Southern Co.’s annual meeting.
It takes place later this year.
News: A previous version of this graphic misstated the title of a movie.
News: A previous version of this article misstated the number of Maryland’s Eastern Shore counties.
Social media: An earlier version of this video had an incorrect description.
News: An earlier version misstated the requirements in the Biden administration’s proposed Title IX rule for determining the outcome of sexual assault cases.
The proposed regulation would require schools to use the “preponderance of evidence” standard most of the time.
News: An earlier version of this video misstated the status of a House Ethics Committee investigation.
Social media: A previous post misidentified the award Beyoncé won.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the home state of Sen. Chris Coons.
He is from Delaware.
Social media: A previous version of this post included an incorrect year of death.
News: An earlier version misstated the name of Hillsdale College's spokesperson, Emily Stack Davis.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated the new price of the Tesla Model Y.
It is $52,990.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this gallery included a photo incorrectly identifying Paige Butcher.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified who created Seven Principles of Leave No Trace.
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2016
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2017
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2018
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2019
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2020
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2021
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2022
The USA TODAY Opinion section publishes analysis, argument and essays on a wide variety of subjects.
We're looking for timeliness (pegged to news), persuasion pitched to the other side, new information, novel arguments, revelatory insights, passion without partisanship, first-person experience, original reporting that reveals fresh angles and makes news, expert knowledge, and/or a topic that will drive conversation on social media and in the real world.
We accept only pieces that are submitted exclusively to USA TODAY.
We do not accept material that has been published on blogs, social media or anywhere else.
Columns typically run 550 to 750 words.
They should be pasted directly into an email and sent to theforum@usatoday.com.
Pieces should include links (URLs, not headlines or footnotes) to back up quotes and factual material.
People featured in columns must be identified by their real, full names.
We do not publish open letters, class projects or material that has been submitted to multiple outlets.
Rebuttals to editorials and columns published in USA TODAY should be submitted as letters to the editor, not as full-length op-eds.
Due to the volume of submissions, we can’t respond to all columns sent to us.
If our Opinion team is interested in yours, you will hear from us within three business days.
Submissions may be edited for accuracy, clarity, style, standards and length.
Please include with your submission a short biography, two sentences at most, to run at the end of your column, as well as a current photograph, to which you own publishing rights.
If you or a business, trade group or other institution with which you are associated stands to gain financially or in any other way from your column, you should disclose that information in detail.
In most cases, it should also be included in the body of the piece or in the author's biographical information.
Columns are accepted for online publication; print publication is not guaranteed.
All columns published by USA TODAY are available for use online and in print by the more than 250 properties in the USA TODAY Network.
They include Austin; Bergen County, New Jersey; Burlington, Vermont; Cincinnati; Columbus, Ohio; Des Moines; Detroit; El Paso, Texas; Indianapolis; Louisville, Kentucky; Memphis, Tennessee; Milwaukee; Nashville, Tennessee; Phoenix, Reno, Nevada; Palm Beach, Florida; and Wilmington, Delaware.
Authors may post their columns elsewhere 48 hours after they are published at USA TODAY.
By submitting a column to USA TODAY and agreeing to its publication, authors are granting exclusive rights to the piece to the USA TODAY Network for 48 hours and non-exclusive rights thereafter.
To get a sense of our range, preferences and requirements, check out our op-ed section, follow us on Twitter and Facebook, or sign up for our daily Opinion newsletter.
If you're interested in joining conversations about topics in USA TODAY, email letters@usatoday.com, comment on Facebook or use #tellusatoday on Twitter.
Letters are edited for accuracy, clarity and length and to conform to our editorial style and standards.
Submissions of 200 words or fewer have the best chance of being published.
Letters must include a name, address and phone number.
Corrections to published letters or columns follow USA TODAY guidelines.
The forums are scheduled to take place Oct. 10-15.
Ambassador and South Carolina Gov.
Nikki Haley met with voters on Thursday night.
You can watch video of the town hall above this story.
Former Arkansas Gov.
Asa Hutchinson kicked off with the first town hall event Tuesday and you can watch the replay here.
Voters who attend will have a chance to directly ask candidates the questions on their mind and receive in-person responses.
All times are Eastern.
The forums are free and open to the public on a first-come, first-serve basis.
At the start of the forums, candidates make their brief opening remarks before proceeding to answer questions from the audience and engage in a meaningful dialogue about various issues.
Former Arkansas governor and Republican presidential candidate Asa Hutchinson positioned himself as an anti-Trump, traditional Republican during his USA Today New Hampshire Town Hall Tuesday.
Hiding out in one of the rows of abandoned houses and small apartment blocks.
After regaining territorial control, elite Israeli police and military units are actively searching for remaining gunmen, whenever and wherever they find them, a little less than a week after Hamas stormed this town of 30,000 people on the edge of the Gaza Strip.
Over 1,000 Hamas fighters infiltrated 22 towns and army bases in a multi-front attack that caught Israel's military off guard.
For Israel, this represents the biggest intelligence failure in decades − a blow to a country known for having robust security that is the envy of the world.
Thousands of Israelis and Palestinians have been killed, and thousands more on both sides injured.
Over 100 were kidnapped, including more than a dozen Americans.
Such a dramatic and unprecedented attack set off a panic across the world's Jewish communities from the U.S. and Mexico to France and beyond along with Israelis scrambling to track down their loved ones.
The attacks are being referred to as Israel's 9/11.
On Friday, the Israeli government announced it was evacuating the town.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has targeted Hamas, saying, "every Hamas member is a dead man."
As he tries to regain complete territorial control of a country roughly the size of New Jersey, Netanyahu has mounted a large-scale air strike in Gaza that killed more than 1,350 people and put tanks along the border.
Now, patrol cars are zooming the militarized streets of southern Israel.
The member of the police unit, a sniper, asked for his name to be withheld because of the sensitive nature of his work and concern over potential reprisals from Hamas against him or his family.
At least 27 police officers like him were killed in the area.
As for civilians, police still won't say.
The sniper spent Tuesday night on a roof of an Israeli military base that was briefly captured by Hamas on the first day of the siege.
The base sits off of a main road that looks over and across to the nearby Gaza barrier.
He said his unit was authorized to kill anyone who tried to cross this road without permission.
"We are waiting for new waves of Hamas to come," he said.
For the actual cases of Hamas infiltrators identified, "it's a hunt."
His forces, side by side with the military, deploy helicopters, armored vehicles and other specialized equipment to catch or kill them.
Hamas, he said, was still managing to cross the Gaza border in "ones and twos" but so far, for the last several days, they have not been able to attack any civilians.
About two dozen Hamas members occupied the station, around which they had set up booby traps preventing police from storming it.
Cohen, a senior border police commander, sported a shiner on Wednesday in the halls of the center.
The assault fell in the middle of a Jewish holiday.
With the army overwhelmed along the border, the defense of the town fell to the police for the first hours.
Eventually, an elite counter-terrorism unit with the Israel Defense Forces came with reinforcements.
The makeshift police station at the center of town was swarming this week with hundreds of rescue workers, police, army and special forces.
They filtered in and out on different missions.
Donations − meals, soap and toothpaste, cases upon cases of water − sat on an outdoor concrete square that had a basketball court on it and was covered from the sun.
Israel's President Isaac Herzog paid a brief visit and urged the international community to demand the release of hostages taken by Hamas.
Throughout the hour, air raid sirens would go off, sending several dozen people who were loitering outside smoking cigarettes, drinking coffee and making small talk scrambling for cover inside.
This was followed by loud thuds and bangs.
On Sunday, the center received a direct hit from one of the barrage of missiles that Hamas is sending over the border each day.
But the damage was not significant.
And no one was hurt.
The patrol unit that the sniper is part of is working 12-hour shifts to investigate every serious report that comes in about Hamas militants: sightings, strange noises, rumors.
There's a lot of time sitting around, eating snacks, some good-humored roasting.
At one point, the sniper was given a shoulder massage by another member of his unit.
"This work is not too scary if you don't think about it too much," confided another officer.
Like the sniper, none of the other officers can be identified for security reasons.
A lot of time sitting around − until there isn't.
A crackly message came through on the radio.
Up front, in the passenger's seat, the unit's commander wedged his automatic weapon, ready to fire, between the vehicle's mirror and its windshield frame.
Many of the town's residents have evacuated to other parts of Israel, but many have remained behind.
They've been told to stay indoors.
The location was near a cluster of homes on a cul-de-sac.
Within a few minutes of arriving it became clear there was no sign of a rocket here.
Just a dog barking in a high pitch and a couple of residents trying to communicate and gesture to the unit from behind a head-level wall outside their home about 50 feet away.
Then, another report came.
There may have been shots fired.
"Get down," the unit's commander ordered.
That too was over before it started.
Back in the van, yet another order had arrived, this time to search a house where a rocket definitely had landed just 10 minutes earlier.
"We're going to do a quick check for casualties," said the sniper, shortly before the door was kicked open.
In the sky above, small clusters of shiny smoke trails could be seen.
These could be rockets just launched from Gaza, where the intensity of Israel's bombing campaign has sent up large plumes of dust and ash and led to scenes of apocalyptic destruction.
Or Israeli missiles sent to intercept them.
Inside, the house seemed lived in.
A half-eaten piece of chocolate cake, spoon resting quietly on a plate, sat on the dining table.
There was a jumble of clothes strewn across the sofa.
A musty human odor.
The rocket had fallen straight through what looked like the main bedroom and hallway upstairs, exposing a twisted and gnarly web of wires, plaster, wooden beams, steel mesh.
The stairway, walls, doors, floor and ceiling were covered in a light gray dust.
A part of the missile was lying in the bathroom, near the toilet.
No signs of Hamas.
"It's clean," said the sniper.
“Our conference still has to come together and is not there.”
“Clearly not everybody is there, there are still schisms that need to be resolved.”
Since January, every GOP lawmaker has been given an outsized amount of power over any decision in Congress, including the current speaker's race which has no clear resolution in sight.
The path forward for House Republicans to elect a new speaker is unclear considering GOP lawmakers seemingly can not coalesce behind a single possible leader.
It is already uncertain if Jordan will seek the nomination again but even more uncertain if he can even unite a deeply fractured House GOP conference behind him.
Despite the gridlock, a sense of urgency has befallen House Republicans to crown a new speaker for the lower chamber to take legislative action again with a looming government shutdown and a key U.S. ally in Israel fighting a rapidly growing war against Hamas militants.
But it's safe to say no one knows what happens now.
Former New Jersey Gov.
Chris Christie, a president candidate, called the House Republicans "the gang that can’t shoot straight."
Our country and our party need a House Speaker.
There is no direction.
There is no leadership.
The House has been frozen in place since earlier this month, Rep. Matt Gaetz, R-Fla., introduced a motion to vacate that would remove McCarthy from his position as speaker.
The move came amid growing tensions between McCarthy and several Republican ultra-conservative lawmakers over key fights concerning the debt ceiling and government shutdown.
208 Democrats and eight Republicans voted to remove McCarthy.
Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-N.C., who chairs the House Financial Services Committee, was chosen to be acting House speaker from a succession list that McCarthy had provided in January.
A police officer was shot and killed and another was wounded after the pair confronted people breaking into a car in a parking garage at Philadelphia International Airport.
Interim Police Commissioner John Stanford said in a news conference Thursday night that the officers were arriving for work just after 11 p.m. and parked in the garage when they saw a few people breaking into a car in the garage area.
As the officers approached them, the suspects opened fire.
One officer was shot multiple times in the upper torso and was pronounced dead at Penn Presbyterian Medical Center just after 11:30 p.m., Stanford said.
The other officer was shot in the arm and is in stable condition at Jefferson University Hospital.
The shooting was reported in the Terminal D parking garage, Stanford said.
Stanford said preliminary information shows the suspects fled the scene in a Dodge Durango, but police are still trying to confirm that information.
ATLANTA AIRPORT STABBING:Stabbing attack at Atlanta Airport leaves 3 hospitalized
Shortly after the shooting, a black Dodge Durango dropped off an 18-year-old man at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia with two gunshot wounds, according to the Philadelphia Inquirer, where he was pronounced dead.
Stanford said they had not yet confirmed that the vehicle and man were involved in the shooting of the officers.
Stanford noted that the shooting came on the heels of three officers getting shot and wounded while responding to a call in Northeast Philadelphia.
“A numb, numb moment for us, to again encounter something like this,” Stanford said.
And then this tonight, so you can imagine what we feel.
We can imagine what this department is going through.
Terminal D and the Terminal D/E parking garage were both closed Thursday night due to the investigation, but reopened Friday morning.
Officer shooting in Minnesota:5 officers suffered gunshot wounds; suspect arrested
The United Nations is calling for Israel to rescind an immediate evacuation order it issued for about a million Palestinians living in Gaza, with the U.N. calling the order "horrendous" and warning of a deepening humanitarian crisis.
The Israeli military announced the Gaza evacuation Friday.
It's an unprecedented order for about half the population of the sealed-off territory ahead of an expected ground invasion against the ruling Hamas militant group.
Palestinians have said there is no real escape in Gaza, which has been under a suffocating 16-year blockade imposed by Israel and Egypt.
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East said in a Friday statement.
Hamas, which staged a shocking and brutal attack on Israel nearly a week ago and has fired thousands of rockets since, dismissed the evacuation as a ploy and called on people to stay in their homes.
Alarmed civilians and aid workers, who were already in distress from Israeli airstrikes and a blockade, were sent into chaos.
Israel-Hamas War newsletter:Sign up to get the latest news and analysis from USA TODAY into your inbox.
∎ The number of Palestinians displaced increased by 25% over the past 24 hours, according to an early Friday update from the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
∎ Airstrikes have left cities and refugee camps in ruins.
And Gaza has been experiencing a full electricity blackout amid Israel's siege of the territory, "which has brought essential health, water and sanitation services to the brink of collapse, and exacerbated food insecurity" according to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Israeli Energy Minister Israel Katz has said electricity, water and fuel will not be provided until Israeli hostages are returned.
∎ Public officials and law enforcement agencies across the United States have expressed concern over potential protests on Friday in response to Hamas leadership's call for a global "Day of Rage."
The D.C. region has enhanced its security in the area, including in the U.S. Capitol complex, and other major cities have also been on alert.
The State Department designated Hamas a terrorist group in 1997.
Several other nations also consider it a terrorist organization.
In 2006, Hamas won parliamentary elections, and in 2007 the group violently seized control of Gaza from the Palestinian Authority, which was controlled by the rival Fatah movement that still governs the West Bank.
There have been no elections since.
The group calls for establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel and believes in the use of violence to carry out the destruction of Israel.
Hamas receives financial, material and logistical support from Iran, though so far, international leaders, including in Israel, have said there is no evidence that Iran was directly involved in Hamas’ attack.
Gaza, or the Gaza Strip, is a densely populated Palestinian exclave of about 2.3 million people.
The narrow strip of land − about 150 square miles, or less than half the size of New York City − is about 25 miles long and six miles wide.
Gaza shares a northern and eastern border with Israel and a southwestern border with Egypt while its western side abuts the Mediterranean Sea.
Hamas won the 2006 parliamentary elections and in 2007 seized control of the Gaza Strip from the internationally recognized Palestinian Authority.
The Palestinian Authority, controlled by the rival Fatah movement, administers semi-autonomous areas of the Israeli-occupied West Bank.
Hamas has fought four wars against Israel since taking power.
Contributing: The Associated Press
“While we have their back now that they’ve been hit, what’s more important is that we have their back when they hit back,” Haley said at a New Hampshire town hall sponsored by the USA TODAY Network.
The former ambassador to the United Nations said Hamas must be eliminated and “we need to remember who the true backer of all this is – Iran.”
Haley, who served under Trump, also went after her former boss who, at a rally Wednesday, called Hezbollah – an ally of Hamas –“very smart.” And Trump said Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu “let us down” just before the U.S. killed a top Iranian general in 2020.
Haley said such comments are why it’s time for a new generation of leaders to “leave the negativity and chaos and the baggage” in the past.
“We can’t have someone who is so clouded with the past that they can’t see the future,” she said to whistles and applause.
After strong performances in the first two GOP debates, Haley has jumped in the polls, including in a recent USA TODAY/Boston Globe/Suffolk University survey of likely New Hampshire voters.
She surged ahead of Florida Gov.
Ron DeSantis, who lost the standing he once held as the dominant alternative to Trump.
But the 19% of likely New Hampshire voters who backed Haley is still far behind the 49% supporting former President Donald Trump.
Still, Trump has shifted his focus from attacking DeSantis to going after Haley.
“I just think she has what it takes,” said Jenkins, who has read two of Haley’s books.
“I like her demeanor, the way she talks.”
What both Janet and her husband, Bob, most wanted to hear from Haley was how she thinks she can win the nomination.
“Trump is so far ahead,” Bob Jenkins said.
Haley has recently expanded her operations in both Iowa and New Hampshire.
“Stop demonizing this issue,” she said.
“We have to humanize it.”
She also went after both parties for not addressing major problems facing the country.
“You don’t fix Democratic chaos with Republican chaos,” she said later in the town hall.
We need focus.
"She's given me hope," Scott said of Haley.
“So I did my undergrad in finance at New York University with those words ringing in my ears.”
Arvind embarked on a career in asset management in New York City after getting an MBA in finance from MIT Sloan School of Management in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
By her mid-30s, she was also a mother of two children under the age of 10.
While she’d powered through the early years as a young mother and a professional woman, by the time her younger one was ready for kindergarten, she didn’t want to do it anymore – commuting back to her home in the suburbs at 8 p.m. just as the kids were getting ready for bed.
She decided to quit her job.
Her husband, an investment banker, would be the sole breadwinner while she’d be the primary “on-call” parent.
In 2022, for example, women with at least a bachelor’s degree earned 79% as much as men who were college graduates, while women who were high school graduates earned 81% as much as men with the same level of education, according to the Pew Research Center.
After collecting and analyzing 200 years of U.S. historical data to demonstrate how and why gender differences in earnings and employment rates have changed over time, she found that while historically, the wage gap could be explained through differences in education and occupational choices, recently, the differences among men and women in the same profession widens after the birth of the first child.
Why is the fatherhood premium growing over time?"
“And therefore, if you are by yourself, you don't have the ability to have that help mate.”
The other explanation is the American notion of masculinity that places a self-imposed pressure to achieve more when you are a father.
“This internal sense that fathers have, that they really have to run fast because they are breadwinners,” she says.
When it comes to college-educated women, high-salary jobs with long, inflexible hours exacerbate the gender pay gap.
When women take on “greedy” work, which pays disproportionately more when they work a greater number of hours or have less control over those hours, they tend not to last long because they opt out to raise families.
But “if that job now changed to, you don't have to travel to Tokyo, you have to Zoom with Tokyo clients every other weekend, you can do it.”
When Jane Vernon moved to the suburbs from New York City with two preschoolers, she worked for a Fortune 500 company that had offered her part-time work during her early days of motherhood.
Her hard work didn’t go unnoticed—she was offered a promotion, but the catch was that needed to be physically present five days per week.
“She said that juggling family concerns was not relevant.”
She decided to quit her job.
If she’d had flexibility, things would have been very different.
“Without a doubt, I would have stayed in the workforce,” she says.
“I did not want to quit my job.”
Her life as a Scarsdale mom, one of the most expensive zip codes in the country, landed her in familiar company: stay-at-home moms with degrees from prestigious universities and experience in the corporate world, including at white-shoe law firms, exclusive management consultancies and Fortune 500 companies.
Vernon established The Acceleration Project, a nonprofit consulting firm in 2012 to help small businesses that were dealing with the aftermath of the economic recession by channeling the talents of these “opt-out” moms with expertise in everything from law, business marketing and finance.
The nonprofit now has more than 200 volunteers who work part-time or full-time with the organization.
"They say they choose to work with us as we provide opportunities for professionals to use their skills for meaningful impact."
Carol Fishman Cohen, a Pomona College and Harvard Business School graduate, took an 11-year break in the 1990s to raise her four children in a Boston suburb before going back to work full-time at Bain Capital.
In Cohen’s case, her husband had been working at a law firm for 20 years when she was going back to work.
He had a demanding job but had little travel.
This, and the fact that she had a nanny to take care of her children ages 5 to 11, enabled her to return to a high-pressure job that required travel.
“My husband handled things like doctor visits, sick kids, and unexpected events,” she says.
When considering childcare costs, couples should evaluate being able to afford childcare based on their combined projected income, not based on the incremental income the returning partner is making.
The share of prime-age women who are employed hit an all-time high of 76% in June and experts believe the flexibility to work remotely contributed to the surge.
In June, 77.8% of women ages 25 to 54 were working or looking for jobs, up from 77.6% in May and the highest in U.S. history, the Labor Department’s July jobs report showed.
About 35% of people who can do their jobs remotely are working from home, up from just 7% before the pandemic, according to the Pew Research Center.
It depends, given that we are seeing various degrees of in-office requirements, says Cohen.
“Less travel enabled by video calls is a huge factor in retaining mothers - and some fathers too.”
That would entail leaving a lot of money on the table, as each passes up the high pressure promotion, partner track or tenure track.
Arvind, who quit her job as a vice president in asset management at Alliance Bernstein when her older son was nine, says mothering while working was an “emotional rollercoaster.”
I don't want to be called just a housewife.
She went back to school for a master's degree in economics and education at Columbia Teacher’s College (taking more courses than required for her degree) and now works as a consultant at a firm that maps and analyzes the prenatal to five funding streams with various state governments.
She also serves on the board of Child Care Council of Westchester.
The consultant job offers flexibility and is a remote position.
Eventually, she hopes to get back into finance as a venture capitalist in the education-tech field.
Laughing, she says she nailed one prediction: the Barbie movie.
Follow her on Twitter @SwapnaVenugopal
The Kansas City Chiefs’ latest victory looked a lot like their last few.
Outplay the opposition, but let them stick around to make it a game.
When it came time to execute in the fourth quarter, the game really wasn’t a contest.
Kansas City, winners of five straight, stifled the Denver Broncos 19-8 on “Thursday Night Football.” It's the Chiefs’ 16th straight victory over their AFC West rival.
Chiefs quarterback Patrick Mahomes was 30 of 40 for 306 yards through the air with a touchdown and one interception.
Broncos quarterback Russell Wilson threw two picks and finished with just 95 passing yards (13-for-22) and 31 rushing yards (four attempts).
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Here are the winners and losers of "Thursday Night Football":
Mahomes didn’t play a great game by his standards, but he was the best player on the field Thursday.
Mahomes went 30-for-40 passing for 306 yards.
He tossed one touchdown and one interception and finished with a passer rating of 94.4.
Jones tallied four tackles, one sack, one pass deflection and three QB hits.
Jones has recorded a sack in eight straight games.
The Broncos produced 94 total yards in the first half.
Rice is slowly become Kansas City’s best wide receiver.
He had a nice 28-yard catch and run on third down in the fourth quarter.
The rookie wideout led all Chiefs wide receivers with four catches for 72 yards.
He caught all four of his targets.
Mahomes’ connection with Rice is steadily improving.
The Broncos had the NFL’s worst defense entering Week 6, giving up the most points (36.2) and yards (450.6) per game.
But Denver’s defense fought hard on the road and limited the Chiefs to 19 points and 389 total yards.
It was Denver’s offense that couldn’t get into a rhythm.
The Broncos’ lone touchdown didn’t come until the fourth quarter.
They only managed one drive of over 50 yards.
Broncos QB Russell Wilson was subpar.
He had a meager 95 passing yards and just one touchdown and two interceptions.
Wide receiver Courtland Sutton led the Broncos with four catches, 46 receiving yards and a touchdown.
The Chiefs have now defeated the Broncos 16 straight times.
Denver’s last victory over Kansas City was on Sept. 17, 2015.
Unfortunately for Denver, it faces the Chiefs again in Week 8.
Thursday’s loss dropped the Broncos to 1-5 on the season.
Since 2015, the Chiefs have a 43-6 record against AFC West opponents.
The Chiefs have won the AFC West for seven consecutive seasons and are well on their way to winning an eighth straight division title.
They are the only team in the division currently with a winning record.
However, the distance didn’t matter.
The Broncos have some life.
Denver finally scored a touchdown in the fourth quarter when wide receiver Courtland Sutton made an acrobatic 11-yard catch in the end zone for a touchdown.
The officials initially called it an incomplete pass, but the Broncos challenged the call, and it was reversed.
Denver then got the two-point conversion to make it a 16-8 game.
The Broncos’ scoring drive was eight plays and went 61 yards.
It was Denver’s first drive of the game over 50 yards.
— Tyler Dragon
Both teams ended the third quarter by trading punts.
Both teams are under 40% on third-down attempts for the game.
Russell Wilson had 44 passing yards entering the fourth.
He'd missed the four previous games due to a hamstring injury suffered in Week 1.
Once again, a Russell Wilson interception killed a Denver drive in Kansas City territory.
The ball landed in safety Justin Reid’s arms for Wilson’s second interception of the game.
The Broncos had moved the ball 47 yards in six plays in a two-possession game.
Kansas City took over at its own 25 with 5:40 left in the third.
Running back Isiah Pacheco (11 rushes, 55 yards) has eclipsed the 55-yard mark for the fourth consecutive game.
A 13-yard Patrick Mahomes scramble set up the score.
The flow of the game has made it seem like the Kansas City lead is more than 10, but Denver’s defense has stood strong in the red zone, holding the Chiefs to one successful trip in four tries.
Russell Wilson (7-for-11, 37 yards) has been sacked three times and is averaging 3.4 yards per pass attempt.
The Chiefs scored the game’s first touchdown on their fourth possession.
— Tyler Dragon
The NFL cannot get enough of the tush push.
Problem is, nobody can execute the short-yardage play quite like the Philadelphia Eagles.
With 8:10 left in the first half and the Chiefs facing a fourth-and-2 from the Broncos’ 6-yard line, head coach Andy Reid called for a fake field goal.
But Gray could not advance the ball past the first-down marker and the Broncos escaped another Kansas City red-zone appearance with zero points allowed.
The Chiefs are 0-for-3 in the red zone and have three points despite winning the field position battle thus far.
The Broncos and Chiefs have traded turnovers in the first quarter.
Chiefs QB Patrick Mahomes threw an interception right after Kansas City’s defense forced a takeaway.
Mahomes was standing in the pocket looking for an open receiver.
With the pocket collapsing around him, he tossed an ill-advised pass near the end zone that was intercepted by Broncos safety Justin Simmons.
Simmons returned the interception 6 yards to the Denver 7-yard line.
The interception was the first of the season for Simmons.
— Tyler Dragon
The Broncos were having success running the ball.
Then Russell Wilson ended the party.
Wilson never saw him, and the Chiefs got the ball back on the 43-yard line.
It was Wilson’s third interception of the season.
Gray was able to pick up an additional seven yards after the lateral.
The play helped set up the Chiefs in field goal position.
The Chiefs covered 42 total yards on their opening drive.
— Tyler Dragon
Denver came up empty on the opening drive of the game despite moving the ball into Kansas City territory.
The drive lasted nine plays and took 5:36 off the clock.
Fresh off attending the premiere of her "Eras Tour" movie in Los Angeles on Wednesday, Taylor Swift is off to Kansas City for another one of her passions: watching Kansas City Chiefs football games.
Swift was spotted Thursday arriving at the Chiefs' game against the Denver Broncos.
The singer wore a black dress, paired with a red varsity jacket.
The star tight end is a go.
The interaction apparently did not go well and left the NFL Network analyst inclined to blast the 2020 first-round pick during the NFL Network pregame show.
“I hope today that you actually show up in a way like you haven’t since they drafted you,” Smith said on air.
Because he is mentally unable to handle constructive criticism from people who watch specifically can he be a wide receiver?
He can be a wide receiver.
Frank Clark’s tenure with the Broncos appears to be nearing an end.
According to multiple reports, Denver will try to trade Clark before this month’s trade deadline.
NFL Network reported Clark and the Broncos reworked his contract to facilitate a potential trade.
Clark spent the first four seasons of his career with the Seattle Seahawks before being acquired by the Chiefs ahead of the 2019 campaign.
He won two Super Bowls with Kansas City and went to three straight Pro Bowls from 2019-21.
Denver moved on from another veteran pass rusher, Randy Gregory, last week and sent him to the San Francisco 49ers for late-round draft compensation.
Broncos at Chiefs will begin at 8:15 p.m.
ET on Oct. 12.
Broncos at Chiefs will be streaming exclusively on Amazon Prime Video and will be broadcast in local markets only.
Tyler Dragon: Chiefs 28, Broncos 16
The Broncos are a mess and on the brink of a fire sale.
Denver has very little chance against the defending Super Bowl champions.
The Chiefs have won four in a row since losing their season opener.
Kansas City surprisingly has a top-10 defense and their wide receivers are slowly improving.
Victoria Hernandez: Chiefs 30, Broncos 17
But the Broncos haven't shown anything that would make them competitive this year in the lopsided "rivalry."
Last week, Sean Payton got served a slice of humble pie and a short turnaround doesn't help his cause.
I like the Chiefs at home against the Broncos, who feel like a dysfunctional bunch during their 1-4 start under Sean Payton.
Inside Amazon's quest to create unique pregame and postgame shows around "Thursday Night Football."
“On my podcast I talked about guys that maybe have not showed up in a way,” Smith said on NFL Network before the Broncos and Chiefs kicked off Thursday night.
— just a guy.
When I saw him, he’s playing well.
His response was, ‘(racial slur), I don’t mess with you.’ And it was a curse word.
Smith went on to deliver some not-so-subtle jabs.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
But right now, I’m 44 years old.
He didn’t like what I said and that’s fine.
I wanted to talk to him.
In 16 NFL seasons, Smith was selected to five Pro Bowls and was named a first team All-Pro twice.
He was the NFL receiving yards leader and Comeback Player of the Year in 2005.
The former Carolina Panthers and Baltimore Ravens wide receiver finished with 1,031 catches, 14,731 receiving yards and 81 touchdowns in 219 career games.
15 overall in the 2020 NFL draft.
He has 174 catches, 2,503 receiving yards and nine touchdowns in 45 career games.
He’s never made a Pro Bowl or All-Pro team.
A St. Louis youth football coach is recovering from surgery after being shot four times by a disgruntled parent that was allegedly upset over his son's playing time, the St. Louis Metropolitan Police Department confirmed to USA TODAY Sports.
The shooting followed an argument between the two.
No one else, including the children that witnessed the shooting, was injured.
He remains in custody.
"It's more psychological than anything else."
This is the latest incident of harassment and acts of violence toward youth coaches and umpires.
In May, a Florida man was arrested for sucker-punching an umpire at his son's baseball game.
Last year, a youth softball umpire in Mississippi was punched in the face by a mom.
Scarlett Johansson is praising Pamela Anderson's "powerful" no-makeup look at Paris Fashion Week.
Anderson, 56, went bare-faced to the star-studded event earlier this month, sparking much conversation and praise, including from the "Black Widow" star.
"I think it is definitely different to see somebody that's in the public eye, a woman in the public eye, go to a fashion show or big event with no makeup on," she said of the "Baywatch" star.
"It's just very different from what we're used to."
"It's powerful for women to see other women rejecting standard beauty norms," Johansson continued.
The "Marriage Story" actress echoed comments Jamie Lee Curtis shared about the look earlier this month.
"THE NATURAL BEAUTY REVOLUTION HAS OFFICIALLY BEGUN!"
Curtis wrote on Instagram, tagging Anderson.
Anderson opened up about not wearing makeup to Paris Fashion Week events in an interview with Vogue France, saying she doesn't "want to compete with the clothes."
Anderson said she hopes that by not wearing makeup she can help model the multitude of ways women can express themselves.
"I'm not trying to be the prettiest girl in the room," she said.
The tape, Tommy Lee, kids:All the bombshells from Pamela Anderson’s Netflix doc, memoir
Former president and current criminal defendant Donald Trump, the front-runner in the GOP presidential primary, is getting worse.
I realize that’s a mighty high bar for him to clear, but he’s doing it, each day showing independent voters and Republicans who still value sane leadership why he should never be allowed within 10 square miles of the White House.
In the wake of the hideous Hamas attack on Israel, with American lawmakers and both sides of the aisle pledging full support for our ally, Trump’s political instincts told him to slam Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and say: “Israel was not prepared.”
Trump then praised the terrorist organization Hezbollah, which on Wednesday was attacking Israel along its northern border.
“You know, Hezbollah is very smart,” Trump said.
“They’re all very smart.”
MAGA loyalists’ minds won’t be changed by anything, but those voters also won’t be enough, should Trump win the GOP nomination, to get him back into office.
He’ll need to win over independents and even some moderate Republicans who put country over party while making headway with the ever-growing number of Generation Z voters who, based on recent elections, broadly reject Trump's MAGA movement.
Consider an assortment of baffling/disturbing comments Trump has made in speeches and on social media just in recent weeks.
The Fox News interviewer had to correct him afterward.
In another recent interview, Trump said: “We have the worst education almost in the large world, the world that people know about.” As opposed to the large world people don’t know about?
He said at a rally that the U.S. Capitol “looks like sh-t.”
When questioning someone’s lucidity, it’s generally best to sound lucid yourself.
Late last month at a rally, Trump mocked Rep. Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., and her husband, who was brutally attacked and beaten in their home last year.
“And she’s against building a wall at our border, even though she has a wall around her house – which obviously didn’t do a very good job.”
As a Gen Z voter, I want younger candidates.
That language mirrors lines in Adolf Hitler’s “Mein Kampf” and is in line with the way white supremacists discuss immigrants.
Trump has said recently that forest fires could be prevented “if you dampen your forests.”
You know why, because he’s got a boss.
Who’s his boss?
Petty criticism of Israel (Trump remains mad at Netanyahu because the prime minister accepted that Biden won the 2020 election), violent rhetoric, mixing up the names of political rivals, mocking an attack on a lawmaker’s spouse and generally sounding like the town drunk slouched at the end of the bar airing conspiratorial grievances.
And that’s only a small sample of Trump’s madness over the past few weeks.
Setting aside his two impeachments, his incitement of an attack on the U.S. Capitol, his election denialism and the 91 state and federal felony charges he faces, I have to ask independents and on-the-fence Republicans alike: Would you actually vote for that mess?
Is that really the best the Republican Party can offer America and the world?
People will keep taking swipes at Biden’s age, though Trump is only three years younger.
But if you listen and pay attention to the former president, you’ll see a profoundly unhinged man teetering on a full separation from reality.
The ham has slipped off his sandwich.
It’s time to stop pretending otherwise.
— The Republican-controlled Wisconsin Assembly passed legislation on Thursday banning gender-affirming care for minors and barring transgender athletes from competing in sports at the high school and college levels.
The three transgender-related bills were approved in a 63-35 vote, with all Democrats voting against the measures and nearly all Republicans voting for the measures.
Democratic Wisconsin Gov.
Tony Evers has vowed to veto the legislation.
"We’re going to stop these attacks, and we’re going to do it together."
Two of the bills would prohibit transgender girls and women from participating in high school and college sports teams.
Instead, students would have to play on teams that match the gender they were assigned at birth.
The third bill would bar doctors from providing gender-transition treatment to minors, such as performing gender-affirming surgery or providing hormones and puberty blockers.
The bills are moving quickly, hitting the Assembly floor a week after heated public hearings drew hundreds to the state Capitol.
The legislation now moves on to the Republican-controlled state Senate.
The highly contentious legislation comes amid a barrage of bills targeting the LGBTQ+ community, including limiting the rights of transgender youths, across the United States.
Republican lawmakers have faced intense pushback and criticism from the LGBTQ+ community along with advocates, prompting discrimination lawsuits in many states.
Religion vs. LGBTQ+ rights:Supreme Court weighs 'conversion therapy' bans for minors
And at the time, that was settled science.
At the Capitol hearings, advocates representing the LGBTQ+ community testified that the proposals would harm transgender and nonbinary youth in Wisconsin, and worsen the mental health challenges and stigma they face.
Republicans argued the bills would ensure competitiveness in women's sports and prevent transgender individuals from regretting medical procedures — though reviews of research find regretting a gender transition is uncommon.
GOP lawmakers made similar remarks during Thursday's floor session.
"Title IX was created so that women can have the same access to the same advantages, the same character building that takes place [in sports] that men always have experienced."
NYPD transgender sensitivity lawsuit:New York Civil Liberties Union sues NYPD for records on transgender sensitivity training
Several groups in Wisconsin have registered in opposition to the legislation, including the American Civil Liberties Union, the Medical College of Wisconsin, the American Pediatrics Academy’s Wisconsin chapter and the Wisconsin School Social Workers Association.
The Wisconsin Interscholastic Athletic Association (WIAA) also opposes the ban on transgender girls and women from competing in sports designated for women.
And University of Wisconsin-Madison officials previously warned that the university's teams would be out of compliance with NCAA policies if the legislation is enacted.
The WIAA's current policy for transgender participation in sports requires transgender athletes to undergo hormone therapy before they can play on the teams of their choice.
The association's policy is derived from existing policies for transgender athletes from the NCAA.
Since 2022, GOP legislators have introduced dozens of bills aimed to prevent transgender youth from participating in school sports that are consistent with their gender identity, according to LGBTQ+ advocacy group Human Rights Campaign.
And at least 22 states have passed laws restricting or banning gender-affirming medical care for transgender minors.
Research has shown that gender-affirming surgery for minors is rare.
According to a study published in August, fewer than 3,700 surgeries were performed in the United States on patients ages 12 to 18 from 2016 through 2019.
Experts have also said that receiving gender-affirming care — the social, psychological and medical support that people receive when their gender identity does not match their sex assigned at birth — is crucial in supporting mental health for transgender people.
Contributing: The Associated Press
In the latest development in the case, on Thursday afternoon the US cancelled a hearing that was scheduled for Friday.
The company and the federal government have been entangled in a legal battle in the U.S. District Court in Norfolk, Virginia since August.
Court records filed by a law firm representing the company in a U.S. District Court on Wednesday show it changed its plans from collecting artifacts to only conducting "unmanned imaging and survey work at this time," according to the Associated Press.
Jessica Sanders, the CEO of RMS Titanic Inc., supported those claims in a statement, AP reported.
The company owns the salvage rights to the property.
The submersible was built with titanium and filament-wound carbon fiber, according to the company's website, which are unconventional materials for deep-sea vehicles.
About one hour and 45 minutes after the boat launched, a support ship monitoring the vessel lost all communication with the submersible.
After connection was lost, the US Coast Guard led an urgent race to find the men before the oxygen tanks on the vessel ran dry.
Search and rescue teams scoured the Atlantic Ocean to find the submersible.
Days later, the Coast Guard found the debris of The Titan on the ocean floor about 1,600 feet from the bow of the Titanic.
They ultimately determined the Titan imploded on its journey.
He was a French maritime and known for his "impressive and tenured history with Titanic," according to his biography on the company's website.
The Marconi room holds the famous Marconi wireless telegraphic machine, named after its inventor Guglielmo Marconi.
More than 700 survivors on lifeboats boarded the ship and sailed to New York City.
A U.S. District judge previously granted the company permission to venture in a submersible to obtain the artifact, saying that it could "contribute to the legacy left by the indelible loss of the Titanic, those who survived, and those who gave their lives in the sinking," according to the AP.
The judge Rebecca Beach Smith said in 2020 it could soon be lost to decay.
The US government also challenged RMS Titanic's expedition then, and the company cancelled its trips due to the pandemic, the AP reported.
The company didn't only cancel its May 2024 trip to the Titanic.
Contributing: Associated Press
Contact Kayla Jimenez at kjimenez@usatoday.com.
Follow her on X, formerly Twitter, at @kaylajjimenez
He had been forced to repeatedly chug 190-proof Diesel liquor in a hazing ritual called “Bible Study,” during which pledges are quizzed on fraternity facts.
As college students begin a new semester this fall, many will participate in rituals to bring in new members of a fraternity or sorority, a sports team or other club.
Sometimes, the initiations involve heavy alcohol use or physical assaults.
Although awareness of hazing and its dangers has grown significantly, it still happens.
In June, New Mexico State University agreed to pay $8 million to settle a lawsuit over hazing allegations in the men’s basketball program.
Michelle Lujan Grisham said she will be introducing anti-hazing and abuse legislation next year.
In July, Northwestern University fired its head football coach after an investigation found widespread hazing on the team.
And Boston College suspended its swim and dive team this month following hazing allegations.
At least 44 states and the District of Columbia have anti-hazing laws in place, most recently Ohio in 2021 and Pennsylvania in 2018.
Kentucky and Washington strengthened their laws this past legislative session.
But state anti-hazing laws, most of which were approved in the past 15 years, differ in their definitions and the criminal penalties they impose.
Depending on the state, participating in hazing activities may result in a fine, misdemeanor charge or a felony charge if the hazing results in serious bodily harm or death.
Some experts and anti-hazing advocates say the penalties in some states aren’t harsh enough to deter organizations from participating in hazing.
Supreme Court says no:LSU can't claim immunity from lawsuit in death of fraternity pledge
Three of them faced misdemeanor hazing charges, while the fourth faced a felony charge of negligent homicide.
The university also banned Phi Delta Theta from its campus until at least 2033.
“It’s something that can be prevented; this never should have happened to our son.”
Hazing, a practice rooted in tradition and camaraderie, has long been a controversial and pervasive issue on college campuses.
The first anti-hazing law in the United States was enacted in New York in 1894.
In the U.S., more than 280 people allegedly have died due to hazing since 1838, according to the U.S. Hazing Deaths Database.
Hazing deaths are not currently tracked by any U.S. government entity.
Between 2018 and 2021, at least 23 people allegedly died due to hazing activities.
No hazing deaths were reported in 2022.
According to a 2008 study by two University of Maine professors, more than half of college students involved with student organizations experience hazing, which often involves “alcohol consumption, humiliation, isolation, sleep-deprivation, and sex acts.” The study, which is considered the most comprehensive analysis of hazing in the United States, also found that about 47% of students come to college having already experienced hazing.
Frats slow to change:Young men have died in fraternities every year for 2 decades
It’s not just a college thing.
Hazing appears in settings such as high schools, other student groups, the military and professional workplaces.
In many states, hazing carries misdemeanor charges – a fact that some advocates argue does little to effectively deter hazing incidents.
“Where hazing is a minor misdemeanor, it’s not taken seriously by law enforcement because it’s not worth the effort to prosecute,” Shelton said.
“One of the biggest hurdles is getting the penalty or statute to match the seriousness of the crime.”
Reckless participation in hazing can result in a misdemeanor.
And in Washington state, the Sam Martinez Stop Hazing Law, which was passed unanimously and signed into law in May, makes hazing a gross misdemeanor instead of a misdemeanor; if the hazing results in substantial bodily harm, it rises to a felony.
The law bumps up penalties for hazing from a maximum of 90 days to up to a year – and up to five years for the felony charge.
Washington became the 15th state to elevate hazing to a felony if it causes severe injury or death.
The new law follows the passage of Sam’s Law in 2022, named after the same student, which updated the definition of hazing and required universities and colleges, as well as fraternity and sorority chapters, to make hazing investigation records public.
Some anti-hazing laws explicitly spell out that consent is not a defense.
Allan co-wrote the 2008 national study on hazing.
Advocacy groups also have been pushing for national anti-hazing legislation to establish uniform definitions and penalties.
Proposed federal legislation, originally known as the Report and Educate About Campus Hazing Act, or REACH Act, was initially introduced in Congress in 2021.
This year, it is set to be reintroduced under a new name, the Stop Campus Hazing Act.
The legislation encompasses a range of transparency and prevention measures, including mandatory public reporting of hazing incidents and the implementation of comprehensive prevention programs.
Still, critics argue that most state anti-hazing laws should impose tougher penalties on national Greek life organizations and institutions, rather than individuals.
“While in this partnership, we have seen stronger state laws passed in over a dozen states and are encouraged by the introduction of the bipartisan Stop Campus Hazing Act in the 118th Congress last week,” the statement said.
A 2020 paper by a Penn State University professor and published in the Journal of College and University Law underscores this argument.
However, some voices within the community question whether genuine change is achievable.
Lucy Taylor, who disaffiliated from Alpha Phi at the University of Maryland and hosts “SNAPPED,” a podcast exploring Greek life, suggests that change within the organizations can often appear performative.
These initiatives may encompass disciplinary committees, mandatory anti-hazing programs or even the hiring of security teams, Taylor said.
“The more secret it becomes, the worse it gets.”
The drama burned so hot in the Bachelor Mansion that it's a small miracle Gerry Turner didn't pull the fire alarm during Thursday's third episode of "The Golden Bachelor."
It's so on.
Here's what happened.
With a Gerry solo-date prize on the line, the talent show brought some wild moments, including Leslie's provocative musical frolic that turned into a Gerry lap dance.
This is, after all, the woman who claims Prince was her onetime beau, who wrote "Sexy Dancer" after he was inspired by her moves.
"She got a little dirty there, a little sexy there at the end," a mostly admiring Susan said in a redundant debriefing to the camera.
But the tense Joan, who nervously claimed she didn't have any talent, killed it reading her poem about meeting Gerry, titled "I Just Hope I Don't Vomit on Your Shoes."
The simple verse got big laughs but also touched Gerry, who welled up for the episode's first tears.
He picked Joan as the talent-show winner.
The two connected on their dinner date, which ended with Gerry giving Joan a rose, and a deep kiss.
And yet the budding passion was all for naught, as Joan tearfully exited "The Golden Bachelor" the next day.
Joan received news that her daughter, who underwent a difficult C-section birth, required her mother's love and intervention in the real world.
Weeping Gerry was devastated for, like, 30 seconds of TV time after Joan broke the news.
Then it was time to move on.
Ellen was chosen for a dream date, with her choice of fancy frocks complemented by Champagne, and Gerry gifted her Neil Lane earrings he most surely didn't buy.
They soared in a hot air balloon, and Gerry presented her with a rose before busting another signature move.
"Have you ever been kissed at 100 feet?"
She has now!
The circle of "Golden Bachelor" life.
That promise finally became reality after Kathy conjured up a show-shaking feud with onetime confidante Theresa.
The Nice One.
Kathy was set off by Theresa's allegedly overly boastful talk about her deep connection to Gerry after last week's solo date.
Actual discussion video footage suggests that Theresa was just baring her heart to a friend.
But Kathy was off, dissing Theresa behind her back, then taking more imagined offense before the women met Gerry wearing their evening gowns.
It was a true reality show "Dynasty" moment.
"Theresa, you can tell that her eyes are saying, 'Yeah, you don't have a chance,'" Kathy fumed in a camera confession.
"I don't like it."
Poor old Gerry was oblivious to the mansion intrigue, falling for Kathy's tears during a one-on-one meeting during which she subtly tried to throw Theresa under the bus.
"I think sometimes what you think you see is not what is," Theresa stammered in a Theresa-bashing effort that flew over Gerry's head.
His face looked like a golden retriever listening to French.
Gerry shockingly presented Kathy with a rose, which is all that Kathy really ― I mean really ― wanted.
"This is crazy," Theresa lamented to the camera as she pieced together the feud she never saw coming.
Theresa even did the healthy thing by speaking to Kathy, who finally revealed her anger while maintaining her stubborn indignation.
This dark genie is not going back into the bottle.
If Theresa can take one bit of solace from the emotionally bruising week, it's that Gerry gave her the last rose.
So this drama will last another "Golden Bachelor" week.
And prospects for a TV feud-escalation look very promising.
Edith and Christina, who stayed out of the fray this week, will not go on this journey.
They both went home.
It's not often that solar eclipses race across our skies, the moon blotting out the sun to usher in either a wave of darkness or captivating rings of fire such as what will occur Saturday.
Years and years pass between these spectacular celestial events, that last of which occurred in 2017 when a total eclipse transformed the afternoon American skies seemingly into dusk.
It's been even longer since we've seen an annular solar eclipse such as the one that will on Saturday travel in the U.S. from the coast of Oregon to the Texas Gulf Coast.
The phenomenon is not only rare, but undeniably beautiful.
That's why astronomers say it's no surprise that the promise of catching a glimpse of such a dazzling spectacle — whether it be a complete eclipse or only a partial one — always manages to fascinate us.
"Astronomical events like eclipses, meteor showers, and the northern lights are a way in which they can experience it first hand."
Millions of Americans have now long been eagerly awaiting what will be their only chance until 2039 to catch a glimpse of the so-called "ring of fire" emanating around the moon as it partially eclipses the sun.
Americans across the county will flock this weekend to eclipse watch parties at libraries, national parks and other venues to catch a glimpse of the phenomenon.
Because the moon appears too small to completely block the sun, it instead appears as a small disc in front of the larger, brighter star, which causes a halo effect that resembles the ring of fire.
It's a process scientists have long understood, but it hasn't diminished the excitement that bubbles up anytime an eclipse approaches.
"Such events are awesome, especially total solar eclipses."
We may think of astronomers and astrophysicists as studious and objective observers of the skies, but solar eclipses are equally exciting for them.
And while much of that eager anticipation is purely for the celestial light show that will be on display, there's an academic reason as well.
Taking photos of the eclipse:Here's what to know about viewing and capturing the solar eclipse with your cellphone camera
Total solar eclipses in particular, such as the one that will overtake a large swath of the country in April, allow for scientists to test and improve human understanding of the laws of physics, primarily those of the sun.
"It reminds me — it reminds us — that the sun is powerful in ways we don't fully understand or quite appreciate."
Reach him at elagatta@gannett.com
WASHINGTON – A giant chunk of marble at least two feet long crashed into an interior courtyard of the Supreme Court last year, according to an Associated Press report Friday.
No one was injured, though the courtyard is used regularly by the justices and their aides.
Justice Elena Kagan and her law clerks had been in the courtyard earlier in the day, the AP reported, citing court employees.
It's not the first time such an incident has taken place at the Supreme Court.
A basketball-sized chunk of marble fell off the building in 2005, landing on the court’s front marble steps.
No one was injured in that incident.
A Supreme Court spokeswoman did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
The courtyard is currently closed for renovation, the AP reported, work that had been planned before the marble fell.
Friday the 13th may be an unlucky day by many superstitious standards, but it has become known as a lucrative one in the ink industry.
Just as with pumpkins at Halloween and turkeys at Thanksgiving, tattoos have become the American symbol of a day that is otherwise associated with bad omens and avoiding black cats or breaking mirrors.
Like any bit of folk wisdom, tracking down the origins behind the unlucky number 13 and the even more specifically Friday the 13th are difficult.
Likewise, the proliferation of the cheap ink tradition carries its own shroud of mystery and uncertainty.
So, while historians continue to ponder the perhaps biblical, perhaps violent or even simply mathematic reasoning behind the Western aversion to Friday the 13th, those of us interested in tattoos can look at the more recent past to find out how, exactly, tattoos and the 13th became synonymous.
Unlucky 13:Friday the 13th is here: What to know about the day many people consider unlucky
In Western culture, Friday the 13th is associated with the idea of unluckiness.
At least once a year, the Gregorian calendar sees the 13th day of the month falling on a Friday, though it can sometimes come three times in one year.
As with many superstitions and traditions, it is difficult to pinpoint the exact origin of the belief.
Some historians say the number 13 originally became an "unlucky" number thanks to biblical references.
Judas Iscariot, the disciple who betrayed Jesus Christ, was the 13th guest at the Last Supper, for example.
Christ was likewise crucified on a Friday in the Bible, drawing an association between the day and catastrophe.
Yet another theory dates back to 1307, when the French king gave orders on Friday the 13th to arrest hundreds of Knights Templar who were later executed.
No matter how it began, the number 13 has been synonymous with bad omens in Western culture for many years.
Of course, the cult-classic horror movie franchise featuring Michael Myers hasn't helped since the 1980s.
Friday the 13th has become something of a Black Friday for tattoo shops.
Many shops run special promotions charging steeply discounted prices to get work done, often for a flat rate at or even under shop minimum (the minimum fee a shop will usually charge on a tattoo to cover the cost of the basic supplies and overhead).
The average hourly price most artists charge is between $100 to $200 plus, making these flash sales a great deal.
While affordable predesigned flash tattoos and flash sales are not uncommon practices throughout the rest of the calendar year, Friday the 13th is the one day you can depend on finding a wealth of markdowns at multiple shops near you.
The ability to pick a shop, walk right in without an appointment and choose a fun design, then sit for a relatively short and easy piece that costs far less than usual attracts heavily tattooed people and newbies alike.
People with many tattoos use the day as a quick and affordable means to fill a small gap in their sleeve or add to their collection between big projects, while people new to tattoos can walk in and navigate a new experience that is already largely pre-planned.
Of course, there's always the added bonus of having what has become something of a good luck charm to combat the bad vibes that apparently come with the number 13.
While some businesses see the day as an opportunity to make connections, get more people in the door and more eyes on their work, other artists choose not to participate due to what they see as an undervaluing of their labor thanks to low pay and long days of churning out many copies of cheap, unoriginal art.
He threw his first major Friday the 13th function in 1995 at the now-defunct Pair O' Dice in Dallas, a marathon session of tattooing the number "13" on as many people as possible in a 24-hour period.
While many tattoos done on this day still feature the number somewhere in the design, it is far from mandatory and plenty of artists and shops now branch out into different themes.
However, the presence of the unlucky 13 in tattoo stencils and pieces well predates the 1990s.
Before heavy ink was associated with being a rock musician or a criminal in the U.S., it originally conjured images of sailors, who were well known for ornamenting their skin starting in the 18th century.
Having seen the practice performed by peoples native to other continents and countries they sailed to, the mariners took a liking to this cultural practice and brought news and demonstrations of it back to the Western world.
While the actual tradition of tattooing dates back much further than the 18th century, it was around this time that sailors and ink were closely associated.
It's speculated that these sailors, known to be a superstitious bunch, already knew about the unlucky nature of the number 13 and, in some form of tattoo reverse psychology, would have the number etched into their skin as a means of warding off the bad luck.
Be ready to wait: Most tattoo shops offering Friday the 13th deals operate on a walk-in basis for the day, meaning you won't be able to make an appointment in advance.
You are likely to have to wait in a line once you arrive, so be prepared.
Prepare to pick a design: Tattoos offered as part of Friday the 13th events are usually predesigned and laid out on what is called a flash sheet, or a collection of relatively simple and small images you can choose from.
Choose an appropriate placement: Once you're there, it's as simple as picking a design off the sheet and waiting your turn.
Usually, these deals are for tattoos on the arms or legs only and are about the size of a quarter dollar up to the inner palm of your hand.
Some shops also participate in a "get what you pick" style game where you pull a number or insert a coin into a gumball-style machine and commit to getting the tattoo you pick out.
Expect it to be crowded: The shop is likely to be crowded and full of artists working quickly on the day, so don't expect a private workstation or to spend a ton of time bonding with your tattooist.
Due to the simplicity and small size of the pieces, your session will likely be quick, lasting roughly 10 minutes to half an hour.
Wear proper attire: Some shops see thousands of customers in a single day on Friday the 13th, so if you want to be one of their favorite clients of the day, be prepared for efficiency.
Make sure you wear clothing that allows easy access to the area you want tattooed, that you come hydrated, with a full stomach and with clean, showered skin.
Be ready when it's your turn: Expect to wait but also be prepared to select your tattoo and tell the artist what you want when you sit down.
Check ahead of time for what kind of payment methods the shop prefers; while many artists accept services like Venmo, some businesses may have different payment instructions for this hectic day.
Finally, the supreme rule is to tip!
While you should always tip the person doing your tattoo, bear in mind that on this day they are seeing way more clients than usual for much, much cheaper than they would usually charge.
Because of this, some tattooists find the tradition stressful, so a healthy tip is a great way to show appreciation for their hard work.
Editor's note: Part one of a five-part USA TODAY series revealing why America hasn't solved its long struggle with Type 2 diabetes.
For chef Robin Ray, newly married with young stepchildren, the turning point came when a stabbing chest pain sent her rushing to the emergency room.
“I didn’t think you’d make it,” the doctor said.
The moments were turning points for all three to get serious about addressing their diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes, in which the body can’t properly regulate blood sugar, has become so common it’s almost considered inconsequential.
More than 1 in 10 Americans have the disease (though many don't know) and another nearly 4 in 10 are at risk for it.
In total, half of all adults and a quarter of teenagers have diabetes or pre-diabetes.
Its financial costs are astronomical.
The country spends more than $300 billion a year to address diabetes, accounting for $1 out of every $4 spent on health care.
And its personal tolls are even worse: heart attacks, amputations, blindness, kidney disease, double the risk of premature death.
It also causes what’s known as “diabetes distress,” the daily burdens and emotional toll of living with and managing a chronic ailment that can lead to regular dips in energy, foggy thinking and depression, and a sense of isolation.
The most frustrating aspect of Type 2 diabetes, experts say, is that it has long been largely preventable and controllable.
“We have made tremendous gains in understanding diabetes,” said Dr. Donald Berwick, a pediatrician and former administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Roughly 40% of people who died early in the coronavirus pandemic had Type 2 diabetes, a rate four times higher than people without the disease.
Even when elevated blood sugar levels are below the threshold for type 2 diabetes, the risk for heart disease jumps 30% to 50% compared with people with normal blood sugar levels.
(Type 1 diabetes, which accounts for 5% to 10% of diabetes, is caused by the immune system and is unrelated to diet or lifestyle.)
America’s failure to address Type 2 diabetes highlights larger problems with our food and medical systems, Berwick and other experts said.
A soda costs less than a bottle of water, a double cheeseburger and fries less than a carton of blueberries.
Patients wait months for medical appointments only to see the back of a white coat for the short time they’re allotted.
Treating disease costs society far more than preventing it but typically provides more profit for insurance companies, hospitals and the pharmaceutical industry.
The USA TODAY Health team spoke with scores of health care providers, researchers, community leaders and patients for this five-part series to understand why Type 2 diabetes continues to worsen in America despite known solutions.
The answer isn't simple.
It involves systemic problems facing everyone in society, not just those with diabetes: a food system designed to sell products; a medical system in which cutting off a leg is less expensive than saving it; the high cost of healthy living and the fact that breaking habits takes a lot more than just personal willpower.
This first story looks at what it takes for people to cope with or overcome the disease.
Then, we explore one community in a David vs. Goliath battle against a food system that fails to prioritize people's health.
More in series:Diabetes runs deep in rural Mississippi.
Locals have taken to growing their own solutions.
We next travel to Colorado, which has the lowest level of diabetes in the nation.
Yet even in this state, where hiking trails and gorgeous views abound, economic and other disparities make it easier for some people to avoid diabetes than others.
More in series:A diabetes disparity: Why Colorado's healthy lifestyle brand isn't shared by all
It's tough to manage a chronic illness in the face of high medical costs, scattered care and caregiver frustration and burnout, so we highlight that next.
More in series:The steep cost of Type 2: When diabetes dragged her down, she chose to fight
Finally, we explore solutions, addressing why it will take a combination of education, medication, medical devices and improved food access to solve this national problem.
More in series:Solutions exist to end the Type 2 diabetes dilemma but too few get the help they need
But it will take "sensible action" from across many sectors, including health care, science, nutrition, business, public health and politics to change the financial and other incentives that drive so many Americans toward sickness instead of health.
"If we do it incrementally or don't do it at all, we're all going to be toast in 50 years from diet-related illnesses and a depleted environment."
There’s no question personal responsibility plays a role in fighting diabetes.
They’ve reduced their dependence on daily medication and hope to have saved themselves the horrors of more amputations, blindness and dialysis.
They’ve extended their lives and improved the quality of that time.
But like many medical problems, the challenges of diabetes go well beyond individual responsibility and blame.
Agarwal recently led a series of studies in the journal The Lancet that looked at diabetes rates around the world.
Poverty, the studies showed, was a major driver of diabetes, along with racism and unequal access to healthy food and high-quality medical care.
Personal stories illustrate how these structural issues play out in the lives of so many Americans.
 “I’m healthy because of privilege – not diet, not exercise, not determination,” he said.
“It’s going to be all right after a while, as long as I keep this spirit,” he said.
Ray’s love for food began when she was 8 years old, watching Julia Child on TV.
During family gatherings, she would run around taking everyone’s dinner order.
Then she’d scurry back to the kitchen with a notepad full of scribbles.
Throughout her life, she made fried chicken, pork chops, baked mac and cheese, collard greens, and even a whole roasted chicken filled with wild rice and two sticks of butter – everything that made her soul sing.
In her world, food was home.
Food was family.
Food was love.
But that was some pretty tough love.
In 2002, Ray was diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes.
Her father, grandmother, aunts and uncles all had diabetes.
She knew what it meant.
“For you to tell me I can’t have ice blue raspberry Kool-Aid was like you shut down my world,” Ray said.
She didn't dwell on the diagnosis and continued with life.
Her culinary career took her to Italy, where she learned and fell even more in love with food.
She returned to St. Louis, got married and became a mom to her husband’s two children ‒ “beautiful bonus babies,” as she described them.
Through the years, she continued to express love through cooking and eating.
In 2015, a stabbing chest pain sent her to the emergency room.
Doctors assured Ray she hadn’t had a heart attack, but they warned that her life was on the line.
At 5-foot-2, she weighed 334 pounds and had an A1C, a measure of average blood sugar of 11%, well above the 6.5% cutoff to be considered diabetic.
Her diabetes – and her diet – were out of control.
She and her primary care doctor decided she would pursue weight loss surgery.
But she also decided to use her culinary prowess to transform her diet.
She reconfigured favorite foods, substituting healthier ingredients: Collard greens cooked in smoked fats or ham hocks turned into a kale, turnip and rutabaga recipe flavored with natural chicken broth fat, oils and seasonings.
She fostered her feelings into new recipes and brought them to North Sarah Food Hub, which partnered with Barnes-Jewish Hospital to make packaged, pre-made meals for St. Louis residents with diabetes and limited access to fresh food.
“I became excited about food again, and food became a joy.”
It isn’t always easy, of course.
Ray admits to an occasional cookie craving.
But now she takes the time to think about how her body processes that cookie and whether it’s worthwhile.
She hopes her cooking can help other people make the same transformation she did.
Her staff at North Sarah helps her create new recipes for others.
She wants to provide nourishment that allows people to avoid illness and medicine.
The lifetime risk of developing Type 2 diabetes if a parent has it is 40%.
If both parents have it, the risk jumps to 70%.
He knew he was at risk, but he pushed his luck, he said, by eating poorly during the pandemic and falling out of his exercise routine.
With the luxury of working from home, walking to the kitchen and bathroom was often the extent of his daily activity.
On Feb. 14, 2022 – Valentine’s Day – he went to an urgent care clinic, concerned his breathing trouble meant he had bronchitis.
His blood pressure measured 210 over 110, well above normal levels that top out at 120 over 80.
A chest X-ray showed fluid filling his lungs, leading to congestive heart failure.
The clinic sent him straight to a local emergency room, where he was diagnosed with a blockage of the left descending artery – a clogged artery made worse by diabetes.
If he had waited any longer, he would have had a massive heart attack, his doctor later told him.
After his release from the hospital, he went to the drugstore to fill his new prescriptions.
The pharmacist told him she couldn’t fill one because it would cost $1,000.
He’d have to wait until his insurance approved it.
“Please fill it,” he said.
She stressed the cost.
“Fill it,” he pleaded, putting the charge on his credit card.
Medication helped him lose 70 pounds in three months.
When his local drugstore ran out of the weight-loss drug, he easily drove to another pharmacy and then another to find what he needed.
His 100 hours of high-quality cardiac rehabilitation were fully covered by insurance.
He could devote all his energy to getting well because he didn’t have to focus on how to afford his care.
When they finally show up in the emergency room, “because they will,” they will cost the system far more, he said.
On the day Haynes stepped on a rusty nail in 2019, he walked all day as the nail pierced the sole of his sneaker and then his foot.
By the time he took off his shoe that night, his foot was infected.
He landed in the hospital for two months as doctors and nurses tried, mostly unsuccessfully, to get the infection and Haynes’ blood sugar under control.
By the time he was released, he knew enough about Type 2 diabetes to realize his daily blood sugar levels – typically in the mid-400s – were four times above what he had been told to shoot for.
But nothing he did or ate seemed to make a difference.
He had long since traded ribs for salads, beer for water.
His wife, Angela, barely noticed when James started wearing multiple pairs of socks, pouring powder on his feet and buying bigger shoes.
His feet tingled a lot, he said, but he was coping with it.
James ended up in the emergency room again, dehydrated and in need of antibiotics.
The doctor amputated the baby toe on his right foot, leaving a large open wound.
“I didn't like that we're not going to try to save anything, we're just going to start cutting.”
James was fading.
Antibiotics left him looking sickly, his voice so weak Angela could barely hear him.
“I felt like I was watching my husband slowly dying,” she said.
She thought it would take months to get James in to see the heart disease specialist, but the office called and asked if they could come the next day.
“We started looking forward to these visits because there was always hope,” Angela Haynes said, though she felt guilty they were taking up so much of the important doctor’s time.
Haynes had blockages in blood vessels on both legs.
Once he got the blood flowing again, Haynes began to feel better.
His flesh returned to its normal color.
The wound started healing at last.
Walking became easier.
Then disaster struck again.
On July 2, 2022, Haynes caught COVID-19.
"Everything went downhill after that," he said.
During his 13-day illness, the bacteria in his foot raged out of control.
Every week, a surgeon would come to the door of his hospital room and before even stepping all the way in ask Haynes whether he had decided to get his leg amputated.
I was born with this.
He was worried about how he’d get around, how he’d be able to work to support his family if he had only one leg.
No one took the time to explain why they thought the leg needed to come off or how he’d cope without it, Haynes said.
In late November, he was finally sent home in a wheelchair.
Back at the hospital, Haynes was told his foot was broken, essentially beyond repair.
He agreed to a below-the-knee amputation.
Released right before Christmas, he spent the next three weeks in bed wondering how he’d manage the rest of his life.
Finally, it looked as if his luck might be turning around.
With the leg gone, his diabetes improved.
His blood sugar dropped into the 120s or one-teens.
His blurry vision cleared up.
During his long hospital stay, he befriended nurses and learned about a program for people who needed prostheses.
The man who ran it called early in the year and said he had received a donated leg.
If it fit Haynes, he could have it while waiting for insurance to pay for a personalized one.
Miraculously, it did.
Haynes spent the next six months teaching himself to walk again.
The donor leg was heavy and uncomfortable.
He wasn't mobile enough to hold down a job.
One late spring night, picking up dinner at a nearby restaurant, he headed to the bathroom for a pit stop.
A sink had been leaking all day and Haynes slipped in the puddle, falling backward.
He's still recovering from the resulting wrist surgery.
He and Angela are living – barely – off her part-time salary as a secretary and a church organist.
Haynes has tried "at least three or four times" to receive government assistance, but they keep losing his paperwork, or not believing he's disabled, though he once checked himself out of the hospital and arrived at an appointment in his wheelchair to prove he didn't have a leg.
Still, he clings to his faith and the positive attitude he has long used to cheer up himself and others.
These are his secret weapons against diabetes and everything else life throws his way.
"I try to put a smile on other people's faces," he said.
"It keeps my day going."
This story is part of a reporting fellowship sponsored by the Association of Health Care Journalists and supported by the Commonwealth Fund.
Our goal remains the same: Provide book lovers with the best, most accurate snapshot of what people are reading by showing which titles are selling.
It is a master list, unbound by genre and format, of what’s selling broadly across the U.S.
Her novel "It Starts With Us" claimed the No.
1 spot in its first week, her highest debut ever, selling more than 800,000 copies on its first day of sales.
It was her fourth book to hit No.
1 in 2022.
The USA TODAY list is a ranking of the top-selling titles each week from a broad range of businesses including major chains, independent bookstores and online retailers.
It reflects combined sales of titles in print and electronic format, if available.
Our data team weighs and compiles those numbers to generate the week's 150 top-selling titles.
The rankings reflect sales from the previous Monday through Sunday.
The full list will publish online at 6 a.m. Wednesdays, with the top 50 titles publishing in print Thursdays.
The list, which began in 1993, went on hiatus in December.
It is the longest-running USA TODAY data journalism project.
In our continued commitment to bring readers more books coverage, USA TODAY is also excited to announce a new content partnership with The Novel Neighbor, an independently owned and operated bookstore in St. Louis.
They are expert booksellers and passionate readers who are deeply connected to what their community is reading.
With the partnership will come regular profiles of independent bookstores across the country, highlighting the important role of these businesses in their local communities.
Novel Neighbor will also be sharing expert book recommendations and fun takes on book trends.
We can't wait to see what you've been reading!
The Gaza Strip, one of the smallest territories in the world, may soon become a bloody battleground as Israeli Defense Forces strike back against Hamas for its brutal, hostage-taking attack on Israel.
Gaza is at the center of the Israeli-Palestinian hostility, which has existed since the creation of Israel in 1948.
The confrontation going on now is another in a long history of Middle Eastern disputes among Israelis, Palestinians, and others.
USA TODAY looks at this tiny Palestinian enclave, its people, and its place in the ongoing conflict.
The Gaza Strip comprises just under 140 square miles of relatively flat coastal plan bordering the Mediterranean Sea.
It is central to the conflict involving Israel, Hamas, the Palestinian territories and various regional actors.
Urban areas, refugee camps, border crossings and high-risk areas as defined by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs can be seen in the map above.
Gaza's area is slightly greater than twice the size of Washington, D.C.
It is home to 2.3 million people in 139 square miles, according to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Gaza borders Israeli territory on its northeastern and southeastern sides and Egypt to its southwest.
To its west, Gaza abuts the Mediterranean Sea.
At least 2.23 million people live in the Gaza Strip, according to the U.N., many of them displaced after leaving or being driven from Israel during its War of Independence and subsequent conflicts.
Gaza is often described as one of the world's most densely populated areas, but population density varies across the territory.
There are roughly an even number of women and men living there.
With 42,059 people per square mile, Gaza City is the 63rd-most densely inhabited urban region in the world.
At least eight Palestinian refugee camps lie in the Gaza Strip and have some of the highest population densities in the world, according to the U.N.
Hamas is the largest Palestinian militant group and has fired rockets from Gaza at Israeli cities in the fighting.
It's committed to the destruction of Israel and is considered a terrorist group by the U.S., the U.K. and other nations.
According to the U.N.
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the socioeconomic situation in Gaza has been in steady decline for more than a decade.
Longstanding restrictions on the movement of people and goods to and from Gaza have made living conditions extremely difficult.
Israel prevents all access to and from the Gaza Strip by sea and air.
Sixty-three percent of the population of Gaza is considered food-insecure, and 81% are living in poverty.
Access to clean water and electricity were at crisis levels even before this month's hostilities.
The U.N. secretary-general says the blockade and related restrictions contravene international humanitarian law because they target and impose hardship on the civilian population, effectively penalizing them for acts they have not committed.
Sources: United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, OCHA OPT Information Management Unit, Jewish Virtual Library, The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, USA TODAY research
Keep up with developments from Gaza:Sign up for USA TODAY's Israel-Hamas War newsletter.
The United Nations is calling for Israel to rescind an immediate evacuation order it issued for about a million Palestinians living in Gaza, with the U.N. calling the order "horrendous" and warning of a deepening humanitarian crisis.
The Israeli military announced the Gaza evacuation Friday.
It's an unprecedented order for about half the population of the sealed-off territory ahead of an expected ground invasion against the ruling Hamas militant group.
Palestinians have said there is no real escape in Gaza, which has been under a suffocating 16-year blockade imposed by Israel and Egypt.
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East said in a Friday statement.
Hamas, which staged a shocking and brutal attack on Israel nearly a week ago and has fired thousands of rockets since, dismissed the evacuation as a ploy and called on people to stay in their homes.
Alarmed civilians and aid workers, who were already in distress from Israeli airstrikes and a blockade, were sent into chaos.
Israel-Hamas War newsletter:Sign up to get the latest news and analysis from USA TODAY into your inbox.
∎ The number of Palestinians displaced increased by 25% over the past 24 hours, according to an early Friday update from the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
∎ Airstrikes have left cities and refugee camps in ruins.
And Gaza has been experiencing a full electricity blackout amid Israel's siege of the territory, "which has brought essential health, water and sanitation services to the brink of collapse, and exacerbated food insecurity" according to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Israeli Energy Minister Israel Katz has said electricity, water and fuel will not be provided until Israeli hostages are returned.
∎ Public officials and law enforcement agencies across the United States have expressed concern over potential protests on Friday in response to Hamas leadership's call for a global "Day of Rage."
The D.C. region has enhanced its security in the area, including in the U.S. Capitol complex, and other major cities have also been on alert.
The State Department designated Hamas a terrorist group in 1997.
Several other nations also consider it a terrorist organization.
In 2006, Hamas won parliamentary elections, and in 2007 the group violently seized control of Gaza from the Palestinian Authority, which was controlled by the rival Fatah movement that still governs the West Bank.
There have been no elections since.
The group calls for establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel and believes in the use of violence to carry out the destruction of Israel.
Hamas receives financial, material and logistical support from Iran, though so far, international leaders, including in Israel, have said there is no evidence that Iran was directly involved in Hamas’ attack.
Gaza, or the Gaza Strip, is a densely populated Palestinian exclave of about 2.3 million people.
The narrow strip of land − about 150 square miles, or less than half the size of New York City − is about 25 miles long and six miles wide.
Gaza shares a northern and eastern border with Israel and a southwestern border with Egypt while its western side abuts the Mediterranean Sea.
Hamas won the 2006 parliamentary elections and in 2007 seized control of the Gaza Strip from the internationally recognized Palestinian Authority.
The Palestinian Authority, controlled by the rival Fatah movement, administers semi-autonomous areas of the Israeli-occupied West Bank.
Hamas has fought four wars against Israel since taking power.
Contributing: The Associated Press
Former president and current criminal defendant Donald Trump, the front-runner in the GOP presidential primary, is getting worse.
I realize that’s a mighty high bar for him to clear, but he’s doing it, each day showing independent voters and Republicans who still value sane leadership why he should never be allowed within 10 square miles of the White House.
In the wake of the hideous Hamas attack on Israel, with American lawmakers and both sides of the aisle pledging full support for our ally, Trump’s political instincts told him to slam Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and say: “Israel was not prepared.”
Trump then praised the terrorist organization Hezbollah, which on Wednesday was attacking Israel along its northern border.
“You know, Hezbollah is very smart,” Trump said.
“They’re all very smart.”
MAGA loyalists’ minds won’t be changed by anything, but those voters also won’t be enough, should Trump win the GOP nomination, to get him back into office.
He’ll need to win over independents and even some moderate Republicans who put country over party while making headway with the ever-growing number of Generation Z voters who, based on recent elections, broadly reject Trump's MAGA movement.
Consider an assortment of baffling/disturbing comments Trump has made in speeches and on social media just in recent weeks.
The Fox News interviewer had to correct him afterward.
In another recent interview, Trump said: “We have the worst education almost in the large world, the world that people know about.” As opposed to the large world people don’t know about?
He said at a rally that the U.S. Capitol “looks like sh-t.”
When questioning someone’s lucidity, it’s generally best to sound lucid yourself.
Late last month at a rally, Trump mocked Rep. Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., and her husband, who was brutally attacked and beaten in their home last year.
“And she’s against building a wall at our border, even though she has a wall around her house – which obviously didn’t do a very good job.”
As a Gen Z voter, I want younger candidates.
That language mirrors lines in Adolf Hitler’s “Mein Kampf” and is in line with the way white supremacists discuss immigrants.
Trump has said recently that forest fires could be prevented “if you dampen your forests.”
You know why, because he’s got a boss.
Who’s his boss?
Petty criticism of Israel (Trump remains mad at Netanyahu because the prime minister accepted that Biden won the 2020 election), violent rhetoric, mixing up the names of political rivals, mocking an attack on a lawmaker’s spouse and generally sounding like the town drunk slouched at the end of the bar airing conspiratorial grievances.
And that’s only a small sample of Trump’s madness over the past few weeks.
Setting aside his two impeachments, his incitement of an attack on the U.S. Capitol, his election denialism and the 91 state and federal felony charges he faces, I have to ask independents and on-the-fence Republicans alike: Would you actually vote for that mess?
Is that really the best the Republican Party can offer America and the world?
People will keep taking swipes at Biden’s age, though Trump is only three years younger.
But if you listen and pay attention to the former president, you’ll see a profoundly unhinged man teetering on a full separation from reality.
The ham has slipped off his sandwich.
It’s time to stop pretending otherwise.
Hiding out in one of the rows of abandoned houses and small apartment blocks.
After regaining territorial control, elite Israeli police and military units are actively searching for remaining gunmen, whenever and wherever they find them, a little less than a week after Hamas stormed this town of 30,000 people on the edge of the Gaza Strip.
Over 1,000 Hamas fighters infiltrated 22 towns and army bases in a multi-front attack that caught Israel's military off guard.
For Israel, this represents the biggest intelligence failure in decades − a blow to a country known for having robust security that is the envy of the world.
Thousands of Israelis and Palestinians have been killed, and thousands more on both sides injured.
Over 100 were kidnapped, including more than a dozen Americans.
Such a dramatic and unprecedented attack set off a panic across the world's Jewish communities from the U.S. and Mexico to France and beyond along with Israelis scrambling to track down their loved ones.
The attacks are being referred to as Israel's 9/11.
On Friday, the Israeli government announced it was evacuating the town.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has targeted Hamas, saying, "every Hamas member is a dead man."
As he tries to regain complete territorial control of a country roughly the size of New Jersey, Netanyahu has mounted a large-scale air strike in Gaza that killed more than 1,350 people and put tanks along the border.
Now, patrol cars are zooming the militarized streets of southern Israel.
The member of the police unit, a sniper, asked for his name to be withheld because of the sensitive nature of his work and concern over potential reprisals from Hamas against him or his family.
At least 27 police officers like him were killed in the area.
As for civilians, police still won't say.
The sniper spent Tuesday night on a roof of an Israeli military base that was briefly captured by Hamas on the first day of the siege.
The base sits off of a main road that looks over and across to the nearby Gaza barrier.
He said his unit was authorized to kill anyone who tried to cross this road without permission.
"We are waiting for new waves of Hamas to come," he said.
For the actual cases of Hamas infiltrators identified, "it's a hunt."
His forces, side by side with the military, deploy helicopters, armored vehicles and other specialized equipment to catch or kill them.
Hamas, he said, was still managing to cross the Gaza border in "ones and twos" but so far, for the last several days, they have not been able to attack any civilians.
About two dozen Hamas members occupied the station, around which they had set up booby traps preventing police from storming it.
Cohen, a senior border police commander, sported a shiner on Wednesday in the halls of the center.
The assault fell in the middle of a Jewish holiday.
With the army overwhelmed along the border, the defense of the town fell to the police for the first hours.
Eventually, an elite counter-terrorism unit with the Israel Defense Forces came with reinforcements.
The makeshift police station at the center of town was swarming this week with hundreds of rescue workers, police, army and special forces.
They filtered in and out on different missions.
Donations − meals, soap and toothpaste, cases upon cases of water − sat on an outdoor concrete square that had a basketball court on it and was covered from the sun.
Israel's President Isaac Herzog paid a brief visit and urged the international community to demand the release of hostages taken by Hamas.
Throughout the hour, air raid sirens would go off, sending several dozen people who were loitering outside smoking cigarettes, drinking coffee and making small talk scrambling for cover inside.
This was followed by loud thuds and bangs.
On Sunday, the center received a direct hit from one of the barrage of missiles that Hamas is sending over the border each day.
But the damage was not significant.
And no one was hurt.
The patrol unit that the sniper is part of is working 12-hour shifts to investigate every serious report that comes in about Hamas militants: sightings, strange noises, rumors.
There's a lot of time sitting around, eating snacks, some good-humored roasting.
At one point, the sniper was given a shoulder massage by another member of his unit.
"This work is not too scary if you don't think about it too much," confided another officer.
Like the sniper, none of the other officers can be identified for security reasons.
A lot of time sitting around − until there isn't.
A crackly message came through on the radio.
Up front, in the passenger's seat, the unit's commander wedged his automatic weapon, ready to fire, between the vehicle's mirror and its windshield frame.
Many of the town's residents have evacuated to other parts of Israel, but many have remained behind.
They've been told to stay indoors.
The location was near a cluster of homes on a cul-de-sac.
Within a few minutes of arriving it became clear there was no sign of a rocket here.
Just a dog barking in a high pitch and a couple of residents trying to communicate and gesture to the unit from behind a head-level wall outside their home about 50 feet away.
Then, another report came.
There may have been shots fired.
"Get down," the unit's commander ordered.
That too was over before it started.
Back in the van, yet another order had arrived, this time to search a house where a rocket definitely had landed just 10 minutes earlier.
"We're going to do a quick check for casualties," said the sniper, shortly before the door was kicked open.
In the sky above, small clusters of shiny smoke trails could be seen.
These could be rockets just launched from Gaza, where the intensity of Israel's bombing campaign has sent up large plumes of dust and ash and led to scenes of apocalyptic destruction.
Or Israeli missiles sent to intercept them.
Inside, the house seemed lived in.
A half-eaten piece of chocolate cake, spoon resting quietly on a plate, sat on the dining table.
There was a jumble of clothes strewn across the sofa.
A musty human odor.
The rocket had fallen straight through what looked like the main bedroom and hallway upstairs, exposing a twisted and gnarly web of wires, plaster, wooden beams, steel mesh.
The stairway, walls, doors, floor and ceiling were covered in a light gray dust.
A part of the missile was lying in the bathroom, near the toilet.
No signs of Hamas.
"It's clean," said the sniper.
The first school resource officer came into existence in the late 1950s under the guise that having a police officer in the school would "improve" the relationship between youth and law enforcement – a novel claim that helped SRO programs multiply.
It's estimated that 20% of schools have an officer.
Yet, despite this original claim that relationships with the youth would improve, there has not been any conclusive evidence that an officer presence improves youth relationships with law enforcement.
In fact, the research is quite mixed.
The UAW strike against the Ford Kentucky Truck Plant is a signal that hourly workers are willing to inflict − and sustain − increasingly serious financial pain to achieve their goals during labor negotiations, as the union and the Detroit Three approach a full month without resolution.
The financial impact of the surprise strike called Wednesday night was swift and immediate.
LAS VEGAS – The Green Bay Packers aren’t a talentless team.
They probably have as much or more talent than two of the three teams that have beaten them this year.
But, boy, are they a bad team.
Their offense is a mess.
Their defense can be pretty good but only to a point.
They are affected any time one of their starters can’t play because of injury.
And they have too many players who just do what they’re told and not whatever it takes to be a difference-maker.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
They also celebrated the end of a years-long battle against Greater Albany Public School District.
Their excitement to be a teen attending a Corvallis high school is a stark difference from their emotions as an Albany elementary school student.
Prepare yourself for a bit of a diminished product this weekend as the NFL steams into Week 6 of the 2023 regular season.
No compelling matchup to lase onto – 49ers-Browns, Lions-Buccaneers and Cowboys-Chargers probably the best offerings.
If you've enjoyed the London element, the Ravens and Titans will meet in the final one of this season (though we're off to Germany in Week 9).
What does it all mean in terms of wins and losses?
Our football experts try to make sense of this week's circumstances:
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Gannett may earn revenue from sports betting operators for audience referrals to betting services.
Sports betting operators have no influence over nor are any such revenues in any way dependent on or linked to the newsrooms or news coverage.
Terms apply, see operator site for Terms and Conditions.
If you or someone you know has a gambling problem, help is available.
Call the National Council on Problem Gambling 24/7 at 1-800-GAMBLER (NJ, OH), 1-800-522-4700 (CO), 1-800-BETS-OFF (IA), 1-800-9-WITH-IT (IN).
Must be 21 or older to gamble.
Sports betting and gambling are not legal in all locations.
Be sure to comply with laws applicable where you reside.
"Just go with the flow," the "Thursday Night Football" senior coordinating producer ordered from the command truck at FedEx Field, not long after the Chicago Bears defeated the Washington Commanders.
They were about to play a game, he said, as celebrity chef David Chang rejoined the set.
It’s a simple premise.
Producers from the truck will put up a name on the screen.
The panel must answer whether that person played in the NFL or is a United States Congressperson – "On the Hill" or "On the Field" – all while chowing down on spicy chicken sandwiches from Chang’s restaurant.
"What can go wrong?"
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
But as Amazon became the league's first new media partner in nearly 30 years, the company also saw the opportunity of a blank canvas.
A streaming giant taking center stage for the NFL one night per week represented a chance to take another step toward the boundaries.
"But like, we want to take the swings and see where we land."
That type of segment likely would not have been flown at network television.
At Amazon, it’s encouraged.
Their willingness to pitch ideas makes the show that much better, he added.
"The show is better for it."
From there, the producers begin outlining a show ahead of a Monday afternoon production call in which the sketch becomes more of a rundown.
Reading the letters Fitzpatrick wrote to Johnson as a boy was one idea.
The crew brainstormed ways for Johnson to sign items for Fitzpatrick and how to place that into the segment.
Of course, it would have to be right before commercial break.
And they’d have to make sure Johnson sat next to the former quarterback.
When it was showtime 72 hours later, Fitzpatrick was all smiles as he unveiled his No.
32 Lakers jersey beneath his signature zany button-down shirt.
Through four weeks, "TNF Nightcap" is averaging 2.08M viewers, which is an increase of 24% over last year’s full-season average (1.68M), according to Prime Video.
(“TNF Tonight,” the pregame show, is averaging 500,000 more viewers per week compared to 2022.)
The morning of the Bears-Commanders matchup, the crew met in a hotel conference room to review the show rundown.
"And we've been shown we've been on parts of shows where not enough of that has happened as well."
Finding the sweet spot is the challenge of creating programming in 2023 for a streaming service.
Other market forces, like podcasts, have influenced the way they construct the show too.
So it's not a podcast, we don't want it to be a podcast.
That type of transition made it easier on the trio of Whitworth, Fitzpatrick and Sherman, all of whom went straight from the playing field to analysts’ chairs (Gonzalez and Thompson both had ample television experience prior to joining “TNF”).
Making sure they don’t lose their personality by improving for television is a fine line to walk.
And I think it's because there's so much content they're consuming in different ways.
During one of those sessions, it became clear that a "Quiz Bowl" for the Week 3 game between the San Francisco 49ers and New York Giants in the Bay Area would be the perfect setting.
Sherman went to Stanford.
Gonzalez is a proud Cal product.
Fitzpatrick famously graduated from Harvard.
"That would be the perfect amount of craziness," he realized.
Something political – but not polarizing – felt appropriate.
With the cameras rolling, Thompson – the only one who had prior knowledge of the game – accidentally gave away the answer to the first question.
No memes or viral posts came from the segment.
A few laughs for sure.
He said the segment featuring Fitzpatrick being honored at his high school the previous weekend was too much.
He hopes everyone else watching did.
Be careful what you wish for, Dallas Cowboys.
As fallout lingers from the blowout loss at San Francisco, the Cowboys are so deep into their feelings about the 42-10 result that it’s fair to wonder if they are capable of recovering – physically and mentally.
 "I just feel like he’s making it way more personal than it had to be," Parsons said Tuesday.
We got something for that.
Trust the Cowboys?
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
The Cowboys, 28 years and counting since the franchise’s last whiff of Super Bowl glory, have proven (again) that they cannot be trusted as a legitimate contender.
Maybe that changes by January.
But that needs to be proven in the flesh as they’ve over-promised so many times before in morphing from America’s Team to America’s Biggest Tease.
Such an identity remains intact about now.
At this point, any threats coming from the Cowboys about what they’ll do to the 49ers have zero credibility.
Remember, Dallas was supposed to use the prime-time showcase on Sunday night as a measuring stick.
And the 49ers basically took that stick and cracked the Cowboys on the butt with it.
The defense that Parsons leads?
The Cowboys went to San Francisco with the unit allowing the fewest points in the league, like 10 points per game.
They left as the defense that gave up six touchdowns and 421 yards and had a terrible time getting off the field on third downs.
So, again, any promises about what will happen if they see them again would be ill-advised.
"It was always personal before the game started," Samuel told Kay Adams on the "Up & Adams" podcast.
Or touchdown, 49ers.
Can we stick a fork in the Cowboys already and declare that this season is kaput?
Maybe not yet.
It’s the NFL, with its week-to-week reality checks.
Look at what happened to Buffalo, a week after destroying the Dolphins: They went to London to get served up by the Jaguars.
This is not the time of year to draw conclusions about what will happen in January – even though it seems clear that if they stay healthy, the 49ers and Eagles will be major factors.
And as long as Patrick Mahomes is in the lineup, the Chiefs have a shot.
"It’s been a wide range of performance, as wide a range that I could ever recall in a 5-week period," McCarthy said after the debacle on Sunday night.
On paper, the Cowboys are not done yet.
There are 12 games left.
Just one of Dallas’ next six opponents – Philadelphia (5-0) – currently has a winning record.
A path to get back into the race in the NFC East still exists, given the two matchups looming against the Eagles in November and December.
Then again, the Eagles will be just as eager as the 49ers to demonstrate a special kind of animosity toward Dallas.
In any event, the expectation correction for the Cowboys has just happened.
After showing that figuratively they don’t belong on the same field with the 49ers, the Cowboys find themselves facing a must-win predicament when meeting the Los Angeles Chargers at SoFi Stadium on Monday night.
It’s about survival, or at least rebounding to restore some confidence after absorbing so many blows during the humiliating loss on Sunday night.
It’s a striking pattern.
Including the playoffs, teams that played the 49ers last season were 0-15 in games the following week.
The Chiefs won their next game after facing San Francisco last October, but it came after Kansas City had a bye week.
And the Eagles had a bye week following the NFC title game, although it indeed lost in the Super Bowl.
Pittsburgh snapped the “next-week” streak last month.
Blown out by the 49ers in Week 1, the Steelers rallied to defeat Cleveland the following week.
The next three 49ers opponents, though, followed suit with last season’s pattern and lost the following week.
Now the trend is attached to Dallas’ challenge to get back on track after a grueling loss to the 49ers.
Tony Pollard, the Cowboys running back limited to 29 rushing yards at San Francisco, was upbeat on Sunday night when assessing how they can rebound.
"Get back to work," Pollard said.
You have to prepare.
You have to get ready and brush it off.
See the 49ers again?
Officially, that’s a maybe for the Cowboys this season.
No, the Cowboys likely can’t achieve the dream of winning a championship without getting past the 49ers.
But considering the way San Francisco has owned them in recent years, the Cowboys had better be careful of what they wish for.
NFL power rankings entering Week 6 of the 2023 season (previous rank in parentheses):
49ers (1): What else is there to say about a team that's been in the top spot since the season started?
S.F.’s +99 point differential is already 20 better than the next team.
Probably have the best defense (though that can be settled at Cleveland on Sunday).
Might have the best offense.
Stars on basically every unit.
And second-year QB Brock Purdy continues to effectively play mistake-free football, his league-leading 123.1 passer rating testament to that.
Eagles (3): They're 5-0 in successive seasons for the first time.
Next up, the Jets – a team Philadelphia has never lost to in 12 previous meetings.
Feels safe to slot the reigning NFC champs at 6-0 and look ahead to their Week 7 date with Miami.
Sunday, Montgomery became the first Detroit rusher to top 100 yards in consecutive games since … Kevin Jones in 2004.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Weird as this sounds, Milano might be the more valuable player to Buffalo's defense.
Dolphins (7): How fast is Miami?
Per Next Gen Stats, the Fins have produced the five top speeds among all plays this season and seven of the top nine.
Jaguars (14): The first team to play multiple international games in a season is now the first to win multiple – both coming against teams with winning records.
Stay in Europe, Jags – it seems inevitable, and you're apparently better for it.
Cowboys (4): Good thing they're not part of the NFC West … even if it would make more sense geographically.
In its two defeats (to Arizona and San Francisco), Dallas has lost by a collective 70-26.
Steelers (12): They've gained the third-fewest yards in the league and surrendered the third most, the delta more than 600 yards.
But 11 takeaways, 17 sacks and just enough clutch plays from QB Kenny Pickett can mask such warts … and propel you to the top of the AFC North.
Ravens (8): It's been an uneven start, to say the least, but it's also unusual to play four of five away from home so early in the season – and Baltimore's three-game roadie winds to a conclusion Sunday in London.
Rams (9): Sure, they're 2-3, but they've hung tough against the league's top teams, San Francisco and Philadelphia.
Seahawks (10): Coming off their bye, they're currently not scheduled to face a team with a winning record until November.
Time to make serious hay toward a playoff berth.
Buccaneers (16): This marks three times in four years that QB Baker Mayfield has won three of his first four starts.
His only 4-1 beginning led to a deep playoff run in Cleveland.
Saints (20): Great sidebar to Sunday's 34-0 runaway in New England.
Pretty cool story amid the NFL's annual "Crucial Catch" campaign for cancer screening.
Falcons (18): If you know anything about the NFL, and running backs in particular, best to appreciate their genius while you can.
Texans (11): No matter Sunday's outcome, this will be their best six-game start since 2019.
But it would help if Houston would run the ball better after cracking 90 yards just once so far this season.
Chargers (22): Did you know WR Keenan Allen owns the NFL record for most games – three – with at least 15 receptions?
With wingman Mike Williams down for the count, wouldn't be a shock if Allen extends that mark before this year is out.
Bengals (26): They'll only be on the road two more times before December, so maybe the comforts of home are good for QB Joe Burrow's calf and team focus with a brutal upcoming schedule (Seattle, San Francisco, Buffalo) for a Cincinnati club that may finally otherwise be turning the corner.
Raiders (28): If they're going to salvage their season and use Monday's win as a catapult, now is the time.
The Silver and Black face three one-win teams (Patriots, Bears, Giants) over the next four weeks.
Packers (19): No worse way to go into a bye week than off a terrible loss.
But Green Bay's next three opponents (Broncos, Vikings, Rams) have a combined four wins, so hopefully a good time for the Pack to get healthy figuratively and literally.
Vikings (25): Why is offensive balance often a virtue?
Consider one-win Minnesota, which has thrown more passes (204) than any team in the league while attempting the fewest runs (91).
Bears (32): The Justin Fields-to-DJ Moore Show has sparked Chicago's revival.
But look closer, and you'll also note a running game averaging better than 170 yards the past two weeks and some encouraging signs of life on defense at Washington.
Commanders (15): Only Denver has surrendered more points than Washington's 160.
Only Minnesota has turned it over more times than Washington's 10.
Some consolation for a team that hasn't run an offensive play with the lead yet and has now been outscored by a league-most 91 points.
Cardinals (27): No NFC team is blitzing less frequently – worth wondering if that's the right approach given the way Arizona's D has been torn up the past two weeks.
Patriots (23): If the dynasty wasn't already dead, then life support has officially been unplugged.
Panthers (31): The NFL's only winless team just turned in its worst defensive performance (42 points allowed) of the season.
A trip to Miami.
Follow USA TODAY Sports' Nate Davis on X, formerly Twitter @ByNateDavis.
The North Dakota governor is stuck in the primary's basement, where he typically polls at 1%.
Worse yet, he has struggled to gain much attention or have a breakthrough moment during the two national GOP debates, where White House hopefuls have largely clawed at each other rather than knocking former President Donald Trump, who is the undisputed front-runner.
Here are five things to know about Doug Burgum ahead of the event.
At that time, he trailed by 49% in the GOP primary against a popular attorney general in North Dakota.
During the state's 2016 Republican convention, the party held a series of votes to endorse a candidate.
But when it came time for the voters to decide, he won his election by 20%, largely running as an outsider in the year that Trump first captured the Republican nomination for president.
In the 1980s, he and his relatives − including his grandparents, who owned an agriculture business − bought Great Plains Software, a software company that eventually was purchased by Microsoft for $1.1 billion in 1997.
He has loaned his campaign more than $10 million.
In a sober delivery style that stays away from culture war or social issues, he has tried to shake the public consciousness about energy's role in America's domestic and foreign policy.
The U.S. should be committed to alternative fuels, he said, such as ethanol and carbon pipelines.
He also supports America having a "homegrown" energy agenda that would leverage a combination of renewable, fossil fuel and nuclear power.
China being America's chief rival in the 21st century is one of his biggest concerns.
North Dakota passed one of the nation's strictest abortion bans that blocks the procedure at all stages of pregnancy after six weeks, with the exceptions for rape, incest and medical emergencies.
And, after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade last year, many White House hopefuls on the GOP side have had to answer whether they support Congress establishing a federal ban on abortion, which some conservative voters and candidates have been demanding in recent months.
"It absolutely belongs to the states," he said.
It's where the first Republican president, Abraham Lincoln, spoke in March 1860, shortly before launching his successful campaign.
Pence is the first former vice president in modern times to run against the president under whom he served.
He will take questions from voters at 3 p.m.
Doors open at 2 p.m.
Here are five things to know about Mike Pence ahead of the event.
During most of his four years in the Trump administration, Pence was exceedingly loyal to President Donald Trump, being careful to never steal the spotlight from the president and keeping any disagreements they had out of sight.
That changed on Jan. 6, 2021, when Pence refused to use his ceremonial role overseeing Congress’ acceptance of the nation's electoral college vote to try to overturn the election.
Trump branded him a coward, and Pence’s safety was threatened by rioters storming the Capitol.
Pence has since said Trump’s actions disqualify him for a second shot at the White House.
While Pence entered the race with high name recognition, he argued he was well known but not known well.
He’s sought to reintroduce himself to voters as a former Indiana governor and congressman.
In the U.S. House, he was a leader among conservatives pushing back on government spending, including a Medicare drug benefit and President George H.W.
Bush's signature education bill.
As Indiana governor, Pence pushed through tax cuts and expanded health care through an alternative Medicaid program.
He also drew national attention for signing and then backtracking on a bill that critics said would have allowed businesses to deny services to LGBTQ people.
Before being elected to office, Pence was the host of a conservative radio talk show that he called “Rush Limbaugh on decaf.”
Pence regularly tells voters that his fight “for the babies” was his motivation for running for Congress, where he was willing to shut down the federal government in 2011 in an effort to defund Planned Parenthood.
As Indiana’s governor, he signed one of the nation's most restrictive anti-abortion laws.
As vice president, he was the Trump administration’s most prominent opponent of abortion.
And as a presidential candidate, he’s criticized Trump and other rivals for not taking a strong enough stance on an issue that Pence said requires “unapologetic leadership.”
He has vowed that he won’t rest or relent “until we restore the sanctity of life to the center of American law in every state in the country.” Pence supports a nationwide ban on abortion, as opposed to the state-by-state approach adopted after the Supreme Court overturned the landmark Roe v. Wade last year.
Before Pence rode Trump’s populist wave to the White House, his political hero was former President Ronald Reagan.
Now that Pence wants to return to Washington as president, he's warning his party that Trump’s populism is a “road to ruin.”
“Will we be the party of conservatism or will we follow the siren song of populism unmoored to conservative principles?” Pence said at the New Hampshire Institute of Politics at Saint Anselm College in September.
Pence is trying to revive Reagan’s “three-legged stool” rubric of uniting social, economic and defense conservatives.
He’s criticized Trump for not being sufficiently conservative on restricting abortion and reforming federal benefits, as well as accusing him of wanting the U.S. to retreat from playing a strong international role.
Pence said that the populist movement in the Republican Party would rather “substitute our faith in limited government and traditional values with an agenda stitched together by little else than personal grievances and performative outrage.”
Pence has long called himself a “Christian, a conservative and a Republican, in that order.”
He frequently references his faith and has said he can create the conditions for solving the big issues facing the nation by restoring civility in public life.
“It's always been our aspiration to treat others the way we want to be treated, to show that you can take a strong stance on your principles but be respectful of differing viewpoints,” he told USA TODAY.
Democracy, he argues, depends on heavy doses of civility.
“Part of the reason I’m running," he tells voters, "is because I think there’s a real desire across the country for us to elevate the debate."
“While we have their back now that they’ve been hit, what’s more important is that we have their back when they hit back,” Haley said at a New Hampshire town hall sponsored by the USA TODAY Network.
The former ambassador to the United Nations said Hamas must be eliminated and “we need to remember who the true backer of all this is – Iran.”
Haley, who served under Trump, also went after her former boss who, at a rally Wednesday, called Hezbollah – an ally of Hamas –“very smart.” And Trump said Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu “let us down” just before the U.S. killed a top Iranian general in 2020.
Haley said such comments are why it’s time for a new generation of leaders to “leave the negativity and chaos and the baggage” in the past.
“We can’t have someone who is so clouded with the past that they can’t see the future,” she said to whistles and applause.
After strong performances in the first two GOP debates, Haley has jumped in the polls, including in a recent USA TODAY/Boston Globe/Suffolk University survey of likely New Hampshire voters.
She surged ahead of Florida Gov.
Ron DeSantis, who lost the standing he once held as the dominant alternative to Trump.
But the 19% of likely New Hampshire voters who backed Haley is still far behind the 49% supporting former President Donald Trump.
Still, Trump has shifted his focus from attacking DeSantis to going after Haley.
“I just think she has what it takes,” said Jenkins, who has read two of Haley’s books.
“I like her demeanor, the way she talks.”
What both Janet and her husband, Bob, most wanted to hear from Haley was how she thinks she can win the nomination.
“Trump is so far ahead,” Bob Jenkins said.
Haley has recently expanded her operations in both Iowa and New Hampshire.
“Stop demonizing this issue,” she said.
“We have to humanize it.”
She also went after both parties for not addressing major problems facing the country.
“You don’t fix Democratic chaos with Republican chaos,” she said later in the town hall.
We need focus.
"She's given me hope," Scott said of Haley.
“So I did my undergrad in finance at New York University with those words ringing in my ears.”
Arvind embarked on a career in asset management in New York City after getting an MBA in finance from MIT Sloan School of Management in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
By her mid-30s, she was also a mother of two children under the age of 10.
While she’d powered through the early years as a young mother and a professional woman, by the time her younger one was ready for kindergarten, she didn’t want to do it anymore – commuting back to her home in the suburbs at 8 p.m. just as the kids were getting ready for bed.
She decided to quit her job.
Her husband, an investment banker, would be the sole breadwinner while she’d be the primary “on-call” parent.
In 2022, for example, women with at least a bachelor’s degree earned 79% as much as men who were college graduates, while women who were high school graduates earned 81% as much as men with the same level of education, according to the Pew Research Center.
After collecting and analyzing 200 years of U.S. historical data to demonstrate how and why gender differences in earnings and employment rates have changed over time, she found that while historically, the wage gap could be explained through differences in education and occupational choices, recently, the differences among men and women in the same profession widens after the birth of the first child.
Why is the fatherhood premium growing over time?"
“And therefore, if you are by yourself, you don't have the ability to have that help mate.”
The other explanation is the American notion of masculinity that places a self-imposed pressure to achieve more when you are a father.
“This internal sense that fathers have, that they really have to run fast because they are breadwinners,” she says.
When it comes to college-educated women, high-salary jobs with long, inflexible hours exacerbate the gender pay gap.
When women take on “greedy” work, which pays disproportionately more when they work a greater number of hours or have less control over those hours, they tend not to last long because they opt out to raise families.
But “if that job now changed to, you don't have to travel to Tokyo, you have to Zoom with Tokyo clients every other weekend, you can do it.”
When Jane Vernon moved to the suburbs from New York City with two preschoolers, she worked for a Fortune 500 company that had offered her part-time work during her early days of motherhood.
Her hard work didn’t go unnoticed—she was offered a promotion, but the catch was that needed to be physically present five days per week.
“She said that juggling family concerns was not relevant.”
She decided to quit her job.
If she’d had flexibility, things would have been very different.
“Without a doubt, I would have stayed in the workforce,” she says.
“I did not want to quit my job.”
Her life as a Scarsdale mom, one of the most expensive zip codes in the country, landed her in familiar company: stay-at-home moms with degrees from prestigious universities and experience in the corporate world, including at white-shoe law firms, exclusive management consultancies and Fortune 500 companies.
Vernon established The Acceleration Project, a nonprofit consulting firm in 2012 to help small businesses that were dealing with the aftermath of the economic recession by channeling the talents of these “opt-out” moms with expertise in everything from law, business marketing and finance.
The nonprofit now has more than 200 volunteers who work part-time or full-time with the organization.
"They say they choose to work with us as we provide opportunities for professionals to use their skills for meaningful impact."
Carol Fishman Cohen, a Pomona College and Harvard Business School graduate, took an 11-year break in the 1990s to raise her four children in a Boston suburb before going back to work full-time at Bain Capital.
In Cohen’s case, her husband had been working at a law firm for 20 years when she was going back to work.
He had a demanding job but had little travel.
This, and the fact that she had a nanny to take care of her children ages 5 to 11, enabled her to return to a high-pressure job that required travel.
“My husband handled things like doctor visits, sick kids, and unexpected events,” she says.
When considering childcare costs, couples should evaluate being able to afford childcare based on their combined projected income, not based on the incremental income the returning partner is making.
The share of prime-age women who are employed hit an all-time high of 76% in June and experts believe the flexibility to work remotely contributed to the surge.
In June, 77.8% of women ages 25 to 54 were working or looking for jobs, up from 77.6% in May and the highest in U.S. history, the Labor Department’s July jobs report showed.
About 35% of people who can do their jobs remotely are working from home, up from just 7% before the pandemic, according to the Pew Research Center.
It depends, given that we are seeing various degrees of in-office requirements, says Cohen.
“Less travel enabled by video calls is a huge factor in retaining mothers - and some fathers too.”
That would entail leaving a lot of money on the table, as each passes up the high pressure promotion, partner track or tenure track.
Arvind, who quit her job as a vice president in asset management at Alliance Bernstein when her older son was nine, says mothering while working was an “emotional rollercoaster.”
I don't want to be called just a housewife.
She went back to school for a master's degree in economics and education at Columbia Teacher’s College (taking more courses than required for her degree) and now works as a consultant at a firm that maps and analyzes the prenatal to five funding streams with various state governments.
She also serves on the board of Child Care Council of Westchester.
The consultant job offers flexibility and is a remote position.
Eventually, she hopes to get back into finance as a venture capitalist in the education-tech field.
Laughing, she says she nailed one prediction: the Barbie movie.
Follow her on Twitter @SwapnaVenugopal
People on Social Security will receive a much smaller bump of 3.2% in their benefits checks next year, as the cost-of-living adjustment, or COLA, after government data on Thursday showed inflation steadied in September from the prior month.
Annual inflation was 3.7% in September, matching August’s increase but off a 40-year high of 9.1% in June 2022.
Without the volatile food and energy sectors, the so-called “core” inflation rate fell to 4.1% from August’s 4.3%.
Although inflation remains about double the Federal Reserve’s 2% target, it remains mostly lower, which means Social Security recipients will see a lower COLA.
The 3.2% increase in 2024 is about one-third of the four-decade-high 8.7% COLA in 2023.
And while the hike in benefits remains higher than the 2.6% average over the past 20 years, older adults are pessimistic about their finances and the growing possibility of Social Security benefit cuts, according to the latest retirement survey of 2,258 people by The Senior Citizens League, a nonprofit seniors group.
Protect your assets: Best high-yield savings accounts of 2023
“Worry that retirement income won’t be enough to cover the cost of essentials in the coming months is a top concern of 56% of survey respondents,” said Mary Johnson, Social Security and Medicare policy analyst at The Senior Citizens League, in a release.
“Social Security benefit cuts are an even bigger concern.”
Various reasons the COLA is falling short include:
◾ Inflation: 68% of older adults say their household expenses remain at least 10% higher than one year ago, although the overall inflation rate has slowed, according to the League’s survey.
They said this situation has persisted over the last year.
◾ Benefit cuts: Nearly 6 out of 10 respondents rank this as their top worry.
“Significant numbers of lower-income older households have lost access to some safety net programs over the past 12 months,” Johnson said.
Some faced a double whammy.
◾ Taxes: Because Social Security recipients received the highest COLA in 40 years in 2023, Johnson expects more beneficiaries to owe federal income taxes on their Social Security benefits for the first time in the upcoming 2024 tax season.
Up to 85% of Social Security benefits can be counted as taxable income when income exceeds certain thresholds.
Unlike other parts of the federal income tax code, the income thresholds that subject Social Security benefits to taxation have never been adjusted for inflation.
CPI - when will rents go down?CPI report live updates: Inflation stays high as used car prices fall, rent climbs again
A few states want some too:These states want a cut of your Social Security check.
Do you live in one of them?
Congress could pass legislation to allow income tax thresholds for taxing Social Security to be adjusted annually for inflation, the same way the IRS adjusts tax brackets.
Here’s an example of what that might mean for someone:
◾ Current law says if an individual’s income is between $25,000 and $34,000, you may have to pay income tax on up to 50% of benefits, and if it’s more than $34,000, up to 85% of benefits may be taxable.
◾ If those thresholds were adjusted for inflation to 2023 dollars, then the individual filing status of $25,000 would be about $74,614, and $34,000 would be about $101,475, Johnson said.
Congress also could change how the COLA is calculated to better reflect how seniors spend their money.
“If that was the law today, the COLA in 2024 would be higher – about 4.2%,” Johnson estimates, using the government’s consumer price index for the elderly.
Social Security Administration bases its COLA each year on average annual increases in the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers from July through September.
The index for urban wage earners largely reflects the broad index that the Labor Department releases each month but differs slightly.
Last month, while the index remained at 3.7%, the index for urban wage earners was 3.6%.
The Seniors Citizens League uses the most recent inflation data to keep a running projection of what COLA might be next year.
September is particularly important because it makes up the final month SSA officially uses to calculate 2024’s COLA.
About 70 million Americans receive benefits from programs administered by SSA, with retired workers and their dependents accounting for 76.9% of benefits paid in 2022.
Nearly 9 out of 10 people aged 65 and older received a Social Security benefit as of Dec. 31.
Among them, 12% of men and 15% of women rely on Social Security for 90% or more of their income.
In August, the average monthly check for Social Security beneficiaries was $1,705.79, according to SSA.
A 3.2% COLA would mean about an extra $54.58 each month.
The new COLA will be effective starting in January.
You can reach her atmjlee@usatoday.com and subscribe to our free Daily Money newsletter for personal finance tips and business news every Monday.
The United Auto Workers’ strikes came to Louisville, Kentucky, this week when the 8,700 workers at the Ford Kentucky Truck Plant held a surprise walkout.
They join the 25,300 employees now on strike at other Big Three facilities across the country.
And the movement they’re leading is gaining momentum – the strikes are popular with the public and infectious with workers.
They’re drawing on the energy of recent labor efforts at Starbucks, UPS, Hollywood and elsewhere.
And in the UAW’s case, they’ve struck a chord by calling out eroding compensation and unjust transitions that have harmed production workers across the economy in recent decades.
Now the members of Louisville’s UAW Local 862 could help shape the outcome of these negotiations.
The Local says its members are responsible for 54% of Ford’s North American profits, including through the production of SUVs and Super Duty pickups.
Ford is now a special target of UAW after some progress in negotiations with General Motors, which recently conceded to putting new electric vehicle and battery manufacturing facilities under the master UAW contract.
The need for good union jobs in the transition to EV production at Ford and Stellantis is still one of the major sticking points in the negotiations.
Solidarity is contagious, and these corporations are worried.
That’s why the Big Three are starting to make other concessions as well.
A deal may be closer than we think:UAW strike talks show progress with Ford, Stellantis
That includes over 20% wage increases, agreements to bring back cost-of-living adjustments that had disappeared in recent years and a shorter path for workers to reach top wage rates.
But along with the need for a full just transition to EV jobs, the companies’ wage proposals fall short after years of failing to keep up with inflation and in the context of soaring CEO pay.
And the UAW is rightly calling for an end to employment tiers that have denied pensions to workers hired after 2007.
I got to hear directly from UAW President Shawn Fain last week at a policy conference in Detroit.
His refrain is common sense: These corporations have never been more profitable, and “record profits must mean record contracts.”
Trump doesn't have union's back:In UAW strike, Trump pretends to support workers.
He's used to stabbing them in the back.
But Fain is also unflinching in his vision that the UAW’s fight is about the future of the broader American economy.
We’ll either continue on the path that enriches billionaires and squeezes the working class, or we’ll build something better.
To the plutocrats claiming that the UAW aims to wreck the economy, Fain clarifies that they only aim to wreck “their economy.”
Now these Louisville workers are joining the growing picket line, and marching for a place in history.
This column first published at the Louisville Courier Journal.
From getting stuck in traffic and the extra effort put into getting dressed, many employees would much rather clock in from home.
However, a recent survey found that one of the biggest reasons could simply be how costly it is to make money.
Owl Lab's 2023 "State of Work" report found 66% of U.S. employees who returned to the office to work five days a week or full time, spend an average of $51 every workday.
Working in the office costs pet owners an extra $20 a day on average, the report states.
The survey shares information on what work tasks are easier to complete during a remote shift, what perks exist at the office and which work models managers feel their teams better thrive in.
The report found that employees working at the office pay about $51 a day on the following expenses:
Your connection with your coworkers can often make or break a job.
Owl Labs found that 46% of employees find it easier to build colleague relationships when working from home.
23% found doing so harder with a remote job while 26% said it made no difference whether they saw their fellow staff in-person or not.
Between August and September 2022, around 27% of the U.S. workforce worked remotely at least part-time, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Multiple academic servers suggested that actually about half of Americans worked remotely at least part-time, the MIT Sloan School of Management reported in June.
The workplace doesn’t look like it did four years ago, namely because of the lack of the “workplace” itself.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, workers were more likely to work from home in 2022 than in 2019, with 34% of employees doing all or some of their work at home.
The “American Time Use” survey also found for full-time workers, men worked an average of 8.3 hours per day and women 7.8 hours.
Here’s a glimpse at the American work year in numbers:
There are about 2,080 working hours in a year for an employee who works a traditional 40-hour workweek.
The average employee works around 8 hours per weekday, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
If you multiply a week's worth of work by the 52 weeks in a year, you get 2,080 hours.
That number doesn’t include holidays or paid time off, however.
There are 11 federal holidays recognized by the U.S. government.
Federal employees have all 11 off, and if you’re lucky enough to receive the same benefit, you’ll get an extra 88 hours off your annual tally.
U.S. employees receive an average of 7.6 paid holidays per year, according to a Forbes survey, with the most common being Thanksgiving, Christmas, Independence Day, New Year’s Day, Memorial Day and Labor Day.
We found out why.
For a traditional five-day workweek, there are 260 working days in a year.
Without accounting for time off, that means you spend approximately 71% of your year working.
Subtract however many federal holidays your company allows (and the vacation time you’re planning) and that’s how many working days you’ll have this year.
With 365 days in a year and 24 hours in a day, there are 8,760 total hours in a year.
Between $5.15 and $16 an hour:Here's which state has the highest minimum wage
USA TODAY is exploring the questions you and others ask every day.
From "Who is running for president in 2024?"
− we're striving to find answers to the most common questions you ask every day.
Head to our Just Curious section to see what else we can answer for you.
Though different people experience attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in different ways, it is something that can significantly disrupt a person's life.
Whether in the classroom, workplace, or at home, ADHD has been shown to affect grades, job performance and can even cause relationship problems.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) notes that ADHD is one of the most common neurodevelopmental disorders among children, but it's also known to be common among people 18 and older.
They've done so through behavioral therapy or by adopting coping mechanisms.
In many cases, medication is also prescribed to improve focus and ease ADHD symptoms.
ADHD is a chronic neurodevelopmental condition (referring to the way one's brain grows and develops) that "is characterized by difficulties with inattention, hyperactivity and impulsivity or both," explains Emma Hepburn, PhD, a clinical psychologist and author of "A Toolkit For Your Emotions."
Though many people refer to ADHD and ADD (attention-deficit disorder) as separate conditions, they are mostly identical, so the term ADD is simply an outdated reference to ADHD, according to the Child Mind Institute.
(One distinction between the two that some people point to is that some individuals with ADHD have hyperactive behaviors while others don't, but medically, the diagnosis is labeled ADHD either way.)
Symptoms of ADHD can "cause impairments in multiple life settings," Ramsay says.
Though it's considered more common in children, with at least 6.1 million kids in the U.S. between the ages of 2-17 living with the condition, per the CDC, it's also common in adulthood.
"6.8% of adults around the world have ADHD," says Ramsay.
The symptoms of ADHD are pretty straightforward and include inattention - an inability to concentrate or focus; hyperactivity - frequent movements not fitting to the setting; and impulsivity - sudden actions that occur without thinking them through.
These symptoms can manifest as a person seeming to daydream a lot, forgetting or losing things often, talking or interrupting a lot, having a tendency to squirm or fidget, or having a hard time resisting temptation, per the CDC.
It's also important to note: "Some people may experience more inattentive symptoms while others experience more hyperactive/impulsive symptoms," says Hepburn.
She adds that such traits may also change over time as a person develops or circumstances change.
Birkenstock has gone public.
Birkenstock Holding Ltd. sold about 10.8 million shares in the offering, its shareholders selling an additional 21.5 million.
The German sandal company raised about $495 million, the Associated Press reported.
Birkenstock sandals came to the U.S. in the mid-1960s – today, they're a staple of comfort and style.
But the shoe has, in part, come into mainstream footwear because of its emphasis on foot health over fashion.
Even the designer credited with popularizing them in the U.S. called them “odd-looking sandals.”
Here's a look back on the sandal from its family shoemaker beginnings to its place in modern-day fashion.
Generations later, Konrad Birkenstock designed a unique anatomical shoe featuring a rounded heel, malleable sole and different left and right feet, allowing the foot to roll.
His son launched the physician-endorsed “System Birkenstock” in 1932, a series of podiatry and specialist courses with an accompanying podiatry textbook in 1947.
It was a time when stilettos were all the rage, and the first launch of the “Madrid” shoe at the 1963 shoe trade fair in Düsseldorf failed.
They were the “laughingstock” of the fair, Karl Birkenstock said.
He pivoted and distributed pamphlets to doctors to drum up support for his sandals.
From there, American popularity spread thanks to a loyal fan base of Northern California hippies, the Los Angeles Times reported.
Apple founder Steve Jobs famously loved the sandals around this time.
It was the highest price ever paid for a pair of sandals.
Buying stocks for the first time?
“It was really about ... creating a total look and I think comfort had a secondary place.”
But the hippie and grunge circles quickly embraced the shoe as a symbol of counterculture.
In 1992, Marc Jacobs drew inspiration from this and styled Tyra Banks in Arizona Birkenstock sandals in the infamous show that got him fired from Perry Ellis.
Dior has a collection with them.
But even as the decades roll on, they’ve been called the “Jesus sandals,” deemed geeky and hallmarks of hipster culture.
They’ve even been the subject of the hot socks and sandals debate – just see the “Socks and Sandals” jingle from Disney Channel’s “So Random!”
But since COVID-19 stay-at-home orders, today's styles place a greater emphasis on comfort.
They’re now part of a “cool girl” aesthetic.
Margot Robbie even traded her pink heels in for a pair of them in the 2023 “Barbie” movie, though with great reluctance.
Birkenstock sandals are made at the company’s production facilities in Germany and the brand’s closed-toed shoes are made in Portugal.
An IPO is an initial public offering – you can think of it as a fundraising effort.
When a company is private, the shareholders often include comprised of founders, family, friends and professional investors, according to Investopedia.
When a company goes public, it means they’re offering shares to the public for the first time, allowing the company to grow and public investors a front-row seat.
After going public, a company is subject to Exchange Act reporting requirements, according to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
What to expect:Stock market outlook for 2024
Birkenstock is valuing the company at $8.46 billion, the Associated Press reported.
The stock opened at $41 each and ended the day down 12.6%.
Birkenstock sales boosted this year in part because of the Barbie movie’s use of the famous sandal.
Bloomberg News reported a 29% rise in revenue last year.
Many adults have worries when it comes to their sleep.
The focus ranges from sleep hygiene to wanting to fall asleep faster and even coping with sleep apnea.
For others, the prospect of bedtime comes with a frightening – and often recurring – condition of being temporarily unable to move at night, a state of being known as sleep paralysis.
While prevalence varies (one study found it in as many as 38% of participants) researchers believe that generally, about 20% of people experience sleep paralysis at some point in their life.
Whether you've experienced this sensation once, or do so frequently, it's important to understand what sleep paralysis is, what causes sleep paralysis and what options there are for sleep paralysis treatment.
Sleep paralysis is "a condition where you feel paralyzed just before falling asleep or, more commonly, when you first wake up in the morning," says Kevin Walker, MD, the medical director of Intermountain Health Sleep Disorders Center in Utah.
It most often occurs between stages of wakefulness and sleep when, for a very brief period of time, a person may be unable to move or speak.
Sleep paralysis symptoms vary.
During sleep paralysis, a person may also find it difficult to take deep breaths or feel like their chest is constricted.
A tendency to hallucinate has also been associated with the condition.
Colloquially, these hallucinations may be referred to as “sleep paralysis demons.”
While the exact cause of sleep paralysis remains unknown, experts say there are often multiple contributing factors or disorders involved, including insomnia, narcolepsy, sleep apnea, substance abuse and sudden changes to one's sleeping schedule.
Most commonly though, sleep paralysis is merely a continuation of what occurs naturally in one's body during sleep.
"When we go into a dreaming state of sleep at night (REM), our body has a mechanism that paralyzes our muscles, which is a great thing so that we don’t act out our dreams," Walker explains.
"We often dream more the second half of the night, including just before we wake up, so sleep paralysis is thought to be a carry-over of this REM sleep-related paralysis into wakefulness."
As such, sleep paralysis can happen to anyone but may also be triggered by other factors.
While startling and even frightening for some people, sleep paralysis is not harmful and should pass quickly.
Still, because the condition is alarming to children and adults alike, it has been linked with heightened cases of anxiety and increased stress at home, school or work.
"Most individuals will then drift back off to sleep and wake up with no issues."
She also suggests making small movements of one's fingers or toes and taking slow breaths to recover more quickly.
"Although it may feel like an eternity while you're going through it," Walker says, "your body will naturally come out of sleep paralysis."
He says one's body, "typically self resolves sleep paralysis within seconds to a few minutes at the most."
The best way to avoid sleep paralysis altogether is to "keep a regular sleep schedule and get an adequate amount of sleep consistently," Walker says.
Doing so includes straightforward practices such as avoiding caffeine, large meals (or late-night snacking) before bed and putting away screens prior to bedtime to reduce stimulating blue-light exposure.
"Only go to bed when drowsy and minimize time in bed awake," Walker suggests.
"Sleep paralysis is usually not a serious health concern," she says, "but if you experience the symptom frequently, speak to your healthcare provider to evaluate for other underlying sleep disorders or medical conditions that can contribute."
The United Auto Workers’ strikes came to Louisville, Kentucky, this week when the 8,700 workers at the Ford Kentucky Truck Plant held a surprise walkout.
They join the 25,300 employees now on strike at other Big Three facilities across the country.
And the movement they’re leading is gaining momentum – the strikes are popular with the public and infectious with workers.
They’re drawing on the energy of recent labor efforts at Starbucks, UPS, Hollywood and elsewhere.
And in the UAW’s case, they’ve struck a chord by calling out eroding compensation and unjust transitions that have harmed production workers across the economy in recent decades.
Now the members of Louisville’s UAW Local 862 could help shape the outcome of these negotiations.
The Local says its members are responsible for 54% of Ford’s North American profits, including through the production of SUVs and Super Duty pickups.
Ford is now a special target of UAW after some progress in negotiations with General Motors, which recently conceded to putting new electric vehicle and battery manufacturing facilities under the master UAW contract.
The need for good union jobs in the transition to EV production at Ford and Stellantis is still one of the major sticking points in the negotiations.
Solidarity is contagious, and these corporations are worried.
That’s why the Big Three are starting to make other concessions as well.
A deal may be closer than we think:UAW strike talks show progress with Ford, Stellantis
That includes over 20% wage increases, agreements to bring back cost-of-living adjustments that had disappeared in recent years and a shorter path for workers to reach top wage rates.
But along with the need for a full just transition to EV jobs, the companies’ wage proposals fall short after years of failing to keep up with inflation and in the context of soaring CEO pay.
And the UAW is rightly calling for an end to employment tiers that have denied pensions to workers hired after 2007.
I got to hear directly from UAW President Shawn Fain last week at a policy conference in Detroit.
His refrain is common sense: These corporations have never been more profitable, and “record profits must mean record contracts.”
Trump doesn't have union's back:In UAW strike, Trump pretends to support workers.
He's used to stabbing them in the back.
But Fain is also unflinching in his vision that the UAW’s fight is about the future of the broader American economy.
We’ll either continue on the path that enriches billionaires and squeezes the working class, or we’ll build something better.
To the plutocrats claiming that the UAW aims to wreck the economy, Fain clarifies that they only aim to wreck “their economy.”
Now these Louisville workers are joining the growing picket line, and marching for a place in history.
This column first published at the Louisville Courier Journal.
Former president and current criminal defendant Donald Trump, the front-runner in the GOP presidential primary, is getting worse.
I realize that’s a mighty high bar for him to clear, but he’s doing it, each day showing independent voters and Republicans who still value sane leadership why he should never be allowed within 10 square miles of the White House.
In the wake of the hideous Hamas attack on Israel, with American lawmakers and both sides of the aisle pledging full support for our ally, Trump’s political instincts told him to slam Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and say: “Israel was not prepared.”
Trump then praised the terrorist organization Hezbollah, which on Wednesday was attacking Israel along its northern border.
“You know, Hezbollah is very smart,” Trump said.
“They’re all very smart.”
MAGA loyalists’ minds won’t be changed by anything, but those voters also won’t be enough, should Trump win the GOP nomination, to get him back into office.
He’ll need to win over independents and even some moderate Republicans who put country over party while making headway with the ever-growing number of Generation Z voters who, based on recent elections, broadly reject Trump's MAGA movement.
Consider an assortment of baffling/disturbing comments Trump has made in speeches and on social media just in recent weeks.
The Fox News interviewer had to correct him afterward.
In another recent interview, Trump said: “We have the worst education almost in the large world, the world that people know about.” As opposed to the large world people don’t know about?
He said at a rally that the U.S. Capitol “looks like sh-t.”
When questioning someone’s lucidity, it’s generally best to sound lucid yourself.
Late last month at a rally, Trump mocked Rep. Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., and her husband, who was brutally attacked and beaten in their home last year.
“And she’s against building a wall at our border, even though she has a wall around her house – which obviously didn’t do a very good job.”
As a Gen Z voter, I want younger candidates.
That language mirrors lines in Adolf Hitler’s “Mein Kampf” and is in line with the way white supremacists discuss immigrants.
Trump has said recently that forest fires could be prevented “if you dampen your forests.”
You know why, because he’s got a boss.
Who’s his boss?
Petty criticism of Israel (Trump remains mad at Netanyahu because the prime minister accepted that Biden won the 2020 election), violent rhetoric, mixing up the names of political rivals, mocking an attack on a lawmaker’s spouse and generally sounding like the town drunk slouched at the end of the bar airing conspiratorial grievances.
And that’s only a small sample of Trump’s madness over the past few weeks.
Setting aside his two impeachments, his incitement of an attack on the U.S. Capitol, his election denialism and the 91 state and federal felony charges he faces, I have to ask independents and on-the-fence Republicans alike: Would you actually vote for that mess?
Is that really the best the Republican Party can offer America and the world?
People will keep taking swipes at Biden’s age, though Trump is only three years younger.
But if you listen and pay attention to the former president, you’ll see a profoundly unhinged man teetering on a full separation from reality.
The ham has slipped off his sandwich.
It’s time to stop pretending otherwise.
Ever since USA TODAY broke the news last month about Michigan State University’s investigation into Mel Tucker’s alleged sexual misconduct, the former football coach has been playing defense.
Statements from Tucker or his legal team have vehemently denied allegations he sexually harassed Brenda Tracy, a rape survivor and activist the coach had hired to speak to his team about sexual violence.
The alleged harassment – an April 2022 phone call with Tracy during which Tucker masturbated and is accused of making sexual comments without her consent – was not harassment at all, according to Tucker.
While he has admitted to masturbating during the call, Tucker claims it was consensual phone sex.
No matter what happened in that phone call, Tucker’s public behavior since then has gone well beyond just denying sexually harassing Tracy.
In his first public statement addressing MSU’s investigation into his alleged sexual misconduct, Tucker went on the attack.
He accused Tracy of fabricating the harassment to “revive her career” and “destroy” his life, and called the allegations “character assassination.”
Other swipes at Tracy are sprinkled throughout the rest of the statement: Tucker implied she provoked him into having phone sex (and blames her for neither objecting nor hanging up the phone), claimed she spread rumors about his marriage, and propped up the idea that Tracy was motivated by greed.
In a second statement following news that MSU was planning on firing the coach, Tucker repeated his claim that Tracy had made false allegations and called the investigation into his alleged misconduct a “miscarriage of justice,” a sentiment that appeared again in Tucker’s 25-page response from his legal team to MSU’s notice of termination.
It’s an acronym that stands for deny, attack, reverse victim and offender.
Perpetrators of wrongdoing – especially those who commit sexual misconduct – often use it to deflect blame and responsibility.
It never happened, she’s lying, I’m being falsely accused.
Surviving sexual assault:President Biden's Title IX promise to survivors is overdue.
We can't wait on Washington's chaos to end.
Even Tracy herself noticed his use of this tactic.
It promotes victim blaming and prevents thoughtful discussions of sexual violence from happening.
If it were really harassment, she would have just hung up, she would have said something, she would have reported it sooner.
In reality, people who are subjected to sexual violence often do not conform to stereotypical ideas about how victims should respond.
For instance, many victims “freeze” while experiencing sexual harassment.
Outdated statutes of limitations:E. Jean Carroll lawsuit against Trump shows why Adult Survivors Act is needed
She’s lying, just like that woman who falsely accused Mel Tucker.
Happens all the time.
In its termination letter to the coach, the university called attention to his “unconvincing rationalizations and misguided attempts to shift responsibility.”
It was ineffective in helping him retain his job, and it injected more victim-blaming sentiment into a cultural landscape already hostile toward people who experience and report sexual violence.
The attacks and attempts to portray himself as the victim of malicious false allegations were a toxic and unnecessary addition.
But, with enough awareness and education about this destructive tactic, its power and frequent use can be curbed.
The first school resource officer came into existence in the late 1950s under the guise that having a police officer in the school would "improve" the relationship between youth and law enforcement – a novel claim that helped SRO programs multiply.
It's estimated that 20% of schools have an officer.
Yet, despite this original claim that relationships with the youth would improve, there has not been any conclusive evidence that an officer presence improves youth relationships with law enforcement.
In fact, the research is quite mixed.
Though different people experience attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in different ways, it is something that can significantly disrupt a person's life.
Whether in the classroom, workplace, or at home, ADHD has been shown to affect grades, job performance and can even cause relationship problems.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) notes that ADHD is one of the most common neurodevelopmental disorders among children, but it's also known to be common among people 18 and older.
They've done so through behavioral therapy or by adopting coping mechanisms.
In many cases, medication is also prescribed to improve focus and ease ADHD symptoms.
ADHD is a chronic neurodevelopmental condition (referring to the way one's brain grows and develops) that "is characterized by difficulties with inattention, hyperactivity and impulsivity or both," explains Emma Hepburn, PhD, a clinical psychologist and author of "A Toolkit For Your Emotions."
Though many people refer to ADHD and ADD (attention-deficit disorder) as separate conditions, they are mostly identical, so the term ADD is simply an outdated reference to ADHD, according to the Child Mind Institute.
(One distinction between the two that some people point to is that some individuals with ADHD have hyperactive behaviors while others don't, but medically, the diagnosis is labeled ADHD either way.)
Symptoms of ADHD can "cause impairments in multiple life settings," Ramsay says.
Though it's considered more common in children, with at least 6.1 million kids in the U.S. between the ages of 2-17 living with the condition, per the CDC, it's also common in adulthood.
"6.8% of adults around the world have ADHD," says Ramsay.
The symptoms of ADHD are pretty straightforward and include inattention - an inability to concentrate or focus; hyperactivity - frequent movements not fitting to the setting; and impulsivity - sudden actions that occur without thinking them through.
These symptoms can manifest as a person seeming to daydream a lot, forgetting or losing things often, talking or interrupting a lot, having a tendency to squirm or fidget, or having a hard time resisting temptation, per the CDC.
It's also important to note: "Some people may experience more inattentive symptoms while others experience more hyperactive/impulsive symptoms," says Hepburn.
She adds that such traits may also change over time as a person develops or circumstances change.
You know you're not going to win.
Still, you can't help but buy a ticket.
It's a hefty prize, but the odds of winning, as with most lotteries, were astronomically small − about 1 in 292.2 million.
For context, you're more likely to get killed by a shark, fatally hit by a meteor or struck by lightning.
You're also more likely to worsen your mental health in the process of playing the lottery, experts say.
If the odds of winning the lottery are so low, why do people bother playing?
Dan Field, a therapist specializing in gambling addiction treatment, says the lottery holds such a prominent place in American culture because it gives people the opportunity to indulge in fantasies about how their lives could change if they win.
"There's this desire to be financially unburdened and free − the fantasy that I'm going to always have enough money to do whatever I want, and no one is going tell me what I do," he previously told USA TODAY.
"That fantasy can become almost an obsession for some people."
It also becomes a problem, he says, when people of lower socioeconomic status see the lottery as their only chance of joining the ranks of the mega-wealthy.
"With gambling, like with other activities, it can become a single-minded focus, and all other avenues of potential joy fade away," Field said.
"They're not as important as the gambling activity."
More:Mega Millions is up to $1.55B.
No one is winning, so why do we keep playing the lottery?
Most people are able to play lotteries for fun without falling into addictive or destructive patterns.
Still, when gambling addictions occur, they can wreak disastrous consequences, including job loss, homelessness, family fractures, bankruptcy and criminal activity, like fraud and embezzlement, he says.
If you do play the lottery, experts say to keep these tips in mind:
Cardi B crying while eating a painfully spicy chicken wing.
Jack Harlow dodging a pointed question about his type while sipping a juice box.
Mark Cuban attempting a Pittsburgh accent.
Though these shows' setups vary, their strategy seems the same: Place a celebrity in an extremely awkward situation and capture as many candid moments as possible.
Cringeworthy clips from these shows regularly go viral on TikTok and Instagram, begging the question: What is it about celebrities and excruciating awkwardness that makes us feel like we can't look away?
"There's a reason we are obsessed with this, and much of it has to do with the fact that, whether we mean to or not, we put celebrities on a pedestal," says Henna Pryor, a workplace performance expert and author of "Good Awkward: How to Embrace the Embarrassing and Celebrate the Cringe to Become The Bravest You."
Pryor defines awkwardness as the emotion experienced when the person we believe we are isn't the person who is being perceived.
"For a moment in time, that external reality doesn't match the identity we painted for them, and we find that fascinating," she says.
By watching other people's social blunders, he says, we learn what not to do.
"It's a great opportunity for us to learn about social life and social expectations and social behavior without having to risk any of our social capital," he says.
"It's a real advantage to be able to learn vicariously from watching other people's awkward moments."
People love seeing celebrities in uncomfortable situations in particular, he says, because of a phenomenon called downward social comparison.
"Hot Ones," which shows celebrities struggling to eat chicken wings dipped in extraordinarily spicy hot sauce, capitalizes on this to great effect, he says.
"At that moment, we're actually doing better than the celebrity is," he says.
By showing their awkward side, celebrities give the impression of vulnerability, which endears them to fans even more.
As a result, a sweaty interview over hot wings may do more to bolster a celebrity's public profile than a traditional news interview.
Who hasn't been stuck in an awkward conversation that has no graceful way out?"
Awkward interviews are also more prone to go viral, because they fit into the unfiltered aesthetic that's currently popular on social media.
"I think it's great, whether it's in these shows or podcasts, to create these more genuine and real moments."
A seismic ground shift that will overtake movie theaters on Thursday, but first trembled Wednesday night, when Taylor Swift's "The Eras Tour" concert film made its world premiere.
More:Watching the world premiere of 'Eras Tour' movie with Taylor Swift felt like a dance party
After popping in to visit invited moviegoers in 13 of the theaters, Swift arrived at the one offering Dolby sound – the most effective presentation of this faithful-to-the-live-show movie – with a casual, "Hi, guys."
Swift stood at the front of the theater for a few minutes to express how much fun she's had performing during her Eras Tour and praised her backup singers and dancers, several of whom sat alongside her, pumping fists and singing along as the film unfolded.
"We pranced on that stage grinning because of what met us on the other side," Swift said.
Fans enthralled by the Eras concert will undoubtedly thrill at the opportunity to relive the magic and enjoy "The Eras Tour" as a communal concert experience more than a staid movie.
More:Taylor Swift rewards fans with 44 songs at Eras Tour opener: Inside her triumphant return
At just under three hours, the celluloid version of Swift's live spectacle is about 30 minutes shorter than her in-person performances throughout her six-month U.S. tour (her overseas dates kick off in November).
Her live shows offered an incredibly fulfilling set list of 45 songs – once she added "Long Live" to the rundown in July – and the film, directed by Sam Wrench, shaves off only a handful of tunes for a more efficient run time.
The concert footage comes from Swift's final U.S. shows of 2023 at SoFi Stadium in Inglewood, California – she played an astounding six nights at the 70,000-capacity venue – and the film pulls from her Aug. 4 and Aug. 5 dates for her customary "surprise" songs.
Swift opted for "Our Song" to "thank the people who liked me when I was a little teenager writing songs for my ninth-grade talent show," she says on stage in the film.
The entire film offers a front-row seat to the grandeur.
The staging is so massive that even the best seats in a stadium – and the King Kong-sized video screens – could provide only so much detail.
But on the big screen, the close-ups are glorious, whether zooming in on Swift's cat-eye makeup outlining her crystal blue eyes, the moss covering her piano and the sweat sticking to her bangs during "Champagne Problems" and her meticulous table setting at the start of "Tolerate It."
Among the performances, "Look What You Made Me Do" sizzles.
The detailed shots of the various Swift incarnations in glass cases spotlight the intricacy of the number, while Swift is in her snarling, sexy glory as the camera whirls around her.
"Blank Space" – already one of the meatiest songs in her extensive catalog – also receives a boost from Swift's uncanny ability to find the camera for a coy wink and to unleash her long-legged strut.
At the premiere, it was difficult to tell the screams from the crowd on film from the cheers in the audience, and throughout, several fans stood to sing and dance along.
By the time the show-closing "Karma" rolled out, the atmosphere felt like the encore at a concert, a joyful encounter full of love that indicated Swift isn't the only one having a blast at her shows.
More:Taylor Swift surprises fans with global premiere for upcoming Eras Tour movie
Billy Joel and Sting plan to flock to Florida this winter.
The piano man late Thursday afternoon announced that he will perform with the Police singer at Raymond James Stadium in Tampa, Florida, for "one night only," on Saturday, Feb. 24.
Joel made the surprise announcement Thursday on social media and his website, billyjoel.com.
He's been touring with Stevie Nicks, who's in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of Fleetwood Mac and as a solo artist.
"The iconic musicians will each perform their most beloved songs on the same stage for the first time ever in their illustrious careers," the website said.
"The spectacular show promises to be an unforgettable evening of live music."
For more on the presale, visit www.citientertainment.com.
Tickets for everyone else go on sale at 10 a.m. Friday, Oct. 20, at livenation.com.
Joel announced during earlier this year he will be performing the last show of his residency at New York City's Madison Square Garden in July 2024 after 10 years of singing his classics in front of adoring fans.
The last show will mark his 150th performance in the venue space.
A fellow Rock and Roll Hall of Famer, Sting has enjoyed success since the 1970s and '80s.
Sting was a founding member of the British new-wave band The Police, who were prominent in the late 1970s and '80s with hits including "Every Breath You Take," "Don't Stand So Close To Me" and "Every Little Thing She Does is Magic."
Sting in the mid-1980s branched out as a solo star wrote and sang many hits, including "Fortress Around Your Heart," "If You Love Somebody Set Them Free" and "If I Ever Lose My Faith In You," which he's performed on the new North American leg of his My Songs tour.
Follow him on Instagram and Threads @lacrossewriter.
Is there anything that Jamie Foxx can't do?
Not really, which is why he can play both a street-smart Boston Terrier and soul man Ray Charles.
Where to watch: Peacock
But the actor's POTUS role, James Sawyer, is also an action hero in Roland Emmerich's political thriller.
When the White House is under siege and taken over by Secret Service bad guys and mercenaries, Sawyer teams with a Capitol cop (Channing Tatum) to save the day and look cool doing it.
Where to watch: Netflix
Where to watch: Prime Video
'I can see the light':Jamie Foxx took 'an unexpected dark journey' with his health
Where to watch: Netflix
Where to watch:Disney+
The boxing biopic is obviously a Will Smith vehicle – he stars as the iconic Muhammad Ali, after all.
Both turn in powerful performances as men moving from a place of distrust to making an immeasurable mark on each other.
Where to watch: Prime Video
Where to watch: Netflix
“The Truth About Cats & Dogs” (1996)
“The Great White Hype” (1996)
“Booty Call” (1997)
“The Players Club” (1998)
“Any Given Sunday” (1999)
“Held Up” (2000)
“Breakin' All the Rules” (2004)
“Miami Vice” (2006)
“The Kingdom” (2007)
“The Soloist” (2009)
“Law Abiding Citizen” (2009)
“Valentine's Day” (2010)
“Due Date” (2010)
“I'm Still Here” (2010)
“Horrible Bosses” (2011)
“Django Unchained” (2012)
“White House Down” (2013)
“Rio 2” (2014)
“The Amazing Spider-Man 2” (2014)
“A Million Ways to Die in the West” (2014)
“Horrible Bosses 2” (2014)
“Baby Driver” (2017)
“Robin Hood” (2018)
“Just Mercy” (2019)
“Project Power” (2020)
“Spider-Man: No Way Home” (2021)
“Day Shift” (2022)
“God Is a Bullet” (2023)
“They Cloned Tyrone” (2023)
“The Burial” (2023)
PHILADELPHIA – Another juggernaut got dismissed here Thursday night, the 104-win Atlanta Braves once again meeting their end at Citizens Bank Park.
The 100-win Los Angeles Dodgers are home, the 101-win Baltimore Orioles not yet ready for prime time, and any notion of “top seeds” still alive in this made-for-TV tournament masquerading as the baseball playoffs is pretty much dead.
The Philadelphia Phillies play on, a concept the man who laid out more than $1 billion in salary to produce a club that’s equal parts talented, tough and together tries not to overanalyze.
“I think luck has to be a factor in life,” John Middleton, a man worth an estimated $3.7 billion and assembler of this baseball bacchanalia in South Philly, was saying in the wee hours of Friday morning, streams of champagne and Anheuser-Busch products trickling by him.
“And if anybody who’s successful doesn’t acknowledge that luck has played a part in their success, I think they’re just not paying attention to reality.”
Reality is suddenly this for Middleton and the club he owns: The Phillies are advancing to the National League Championship Series for the second consecutive year, will be heavily favored to defeat the Arizona Diamondbacks and claim back-to-back NL pennants, and somehow have turned a pair of unsettling baseball trends on their ear.
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
And much of it almost certainly wasn’t luck.
Spending big bucks on talent doesn’t work out?
(As the Mets, Padres and Yankees discovered that this year).
Since 2019, Middleton has committed $1.04 billion to Bryce Harper, J.T.
All took their “welcome to Philly” lumps – and have come out the better for it.
Superstars don’t correlate with playoff success?
Well, just ask the Braves how that’s working out in Philly.
In their series-ending 3-1 victory, Castellanos, signed to a $100 million deal in March 2022, hit a pair of home runs for the second consecutive night – the first person in playoff history to pull that off – including a game-tying shot that eerily resembled his Game 3 equalizer.
As for Harper?
Middleton planted his flag with the then 26-year-old, signing him to a $330 million contract that preceded all the rest.
It took four years, but what Harper’s done to Atlanta the past two postseasons almost defies belief:
Fourteen hits in 29 at-bats, five home runs – two in a stunning Game 3 revenge game – and 10 RBI.
Strangely enough, Middleton just kept coming with his checkbook – all the while adding players seemingly as relentless as his spending.
Adding Castellanos to the mix was poignant, in some ways.
They shared a moment Thursday night, after Castellanos tied the game with a booming shot off Strider and later ended his night with a 112-mph rocket, the hardest-hit ball in his career.
Because of those big moments.
And obviously we're not in their category yet.
They’re working on it.
The Phillies will roll out Wheeler and Aaron Nola in NLCS Games 1 and 2 and will welcome the Diamondbacks to a ballpark where they’re now 26-11 in the postseason – 10-2 in this two-year run.
The Braves, the Padres, the Marlins – they’ve all discovered in the past two years how hard it is when Citizens Bank is in full throat, as it was with 45,831 on hand for Game 4.
It makes sense: By the time a club acclimates to this atmosphere, the series is over.
After all, it took all the Philly stars time.
Castellanos acknowledged that year one last year moved too quickly.
Just to get his head right.
It worked: Turner finished the year strongly and perhaps reinforced his belief that failure is nothing to fear.
Harper and Turner’s response in Games 3 and 4?
Nine hits in 15 at-bats, four homers, potential sainthood in Pennsylvania.
And you're not going to be perfect throughout the season.
You're not going to be perfect in the postseason.
So we got a good group, man.
I think that's the only way to put it is someone messes up, so what.
We can fix it.
We can overcome it.
And I think that belief is true.
Again, Middleton believes there’s nothing coincidental about that.
“Ultimately, when we handed Harper $330 million guaranteed, he was going to respond,” Middleton said of his bell cow.
I need to earn this.
As opposed to, I’ve earned it, now I can coast.
I’ve got it made.
How are they going to fit in?
As for the early struggles?
Middleton is quick to credit the fans for providing both accountability and full-throated support when his stars struggle – along with internal support in the clubhouse.
“Let’s give the fans some credit for that,” Middleton says of Castellanos’ and Turner’s trial periods.
And when you channel passion positively, it’s an extraordinary motivating force.
If there’s a unifying theme for both smaller-market teams and analytically inclined big-budget clubs like the Dodgers, it’s that the aim is to provide your team a chance to win in as many years as possible.
The Phillies’ approach feels much more scorched earth – see a need, sign a guy, fill the hole.
At some point, the spigot will be turned down, if not totally off.
The Phillies are getting close to their ideal, a gritty but wildly talented club that’s both entertaining and successful.
Monday, they’ll take aim at the Diamondbacks, and perhaps will get a revenge date with the Houston Astros in the World Series.
If they fall short, it certainly won’t be for lack of effort – from the owner’s suite to the front office, from the grandstands to the clubhouse, all the factors combining to shoo away the bad playoff mojo that’s befallen so many titans of the game this autumn.
“Winning teams find ways to win,” says Harper, shirtless and clad in socks amid the Phillies’ booming celebratory playlist.
“At all costs.”
SANTA CLARA, Calif. – Holding court in front of his stall in a near-empty San Francisco 49ers locker room, Trent Williams prompted his audience to ponder what Brock Purdy can become in time.
Purdy, 23, has never lost an NFL regular-season game, leads the league in pass efficiency and has a legitimate chance of leading the 49ers to a Super Bowl crown, but the young quarterback is still a baby in NFL terms.
Make that an overgrown baby.
“Brock was a rookie last year,” Williams said.
At the end of the year.
The player you’re looking at now and the player you saw in early January, late ’22, it’s a different player.
The mental bank has so much more in it.
None of this is automatic.
Toiling in his 14th NFL season (Purdy was in elementary school when Williams broke into the league), the burly left tackle has experienced all sorts of drama and flash-in-pan circumstance on his journey.
For instance, he was there (with 49ers coach Kyle Shanahan) for the entire rise and fall of the Robert Griffin III phenomenon in Washington.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
After Purdy fired four touchdown passes to slay the Dallas Cowboys 42-10 on Sunday night, though, the takeaway from Williams was as good of a warning as any for the NFL universe.
If that sounds like something you’ve heard in a horror movie, so be it.
Purdy’s rise after being the last player picked in the 2022 NFL draft makes you wonder whether he’s really a monster created by Shanahan and GM John Lynch in some lab hidden below sea level at 4949 Centennial Boulevard.
What a compliment – and subliminal dig at the haters – which speaks to cold efficiency reflected with an NFL-best 123.1 passer rating.
The 49ers (5-0) can set a franchise record at Cleveland on Sunday by winning a 16th consecutive regular-season game, while Purdy can keep piling his cache of superlatives.
Only Chad Pennington (70.8%) topped Purdy’s 70.4% completion rate over that 10-game sample size.
That consistency matters when it comes to gaining trust as a quarterback, which goes hand in hand with his preparation and grasp of the details.
If the 49ers keep winning, in time it will be natural to ponder whether Purdy belongs in the conversation about the NFL’s elite quarterbacks.
Having 10 regular-season starts and one playoff finish doesn’t provide the track record that declares “elite” but Purdy may be on his way to that level.
Purdy is undoubtedly a beneficiary of great fortune, landing with one of the deepest, most balanced teams in the NFL.
Add to that the powerful front wall fortified by Williams and a stingy, star-studded defense that won’t leave you having to win shootouts (even though San Francisco is capable, scoring at least 30 points in each game), and a ton of pressure is relieved.
But those factors also overshadow how well Purdy has handled his role.
It’s not automatic.
Remember, the 49ers traded a bundle to move up and draft Trey Lance in 2021, and he’s gone now.
They wanted Lance to become the franchise quarterback and that never materialized.
Purdy has seized his moment – now and perhaps in the future – because he just doesn’t make the glaring mistakes that can derail young quarterbacks.
The reps he had during four years as a starter at Iowa State surely provided a tremendous head start for his NFL career.
His big passer rating this season, however, is enabled by the fact that he hasn’t thrown an interception while firing 9 TD passes.
Maybe you were waiting for Purdy to wet his pants in a big moment.
Well, it still hasn’t happened.
The NFC title game setback at Philadelphia was “incomplete” as he suffered an elbow injury in the first quarter that required surgery.
The latest case, against Dallas, wound up as an example of what Williams talked about regarding Purdy’s learning curve.
Purdy had his worst game during the 19-12 NFC divisional playoff victory against the Cowboys in January, when the offense bogged down in the red zone.
He learned from it, sensing that he had a better grasp of Dallas’ defensive schemes the second time around.
No, man, I was just doing what I was asked.
Knew the game would come to me over time.
You’ve got to get into a rhythm, hit the open guys and do my part as a quarterback.
Don’t try to be a superhero and that’s that.
Purdy was in such a rhythm that Shanahan had to remind himself not to call too many passes.
In any event, Purdy sees his flow as part of a bigger picture.
“It feels like everyone’s just on a mission,” he said.
Everyone is so detailed in what they do.
The play calls are great.
The prized pupil is ready for some more tests.
That got us thinking about what recent moves are already showing troublesome signs.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Ezekiel Elliott pretty much sums it up … times two.
Seven of his 12 touchdowns for the Dallas Cowboys in 2022 came from 1 yard out and all of them occurred in the red zone.
Zeke did take a very team-friendly, one-year, $3 million deal to go to the New England Patriots, a club that really needed to add juice to its offense – and we’d argue a heavily used 28-year-old running back doesn’t really qualify.
Foresight was 20/20 on this one – Dallas should’ve kept Elliott, and the Pats should have found a dynamic weapon for their dead-in-the-water offense.
– Nate Davis
Not trying to lure Tom Brady back to the New England Patriots.
If not TB12, B.B.
Jones' 74.2 passer rating is third-worst in the NFL.
And it looks even worse when Zach Wilson and Daniel Jones are the only QBs ranked lower for efficiency.
Yet O'Brien really needs to prove that he's a miracle worker.
When the young quarterback regresses with no viable alternatives in sight, you get what the Patriots are living with: a hot mess.
– Jarrett Bell
The Denver Broncos trading for Sean Payton and not allowing him to start from scratch immediately.
Instead, the organization stays mired in one of the most brutal stretches in franchise history.
From the get-go, it was clear Russell Wilson and Payton were not going to be simpatico off the field.
Perhaps they could work it out on the field?
Thus far, that has not been the case, either.
And Payton made it much worse by criticizing former coach Nathaniel Hackett, who lasted less than one season.
Denver gave its first-round pick in the 2023 draft (and a 2024 second-rounder) to the New Orleans Saints for Payton’s services.
Hiring Payton, and making him one of the highest-paid coaches in the NFL, is a long-term play.
But the Wilson-Payton pairing was ill-conceived and set the franchise back another year.
The Giants pledged their allegiance to Daniel Jones when they signed him to a four-year extension worth $160 million ($82 million guaranteed) in March.
Jones has responded with just two touchdowns and six interceptions to begin the season.
Jones’ 176 passing yards per game average is the worst mark among NFC East starting quarterbacks.
While Jones’ 71.7 passer rating ranks dead last among NFL starting quarterbacks.
Jones is hardly the sole problem in New York.
The Giants have a patchwork offensive line and a below average receiving corps.
But the Giants gave Jones franchise quarterback-type money.
Franchise quarterbacks are supposed to elevate their team.
Jones hasn’t been able to do so.
Maybe the Giants are beginning to figure out what many of us already believed; Jones isn’t a franchise quarterback.
Barkley might be oft injured, but New York’s offense runs through him when he’s on the field.
– Tyler Dragon
Sure, that's essentially the going rate for top offensive tackles these days.
But Taylor, 25, hasn't established himself in that class yet, meaning this was a substantial bet on his growth potential.
In the early going, that wager has gone bust.
Through five weeks, Taylor had a solid lead as the NFL's most penalized player with nine accepted flags.
Patrick Mahomes and Andy Reid have come to the right tackle's defense, saying he was being unfairly targeted by officials.
But beyond the penalties, Taylor hasn't been nearly good enough as a protector for Mahomes.
In the cutthroat AFC, the margin for error is slim, especially with the young receiving corps yet to find its way.
Things are still salvageable, but a significant leap will be required for Taylor's deal not to go down as one of the franchise's bigger missteps in recent history.
It’s true: we’re one step closer to flag football being an Olympic sport.
Yes, that’s totally absurd.
Yes, adding flag football would be one of the dumbest things the International Olympic Committee has ever done (and that’s saying something).
The IOC will soon decide on which of the five proposed new sports will be allowed into the 2028 Olympic Games in Los Angeles.
One of those proposals is to add flag football.
"Calling all NFL guys let's bring one home," Hill posted on X, formerly known as Twitter, speaking about a gold medal.
If Hill gets his wish, he'd be part of the flag football version of the Avengers.
While the idea of flag football as an Olympic sport is goofy, if it’s going to happen, let’s dominate this sucker, the way Americans dominated the Russians at Lake Placid.
Do you believe in flag miracles?
They will be made in America.
At the Alamo.
We’ll have the best flags.
The greatest flags.
Flags so pristine and beautiful we’ll be able to eat our hot dogs and apple pie off of them.
There will also be no soft flag pulling.
We’re not France.
Plus, when we pull a flag, every American will stop and stand for the anthem.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
In all seriousness, the NFL says that flag football is one of the world’s fastest-growing sports.
That it’s played by over 20 million people in more than 100 countries and women and girls are driving the fastest growth.
This may all be true but all of this still smacks of a rich American corporation, acting in its own self-interest, using flag football, and the Olympics, as a way of spreading the NFL gospel around the world.
Can’t blame the NFL for trying this.
Many sports have done the same thing.
Hell, the NBA had the Dream Team, and it was a marketing bonanza.
But the primary reason for its existence was the 1988 Olympic team failing to win gold.
Yet, I have to admit, if this does happen, people will watch.
Lots of people.
Because the NFL as an organization will push for some of its top stars to compete.
Individual teams will be horrified at such an idea fearing a catastrophic injury.
Can you imagine Hill blowing out his knee?
But if the flag football Olympics do happen, maybe the team will look like mine below.
This is assuming the teams are standard five-on-five.
This also assumes the NFL and union would even allow its biggest stars to participate.
Also, remember, not every player in the NFL can be on the team.
And yes, this team can't account for future star players who might emerge between now and the time of the Games.
I'm not a time traveler, buddy.
COACH, TOM BRADY.
Age in 2028: Immortal being.
Plus, there'd be a built-in backup quarterback.
QUARTERBACK, LAMAR JACKSON, Ravens.
Age in 2028: 31.
Even in his 30s, Jackson would still be one of the fastest humans on the planet.
Age in 2028: 39.
Once the center snaps the football, he can go out for a pass.
Assuming they're still together.
If they're not, it would be a sad day for the planet.
Age in 2028: 34.
A very public flag football backer.
WIDE RECEIVER, JUSTIN JEFFERSON, Vikings.
Age in 2028: 29.
His abilities would rupture the flag space-time continuum.
WIDE RECEIVER, MARVIN HARRISON JR. Age in 2028: 26.
He'll be a top five pick in this upcoming draft, a Super Bowl winner with the Chicago Bears, and then a gold medalist.
Age in 2028: 26.
Any player who rushes the passer must be a minimum of seven yards past the line of scrimmage at the snap.
DEFENSIVE BACK, TARIQ WOOLEN, SEAHAWKS.
Age in 2028: 29.
Ran a 4.26 40-yard dash at the scouting combine in 2022.
Age in 2028: 29.
Ran a 4.23 40-yard dash at the combine.
Somehow, he ran faster than Woolen.
Age in 2028: 28.
My team will feature receivers as safeties.
Because why not.
Age in 2028: 28.
If his stint at safety works out in the Olympics, he should play the position in the NFL.
So this is the team.
The Flag Dream Team.
But we have to come up with a better name than that.
Tourists were officially welcomed back to West Maui on Sunday, exactly two months after devastating wildfires displaced thousands of residents, killed 98 people and destroyed hundreds of buildings.
Cleanup of debris has barely begun.
Josh Green announced on Sept. 8 that the unaffected areas just north from where the fire took place would reopen to travelers so “people from Hawaii and around the world can resume travel to this special place and help it begin to recover economically,” he said in a news conference.
To kick off the reopening, five hotels and eight timeshare condos in West Maui started accepting guests and owners, starting with 3 miles of the northwestern coast.
Tourists and residents alike have been grappling with the island’s reopening plans, with some wondering if it’s insensitive to bring back visitors months after the deadliest wildfire in recent U.S. history.
Besides palpable grief, residents fear the government will prioritize visitor dollars over their urgent needs, like education and housing, but what hangs in the balance is the livelihoods of many of them.
Learn more: Best travel insurance
While the island only accounts for 12% of the state’s jobs, it makes up one-third of the visitor spending statewide, according to a recent report by the Economic Research Organization at the University of Hawaii.
In 2021 and 2022, Maui was the most visited island over Oahu.
Visitor arrivals on Maui in August dipped more than 60% compared to the month prior, according to data from the Hawaii Tourism Authority.
The reopening of West Maui – home to over half of all the accommodations on the island – has been controversial as recovery from the fires has been slow and emotional for residents.
Some West Maui residents accept respectful visitors looking to support local businesses and volunteer while others want to delay the reopening for more time to heal.
Prior to the reopening, the state and county released sensitivity messaging, asking tourists to be respectful and not take inappropriate photos.
Hotels will open in groups.
“No one should be discouraged or reluctant to go and support the businesses and workers that rely on tourism in West Maui for their families’ livelihood,” according to the Hawaii Tourism Authority website.
An 80% recovery of pre-fire visitor levels isn’t expected in Maui until the end of 2024, according to the Economic Research Organization.
“Even if they didn’t do a phase reopening, there’s no reason to believe there would suddenly be tens of thousands of visitors rushing into West Maui,” he said.
The date is to help travelers plan future trips to the island.
'We need responsible tourism':Maui businesses plead tourists to help economy after fires
Since the fires, the restaurant has been delivering hundreds of free meals and operating as a place with free Wi-Fi for West Maui residents.
When in operation, about 90% of the produce used is sourced from local farmers.
He said many of his employees want to go back to work.
“If people feel like it’s too soon, that’s fine, they don’t have to go back to work.”
“We’re probably going to lose money for the first several months we’re open, but it’s our responsibility,” he said.
“The key thing is encouraging tourists to behave well is really important, because the community is definitely still hurting.”
To access the parts of West Maui that are reopening means people will have to drive through burn zones, which have mostly been covered by fencing.
Many residents aren’t ready to enter the tragedy-stricken area yet.
Earlier this month, people gathered at the state Capitol in Honolulu to speak out against the Oct. 8 reopening and drop off a petition with 14,000 signatures to the Governor’s office.
He told USA TODAY that the "timeline of this just felt so rushed in so many ways, two months is definitely not enough time."
He added that the quick reopening has also taken a toll on the mental health of many residents, who are already struggling from the tragedy itself.
The Maui City Council voted unanimously for a resolution on Friday that echoed pleas to delay the reopening, saying the two-month anniversary was not “trauma-informed.”
“It's really hard to know what is the right decision, honestly, because you're balancing between protecting your community and people who are completely devastated, and economic, financial implications of not opening,” said Jan Jones, a lecturer and coordinator for hospitality and tourism management at the University of New Haven.
But some argue that small businesses need tourists, especially after taking a hit from the pandemic.
One recent study found the island lost more than $13 million of visitor spending per day in the weeks after the fire, according to the Economic Research Organization.
Look for the smallest person that does tours.
Look for the local guy who gives surf lessons.
“That would be so helpful right now.”
Kathleen Wong is a travel reporter for USA TODAY based in Hawaii.
You can reach her at kwong@usatoday.com.
Bailey Schulz is a general assignment money reporter based in Las Vegas.
You can reach her at bschulz@usatoday.com.
Contributing: The Associated Press
For those seeking to catch the spectacular solar eclipse this week while visiting a National Park, we've got you covered with some good leads.
Camping World, an online retail company for outdoor gear, revealed the 15 “most popular” stargazing locations in the United States, based on a review of the most-searched out of 50 locations.
For astronomy buffs who want to know which amazing places they should visit for events leading up to and on the solar eclipse on Saturday, Oct. 14, we’ve compiled a list of activities at various National Parks across the U.S.
More:Looking for last-minute solar eclipse glasses?
These libraries and vendors can help
Learn more: Best travel insurance
According to the NPS, an annular solar eclipse will cross the sky from Oregon to Texas this Saturday.
From making your own shades to learning from NASA astronauts, here's a list of some events happening around the country.
More:October 2023 solar eclipse weather forecast: Will clouds ruin the view?
A stabbing attack that left three people hospitalized temporarily shut down the security line at Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International Airport’s domestic terminal on Wednesday evening.
Posts on X, formerly known as Twitter, first documented the incident at around 5 p.m.
The Atlanta Police Department and Atlanta Airport confirmed the incident on X about a half hour later.
Three people were injured in the attack, according to a statement by the Atlanta Police Department.
Learn more: Best travel insurance
All victims are conscious and have been taken to the hospital.
The suspect has been taken to the airport precinct, and an investigation is underway.
TSA firearm detections are on the rise:Here's what we saw at one of the airports with the most cases
A spokesperson for the Atlanta Airport told USA TODAY that impacts to operations are minimal and there is no threat to public safety.
Updates will be posted to the airport’s social media.
Kathleen Wong is a travel reporter for USA TODAY based in Hawaii.
You can reach her at kwong@usatoday.com
UPDATE: This story has been updated with news that within hours of publication of USA TODAY's investigation, MSU suspended Coach Mel Tucker without pay.
Two years ago, one of the nation’s star college football coaches and a prominent rape survivor teamed up to fight the culture of sexual violence in sports.
Their partnership should have been a force for good.
Instead, it has devolved into scandal, with the activist accusing the coach of the same misconduct that both of them preached against.
Accusing him is Brenda Tracy, a rape survivor who has made educating athletes about sexual violence her life’s work.
Over eight months, they developed a professional relationship centered on her advocacy work.
Tucker invited Tracy to campus three times – twice to speak to his players and staff and once to be recognized as an honorary captain at the team's spring football game.
But their relationship was upended during a phone call on April 28, 2022, Tracy says in a complaint she filed with the university’s Title IX office in December that remains under investigation.
According to her complaint, Tracy sat frozen for several minutes while Tucker made sexual comments about her and masturbated.
His violation, she said, reopened 25-year-old wounds from her rape by four men – two Oregon State University football players, a junior college player and a high school recruit.
“The idea that someone could know me and say they understand my trauma but then re-inflict that trauma on me is so disgusting to me, it’s hard for me to even wrap my mind around it,” she told USA TODAY.
“It’s like he sought me out just to betray me.”
In his statements to the Title IX investigator, Tucker acknowledged masturbating on the call but said Tracy grossly mischaracterized the episode.
According to him, they had consensual “phone sex.”
Michigan State hired an outside Title IX attorney to investigate the complaint.
She finished her investigation in July.
A formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated the school’s policy banning sexual harassment and exploitation is scheduled for Oct. 5 and 6, during the Spartans’ bye week.
The stakes are high for everyone.
Tracy says Tucker is following through on a threat to ruin her career and reputation by painting her as a woman who mixes professional and personal relationships and files false reports.
She fears he will undo her legacy.
Tucker, who signed one of the most lucrative contracts in college sports history two years ago, could lose out on the roughly $80 million he is owed if Michigan State fires him for cause, which would be a stunning fall from the elite ranks of college coaches.
Reached by USA TODAY on his cellphone Saturday night, Tucker hung up after a reporter mentioned the case.
Hours after USA TODAY published its investigation, the university suspended Tucker without pay, pending a resolution of the Title IX case.
“This step, suspending Mel Tucker without pay, is … necessary and appropriate for today's circumstances,” Interim President Teresa Woodruff said at a Sunday evening press conference.
“These actions are not taken lightly.”
USA TODAY typically does not identify people who allege sexual harassment.
Tracy agreed to be identified and shared more than 1,200 pages of case documents.
Title IX, the federal law banning sex discrimination in education, requires schools to investigate allegations of sexual harassment that took place in the context of a school program or activity.
Such claims are inherently difficult to adjudicate because of many of the factors at issue in this case: a lack of eyewitnesses and recordings, the passage of time and the thorniness of litigating consent.
Adding to the uncertainty, the institution tasked with sorting out the facts is perhaps best known for missing repeated opportunities to stop one of the most prolific sexual abusers in American history.
Gymnastics and campus physician accused of sexually assaulting more than 300 female athletes under the guise of medical treatments.
He has been sentenced to a minimum of 100 years in prison.
Amid its efforts to rebuild trust among students, employees, alumni and the East Lansing community, Michigan State's leaders must now decide whether the face of its prestigious football program is guilty of sexually harassing one of the country’s most influential advocates against gender-based violence.
For some, how the university navigates the crisis will send a clear message about its commitment to progress.
“This goes beyond coach Tucker and Brenda Tracy,” said Jennifer Gomez, a Boston University professor who researches the effects of interpersonal trauma and violence.
“What happens here has the potential to be very healing or very harmful for lots and lots and lots of other people.”
Tracy and Tucker met in August 2021 during her first visit to Michigan State, after a mutual acquaintance introduced them.
Standing before a packed auditorium in the Spartans’ football operations building, Tracy told a gut-wrenching story of turning her pain into purpose two decades after filing a police report saying she had been gang-raped as a 24-year-old mother of two.
At the end, she challenged the “good men” in the room to use their privilege and influence to educate themselves and call out bad behavior.
By then she had delivered versions of the speech more than 100 times to at least 40,000 athletes and coaches.
Michigan State paid her a $10,000 speaking fee.
Tucker was in his second season as head coach.
A former University of Wisconsin-Madison defensive back, he had spent two decades coaching defenses for 10 college and NFL teams before landing the top job at the University of Colorado in late 2018.
Michigan State lured him away a year later by doubling his salary.
Mel Tucker's career at Michigan State: A timeline
Tucker and Tracy “hit it off” immediately, they would both later tell the Title IX investigator.
They bonded over their love of Jordan sneakers, shelves of which lined Tucker’s office walls.
Tucker had been moved by her speech, and she had been a big hit with players, he told the investigator.
They discussed her coming back to campus in the future.
Tracy left East Lansing feeling she had found a champion in Tucker, she told the investigator.
He seemed engaged with her cause, leading his players in signing her pledge to, among other things, obtain “ongoing, affirmative consent” before engaging in sexual acts with another person.
During that time, the two also talked on the phone at least 27 times, Tracy’s phone bills show – an average of once every two weeks for a half hour.
They often spoke at night to accommodate their work schedules, they said.
They chatted about their jobs and eventually more personal matters, such as their families, mental health and daily lives.
In November, Michigan State signed him to an unprecedented 10-year, $95 million deal that came fully guaranteed, even if it fired him for poor performance.
The only way he could lose out on the money, the contract said, was if he materially breached it, was convicted of a crime or engaged in “conduct which, in the University’s reasonable judgment, would tend to bring public disrespect, contempt or ridicule on the University.”
It was around then that Tucker, who had been married for more than two decades, started becoming interested in Tracy romantically, they both told the investigator.
Whether Tracy reciprocated is where their accounts diverge.
Tucker told the investigator that he and Tracy developed a romantic connection and talked openly about it.
They frequently made flirtatious comments about each other’s looks and bodies, Tucker said.
Tracy told him she wanted a “sugar daddy” who would pay her a monthly amount to be his girlfriend, he said, and that she would be “all over” him if he wasn’t married.
Tucker said they had acknowledged their mutual desire for a romance but agreed it would be “too messy” because of his marriage and the physical distance between them.
By contrast, Tracy told the investigator that Tucker’s romantic interest in her was entirely one-sided.
She said she came to feel he was less interested in her cause than in her.
Tucker messaged her photos of herself that he had found on her Instagram page, making comments such as, “This is the one,” or complimenting her eyes, Tracy said.
Once, Tucker called Tracy via FaceTime.
He was in bed, shirtless.
He talked about his unhappy marriage, describing himself as “more or less single.” Then, during a Nov. 9, 2021, call, she said he asked her, “If I wasn’t a football coach and if I wasn’t married, would you date me?”
Tracy said she responded that she would not because they worked together – one of several times she recalled trying to set boundaries.
She said she made clear to Tucker on a Dec. 1 call that they would only be friends, and he seemed to agree.
Then, after the spring game, Tucker called her four times, phone records show.
Tracy said he repeatedly asked her to meet him alone, without her assistant, and even suggested slipping into her hotel through a back door so no one would see him.
She said no.
Twelve days later came the call.
Tracy was in her home office in Oregon.
Tucker, who was in a hotel in Florida, called her at 12:39 a.m. EST, phone records show.
The call lasted 36 minutes.
According to Tucker, he became aroused when Tracy made a comment about needing to hit the gym more to look better without clothes on.
“Unequivocally, there’s no doubt about it,” Tucker told the investigator, case documents show.
“She was the one who said we’ll do it.”
Tracy denies all of that.
The call started off normal, she said.
But when she sent Tucker a photo of them together from the spring game, she said he responded by commenting on her buttocks and calling himself an “ass man.”
She remembered Tucker’s voice getting deeper and weirder as he continued talking about her buttocks.
She asked him what he was doing, and he said he had a “hard dick” and was touching himself.
“You’re touching yourself?” Tracy asked, according to the investigation report.
Tucker responded, “Yes.”
Tracy said she thought to herself, "Oh my god, this is happening, and I can’t stop it."
Eventually she said something along the lines of, “If you do this, I don’t ever want to hear about it, we are only friends, that’s it.”
When he finished, Tracy said, Tucker told her, “Thank you, good night, sweetheart.” She responded, “Yeah,” and he hung up.
Then she sat at her desk for a while, staring at her phone and crying.
Three months passed between the call and the next time Tracy and Tucker spoke.
At first, Tracy tried to pretend to herself that nothing had happened.
Tucker, however, was not responding to her text messages.
And he abruptly canceled her in-person training, planned for July 25, three days before it was supposed to take place.
A team staffer told her they had double-booked, but Tracy believed she knew the real reason.
When Tracy finally got Tucker on the phone about a week later, he was angry, she said, accusing her and her assistant of gossiping about his marital problems.
Tracy recalled that Tucker made comments such as, “I can’t trust you,” “If you say anything about this, I’ll hear about it,” and “I’ll be fine, it’s you that I am worried about.” She viewed it as a threat to destroy her reputation if she spoke out about him.
Tucker at one point told her he had done nothing wrong.
According to Tracy, she started to say, “Well, something…” referring to his masturbation, and Tucker interrupted, saying, “But nothing happened.”
Tucker recalled the Aug. 2 phone call much differently.
He told the investigator that Tracy apologized to him for discussing his marriage with her assistant, and he accepted.
Although they ended the call on good terms and discussed postponing her visit until next year, Tucker said he had lost trust in Tracy.
The training was never rescheduled, and they never spoke again.
Tracy initially stayed quiet about Tucker for the sake of her career, she said.
Ultimately, she decided that if she let it slide, she wouldn’t be the person she claimed to be – the one who encourages people to speak up about sexual misconduct and hold others accountable.
She filed her complaint in December – eight months after the call.
In dry and bureaucratic language, the record of that complaint begins: “The specific allegations of prohibited conduct against Respondent are as follows …” A notification was delivered to Tucker the following day.
Tucker was “absolutely shocked,” he would tell the university’s investigator.
In subsequent correspondence, he and his attorney suggested Tracy’s motive: She held a vendetta against Spartans athletics because of its history of sexual misconduct scandals and falsely accused him for financial gain.
“To say that I have learned from this situation is an understatement,” Tucker wrote in a letter to the investigator on March 22.
“I will never again allow myself to be duped by kindness.”
A former Indiana sex crimes prosecutor who now heads a private practice, she also previously worked in the Title IX offices at Michigan State and the University of Michigan.
Jacqueline Swanson, Tracy’s attorney who is also her friend, turned over a copy of the notes she took from their conversation on a yellow legal pad.
She shared a screenshot of a Dec. 2 text message in which Tracy told her she had just spoken with Tucker, who had agreed they could only be friends.
“I’m glad it didn’t get weird,” Tracy wrote.
Tracy provided phone bills and emails that corroborated her timeline of events and showed Tucker had been calling her from his personal cellphone.
Tracy said no.
In January, they sent a 12-page letter to the school arguing it lacked jurisdiction to investigate Tucker's “purely personal” relationship with Tracy.
“How far does MSU intend to go in policing the private conduct of its employees, and how does it expect its 20,000+ employees to react when they find out that they no longer have private lives outside the reach of their employer?”
Michigan State was not persuaded.
The alleged conduct would be covered by school policy, it concluded, because it took place in the context of Tracy’s work as a vendor for the school and affected their ongoing business relationship.
The case would go forward.
Tucker sat down for his interview on March 22.
He said he wanted to be transparent and set the record straight.
For instance, Tucker claimed he had made the phone sex call from home in East Lansing – not in a Florida hotel.
He had just returned from a trip to Florida, he said, where he had been doing charity work unrelated to his employment with the school.
An expense report Tucker submitted to Michigan State for his hotel and meal costs showed the trip's purpose was “administrative” and did not involve any personal travel.
The costs were paid by the Spartan Fund, the athletic department’s fundraising arm; he had flown to Florida on a donor’s private plane.
The information, Tucker said, made him question how Tracy “goes about her business.”
“I’m perplexed that Mel Tucker would respond to a complaint of sexual harassment by involving me or ESPN.”
Tucker did not identify any witnesses who could support his version of events, including his associate, whom he said he had promised anonymity.
That same associate, Tucker said, told him that Alvarado, Tracy’s assistant, had been gossiping about his marriage – a claim Alvarado denied.
Along the way, she had learned that one potentially rich source of evidence was missing: Both Tracy and Tucker had deleted their text messages with each other.
Tucker would tell her that he deletes his messages regularly because he receives so many; Tracy said she did so in a panic after their last phone call, feeling she needed to cut all ties with him.
At the hearing, planned for October, both sides will have the opportunity to present evidence and make arguments.
Another outside Title IX attorney hired by the school will then decide whether the evidence shows that Tucker likely violated school rules.
Among the witnesses who will be missing from Tracy’s witness list is her assistant and best friend, Alvarado.
She died in a car accident in June.
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
It was a private event thrown by the school to promote its migrant student services program, which provides financial aid and support to farmworkers seeking college degrees.
After the April 28, 2022, tour, disclosed in records obtained by USA TODAY this week, Tucker met with community leaders and alumni.
That night, Tucker would make the now-infamous phone call from his hotel room in nearby Naples, during which he is accused of masturbating and making unwanted sexual comments to Brenda Tracy, a prominent rape survivor and activist he had hired to speak to his team about sexual violence.
Yet, when Tucker met with the university’s outside investigator in March for his interview in the sexual harassment case against him, he insisted the trip was not work-related – a claim the investigator would disprove in her report.
It’s just one example of Tucker failing to keep his story straight at the most consequential moment of his career.
With his job, reputation and the roughly $80 million left on his contract at stake, Tucker repeatedly made false statements to the investigator and misled her about basic facts, such as his location during the phone call and the date it occurred, a USA TODAY review of more than 1,200 pages of case documents found.
Michigan State suspended Tucker without pay on Sept. 10, hours after Tracy went public for the first time with her story in USA TODAY.
On Monday, the school informed Tucker it plans to fire him for cause based on the conduct he had admitted to and the embarrassment he had caused the school.
Investigation:Michigan State football coach Mel Tucker accused of sexually harassing rape survivor
Although Tucker denied sexually harassing Tracy, he acknowledged masturbating on the call, saying he and Tracy had been in a romantic relationship and had consensual “phone sex.” Tracy said Tucker’s romantic interest in her was completely one-sided and that she had tried to set boundaries multiple times during their yearlong business partnership.
Per his contract, Tucker has until Tuesday to make a case for keeping his job.
Regardless, a formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated school policies against sexual harassment and exploitation is expected to proceed on Oct. 5 and 6.
He accused the school of conducting a “sham” hearing and having “ulterior motives.” Yet even in these written statements, the central details of his story changed entirely.
Tucker, who previously hung up on a reporter who called him on his cellphone asking about the case, did not respond to a message seeking comment for this story.
Tracy declined to comment for this story.
“Very often you’re weighing credibility based on little bits and pieces of information.”
“I believe a fact finder could assess these pieces of evidence about credibility and make a determination that Brenda is more credible than Mel,” she said.
“In my experience, a clear sign of a lack of credibility is generally taken very seriously.”
The school had informed him of Tracy’s complaint on Dec. 22, the day after she filed it.
Tucker was the only holdout.
Rather than tell his side of the story right away, Tucker and his attorney spent three months trying to stop the investigation, case documents show.
They wrote legal arguments urging Michigan State to drop the case and twice approached Tracy’s attorney proposing a settlement agreement.
Tracy said no, and the school pressed forward.
Only a handful of text messages remained; he and Tracy both told the investigator they had deleted their texts with each other in the months after the April 2022 phone call.
In his interview, which lasted 3 ½ hours, Tucker questioned whether Tracy had mixed up the date of the call.
He said he recalled being at his home in East Lansing when it occurred, but his own records showed that he had been in Florida on April 28, attending a charity function that was “absolutely not a University-sponsored event.”
His seven-page account told a different story – that he had called her while he was “alone in a hotel room.”
But by then she knew what he told her in the interview was untrue: she had already obtained records proving he had not been home in East Lansing.
An expense report he had submitted to the university for reimbursement of his hotel and meals shows Tucker flew to Naples, Florida, to attend a golf fundraiser hosted by The Greg H. Montgomery Jr. Foundation for Ultimate Growth, which raises awareness for suicide prevention.
It showed he stayed at the Hilton from April 27 to 29, that the trip’s purpose was “administrative” and that it did not involve personal travel.
He had flown there on a donor’s private plane.
The event was titled “Working to make dreams a reality,” according to an agenda obtained from the university by USA TODAY through a public records request.
The agenda features Tucker’s name prominently.
Tucker posted photos from the tour on his Twitter account.
That Tucker was on a university-sponsored work trip during the incident was a contributing factor in the university’s determination that it had jurisdiction to investigate, the investigation report shows.
Tucker’s lists of calls and text messages also were missing an important detail: They did not show any communication with Tracy on April 28.
He acknowledged in the interview, however, that he had not reviewed the lists before submitting them and that they may have been incomplete.
Tucker and Tracy did not speak in the three months after the April 28 call.
Meanwhile, their assistants were planning Tracy’s third visit to campus – an in-person training with coaches and players scheduled for July 25.
Tucker canceled that training three days before, the investigation report shows.
When Tracy spoke to him by phone on Aug. 2 seeking to find out why, she would tell the investigator in her interview that Tucker insinuated he would harm her career if she spoke about his conduct.
He never rescheduled her visit, and they never spoke again.
The cancellation became a key focus of the investigator – one of a series of alleged incidents that taken together would meet the definition of sexual harassment, which can include pressuring someone into engaging in sexual behavior for an employment benefit and threatening that rejecting such behavior will carry a negative consequence.
Tucker tried to distance himself from the cancellation in a public statement on Sept. 11, the day after Michigan State suspended him without pay.
“I never cancelled any presentation,” he wrote.
But that statement contradicts what he told the investigator.
Such timing would not make sense, he added, because most of his new players would not yet be on campus.
Tucker also told the investigator why he canceled the visit, blaming it on a scheduling conflict.
He said he had recently hired a mental conditioning coach, Ben Newman, who needed to implement his new program on short notice.
There was limited time in fall camp, Tucker said, and he didn’t want to “overwhelm” the players.
He said he decided to yield the time to Newman.
He had been meeting with them weekly since June 6, the records showed but held no meetings between July 15 and July 28.
One of Tucker’s assistants, who is a witness in the case, also told the investigator that Tucker asked him via text message to cancel it.
He said he was never instructed to reschedule.
Tucker confronted Tracy about the alleged gossiping during the Aug. 2 phone call, they both told the investigator.
Tracy said he berated and bullied her, repeatedly saying he could not trust her.
She said she told him she did not know what he was talking about.
During the Aug. 2 call, Tracy said she pressed Tucker to identify his source – the associate.
In her report, she wrote that he said he had “given (his) word that (he) wouldn’t divulge their name.”
Tucker never revealed the associate’s name to the investigator, nor did he identify anyone who could support his version of events.
In his Sept. 11 public statement, however, he lamented that the hearing would not afford him the opportunity to “offer any substantive evidence of innocence.”
It was not the only claim he attributed to his anonymous associate.
It turned out to be yet another falsehood.
“Neither the organization nor Tracy is or has been the target of any investigative reporting.”
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
Contributing: USA TODAY reporter Steve Berkowitz.
The bullets came in plywood crates.
Any given box was about the size of a small microwave oven.
The printed label stuck to each one demonstrated a militaristic brevity.
“CARTRIDGES FOR WEAPONS, INERT PROJECTILE,” next to a bright yellow hazmat sticker, “EXPLOSIVES.”
Inside the boxes: drab green steel cans of .50-caliber ammunition.
Each round was giant, more than 5 inches long, built to be fired from a gun so big it is typically bolted to a truck.
The bullets were clipped together in long strands for rapid, machine-gun fire.
By the time Bill Brown got to the boxes, they sat double-stacked eight high atop wooden pallets inside a Missouri warehouse.
The pallets went on, row after row.
Three million bullets in all.
It was enough ammunition to feed a single machine gun – if fired nonstop at its rated speed eight hours a day, seven days a week – for almost six months.
Brown’s job was to get it out of there and toward the Ukrainian front lines.
The faster, the better.
“War is bad,” Brown said.
There would be virtually no public record of this Ukrainian arms shipment.
As a weapons dealer, Brown’s company would deliver the bullets under a system known as a direct commercial sale.
Instead, it was part of a shadowy system of brokers, exporters, arms dealers and country-to-country transfers that has become one part of the race to meet demand on distant battlefields.
President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said the effort was delayed in part by the wait for more arms.
Most of America’s $44 billion in documented support to Ukraine came in the form of old U.S. military stock, donated directly by the federal government.
In general, commercial sales over $14 million, and sales of military-grade weaponry like mortars or missiles, require State Department approval and congressional notification.
But other aid comes via private sales.
More than 14,000 U.S. entities are registered to conduct defense trade activities.
Their deals are monitored by an alphabet soup of agencies including Departments of Homeland Security, Commerce, Defense and the Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
Trade secrecy clauses in federal law mean this flow of gear, weapons and ammunition is almost never revealed to the public.
Brown, who works for a small Nevada-based logistics company called Battle Born Munitions, provided USA TODAY with a rare look behind the curtain of these private sales.
Details about the shipment were verified by his employer and the European government that made the purchase.
State Department officials declined to answer questions about the specific shipment Brown described.
This March sale and the secret number of other shipments like it fuel Ukraine’s fight against a Russian invasion.
Those sales also release an unknown amount of weaponry into the world.
What becomes of that weaponry after it’s sold – and especially after it’s delivered – is difficult to track.
As Brown surveyed the warehouse in Missouri, a crew steered forklifts and skid lifts among the stacks of plain wooden boxes.
From high in the trusses, suspended lamp fixtures bathed the boxes in artificial daylight.
Brown lifted his camera and started snapping photos.
In just a few hours, he and his cargo would be boarding a jumbo jet.
From Ukraine:War crimes in Ukraine may be unprecedented.
So is the country's push for swift justice.
The bullets had once been bound for Saudi Arabia.
Lot number SMQ19K401L026 had rolled off the assembly line in 2019 at Lake City Army Ammunition Plant near Kansas City.
Lake City, owned by the government and run by a contractor, sprawls across nearly 4,000 acres of green Missouri farmland.
Roads curve past World War II-era bunkers known as igloos, spaced out amid the countryside – far enough apart that an explosion in one won’t trigger a chain reaction in the others.
Lake City has been pumping out ammunition almost without pause since 1941.
It is the largest small-arms manufacturing plant in the world.
And in 2019, Saudi Arabia was stocking up on weapons during the Trump administration, fueling the war in Yemen and other conflicts that drew criticism from congressional Democrats.
The plant manufactures .50-caliber ammunition on a rolling basis, for both military and commercial buyers.
That’s a testament to just what a legend the bullet – and the gun that shoots it – has become.
In 2019, the technology was already a century old.
The .50 caliber was the brainchild of American gunsmith John Browning during World War I.
Built to respond to German anti-tank rifles, the M2 was first tested in 1918, and it entered widespread service in 1923.
It earned the nickname “Ma Deuce” and has served in combat ever since, bolted to trucks, ships, planes and handheld stands on the battlefield.
The .50-caliber rounds – named for their diameter, about half an inch – can easily hit targets more than a mile away.
At closer ranges, they will blast through solid concrete or armored vehicles.
The gun can fire at a sustained rate of about 40 shots per minute.
Military setups use strings of “linked” ammunition to feed into machine guns.
Spaced out after every fourth bullet, so-called tracer rounds have small pyrotechnic charges that illuminate the line of fire, aiding in targeting.
The gun’s longevity and versatility made it popular for militaries the world over.
But this particular batch of bullets wouldn’t end up being sold to Saudi Arabia.
The Biden administration put a temporary freeze on sales to the Saudi government in 2021 as it reviewed weapons deals approved under Donald Trump.
Instead, Brown said, the bullets were sold to a U.S. ammunition provider, only to be held up again.
Ultimately, they were mothballed.
Then, in spring 2023, the bullets found a buyer, or actually two: first Battle Born; ultimately, the Netherlands.
The European country, a NATO ally, needed a big supply of ammunition.
It wouldn’t be keeping the bullets but giving them to Ukraine.
Its purchase, essentially a donation, would count toward the country’s required NATO contribution.
Brown had a line on exactly what they needed.
It was sitting in the warehouse in Missouri.
He arrived in March to personally oversee the shipment.
As he prepped for delivery, Brown dropped tiny black tracking devices onto several of the pallets.
Just $55 apiece, the units use GPS and cell signals to keep tabs on the load.
The idea was to ensure it wouldn’t fall into the wrong hands.
But packing up the bullets was just the beginning.
As with anything that’s deadly and made of metal, the shipping costs can be extreme.
Forty-five to 60 days on a ship?
Brown – or Chief Bill, as he prefers – is a no-nonsense 35-year veteran of the U.S. Army and former helicopter pilot.
He retired as a chief warrant officer and lives in Orlando.
Now 59, he still spends a lot of time on the road – 10 international trips this year.
He says his arms logistics work takes him to places most Americans would rather avoid – near the Syrian border or to unstable regions of Iraq.
He’ll travel halfway around the world, he quips, “have some soup, and go back to Warsaw to head home.” The trips aren’t really about the destinations.
They’re about the cargo.
On that spring day in Missouri, forklifts carefully loaded 107 pallets of the ammo onto 18 flatbed semitrailers.
They’d all make the eight-hour drive to O’Hare International Airport.
In Chicago, two Boeing 747-400s operated by National Airlines would be ready for the freight.
Four pallets each were stacked and shrink-wrapped to create “air pallets” or “cookie sheets” weighing 12,800 pounds.
Each plane could carry up to 17 of the pallets that ran the length of each plane secured by white cargo netting.
Flight records Brown provided show the two planes departed about seven hours apart, one in early afternoon, one after dark.
The flight would take nine hours.
Brown wasn’t going to the Netherlands, even though it was the buyer.
The planes were bound for Rzeszów, Poland.
The ancient city sits at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains in southeastern Poland.
It has a gleaming modern airport next to a major east-west freeway.
From there, it’s barely 60 miles to the border with Ukraine.
It was an expensive journey.
The trucking company’s bill for those 18 semis?
Chartering the two 747s?
But this shipment of .50-cal rounds was profitable for Battle Born Munitions, according to Brown.
The company purchased the 3 million rounds from Northrop Grumman at a bargain and resold them for more than double the price.
(In subsequent interviews, representatives at BBM disputed the specific totals Brown mentioned, saying the accurate figures were protected by “various commercial and government non-disclosure agreements.” They did not dispute the other specifics of the deal he provided.)
Retail prices for .50-caliber ammunition run roughly $5 per bullet.
At that rate, the whole shipment would have been worth $15 million.
The pricing might also be elastic.
The Dutch mark up the price of the bullets and count it toward their NATO contribution, pegged to a percentage of gross domestic product, Brown said.
The Netherlands has contributed about $15 billion to NATO this year, or about 1.7% of its GDP and just under the NATO mandate of 2%.
Representatives of the Dutch military confirmed the shipment to USA TODAY but declined to comment further about the pricing or details.
The war in Ukraine has only increased the demand for private deals.
The State Department signed off on more than $154 billion in commercial arms deals directly to foreign countries in 2022, a 48% increase from the previous year.
Direct commercial sales represent a modest portion of the contribution to Ukraine compared with the $44 billion donated by the U.S., but they still amounted to more than $600 million in sales from U.S. companies to the Ukrainian government last year alone.
That doesn’t include sales to other countries that also support Ukraine – sales like the one Brown described.
Jim Bartlett, an attorney with expertise in the specialized international arms transactions, said private U.S. businesses are playing a small but important role in the conflict.
“American companies are happy to export defense articles to foreign buyers approved by the U.S. State Department,” Bartlett said.
Those sales also come with risks.
Direct sales face fewer regulatory controls, oversight and enforcement, said Robert Nichols, an international military sales expert and attorney at the law firm Nichols Liu.
“You can imagine the range of characters involved in supplying a war effort,” Nichols said.
So far, the Department of Justice has indicted just a handful of arms brokers over deals related to the war in Ukraine.
They allegedly lied to Commerce Department agents and told them the parts were bound for Turkey.
Both pleaded not guilty to the charges this summer.
A State Department spokesman declined to provide details of enforcement actions but said, “The United States takes seriously our responsibility to protect American military and dual-use technologies and prevent their diversion, including through strong enforcement actions.”
NATO said it oversees allied arms deliveries, and that those arms generally reach Ukraine.
NATO itself technically only provides non-non-lethal aid, like fuel, medical supplies and generators.
Brown, of Battle Born, says he fields calls weekly from “clowns” without the proper licensing, whom he reports to the State Department for potential violations.
Some raise red flags when they approach him about transactions that include payment via diamonds or gold.
He prefers traditional wire transfers with approved sales partners since he knows government officials are watching.
He validates the contracts and checks certificates for the final users.
That’s part of why he traveled with the ammunition.
He would be meeting a Dutch military official for the official handoff.
“My job is to keep us all out of jail,” Brown said.
The two 747s touched down in Poland, one before the sun, the other in late morning.
Brown exchanged paperwork with a young Dutch military staffer who signed for the delivery, he said.
They traded military patches as souvenirs.
They snapped a photo together.
The bullets bought by the Netherlands would never touch Dutch soil.
U.S. aid:Billions from the US flows to Ukraine.
Here's where it comes from, and how it adds up
Despite playing a small role proportionately in the war, $600 million in direct commercial sales can buy a lot of small weaponry.
Put another way: It’s hard to sneak away an F-16 or a missile launcher the size of a tractor-trailer.
But a bunch of guns or a pallet of ammo?
Much easier to resell.
After Russia invaded Ukraine in 2014, the Small Arms Survey, a Swiss arms research project, estimated that within a year, battlefield seizures and other forms of diversion led to 300,000 small arms and light weapons going missing, including 100,000 in Crimea alone.
When small arms go missing, they can go missing into another country, maybe one led by a despot or even a terrorist organization.
The U.S. government says diversion of American donations has been widely absent so far in Ukraine.
That could be a combination of intensive “end-use-monitoring” programs and the reality of the battlefield, where supplies are rapidly put to use.
But even if not now, unused ammo could be resold someday.
“These are commodities with very long shelf lives.”
Florida-based Global Ordnance, another State Department-licensed exporter, is a competitor in the direct weapons sales business.
General counsel Bryan Van Brunt said the company has extensive protocols in place to track shipments and make sure the end-users are federally approved, though he declined to provide specifics about those systems.
Brown, with Battle Born Munitions, says the company employs a mix of simple and sophisticated tracking technology to ensure his shipments are tracked to end users.
The black GPS devices he dropped onto his cargo tracked the ammo all the way across the globe.
But that system only works as long as Brown is actually tracking.
“Technically, my role ends when I deliver it to NATO,” he said.
Sometime after the 747s touched down in Poland, along with signing the paperwork and snapping a selfie with the Dutch official, Brown found the tiny black GPS trackers and lifted them off the pallets.
Ukrainian trucks would arrive at the airport to pick up the ammunition.
They would point toward the border, and onward to Lviv, and some distant battlefield.
Brown would point in the opposite direction.
Just like one of his quips: Fly in, have soup, get home.
He headed toward Warsaw, with the GPS trackers in his bag.
Contact him at npenz@usatoday.com or @npenzenstadler, or on Signal at (720) 507-5273.
The geography professor didn’t hide his clown fetish or the fact that he sometimes indulged his urges by recruiting students as subjects.
He posted regularly about it on social media.
He submitted his resignation the same day their story was published.
His interactions with students and open discussion of his fetish happened in both mainstream and tailored digital spaces.
He popped into Facebook groups geared toward new students and niche forums on websites like Reddit.
He posted videos on YouTube.
Over the years, two students reported him to campus police; others complained online.
He left Kent State University after pleading no contest to something different: a theft charge that involved entering his peers’ offices without permission and taking a USB drive.
Nicholls State, for example, told USA TODAY Network reporters it does not routinely check social media for new hires.
The money was appealing but the interactions soured.
“I thought maybe they could prevent anything bad from happening since other girls would go with him.”
She said there was never any followup from campus police – or anyone else.
The two who expressed public concerns on social media told USA TODAY they never heard from their campus officials either.
She said she would pass along that reporters were trying to reach him.
He said his contract was not renewed because he was the target of a “grade inflation task force.”
She has seen the pattern often in her work maintaining a database of publicly documented sexual misconduct by faculty and staff.
As for grad students?
“I don’t on purpose,” she said, “because that’s information that almost never comes out.”
He was working toward his doctorate and researched fading businesses.
His work about shopping malls in the Rust Belt won several awards.
Like many graduate students, he also taught classes.
“I will literally pay you!”
What’s more, she figured out that he was a graduate student, a fact she said he didn’t disclose in his posts.
It arrived at midnight and contained no message, although writing on his shirt read: “I'm not a failure.”
“It’s definitely burned into my mind.”
He would send “get to know you” messages, the police report said, and then ask the student if she was “interested in having her face painted for one of his class projects.”
“She does not have any concerns for her safety, but just wanted this documented,” the police report read.
In July 2017, another student had retweeted a message from Kent State’s Twitter account that asked for Kent State love stories.
She said she tweeted to draw officials’ attention to it and moved on but now wishes she had reported it officially.
College campuses are supposed to offer students special protections from sexual harassment even when it falls short of criminal behavior.
Title IX, often associated with equity in women’s sports, also addresses “sex-based harassment, which encompasses sexual assault and other forms of sexual violence” at schools that receive federal funding.
Colleges infrequently and unevenly enforce the rule, however.
A 2022 USA TODAY investigation found just one of every 12,400 students was suspended in connection with sexual misconduct.
The student who shared her story online said the only response she received was from a graduate student in the geography department, who contacted her on Oct. 1, 2018.
In an email, he wrote that he had seen her post and suspected he knew which faculty member had asked her about face painting.
“I brought it to the attention of some of our faculty because I was pretty sure I knew who it was, but they were certain it wasn’t that individual and that you probably just meant geology,” he wrote.
He went on to reference another student being “approached in (at least by just looking at your tweet) a much more aggressive way.” The grad student asked the undergraduate for more information, but, she told USA TODAY, she didn’t respond.
She said she started drafting a reply, but a year had passed.
She wanted to move on.
Kent State would not say whether any actions were taken after the students’ reports, but Eric Mansfield, a spokesman for the university, said the police department confirmed that the students who filed police reports were provided with “university resources, which would include other non-criminal avenues to pursue (Counseling Services, Title IX, Center for Sexual and Relationship Violence Services, etc.)
Mansfield also said that the university monitors social media but that colleges “can’t always see or track every mention on social media.”
A blotter item in the local newspaper shows police obtained an arrest warrant in connection with a third-degree felony burglary charge.
“Also, we do not comment on personnel matters.”
In more recent years, Buckley has become critical of the law and how schools interpret it.
He told the Columbus Dispatch in 2010 that “the law needs to be revamped.”
Survivors of sexual violence and students accuse universities of using the law to avoid negative media coverage.
Students with a history of bad behavior may jump from one school to another without the public ever knowing about their histories.
One case involved Brandon Austin, who was accused of sexual assault at Providence College in 2013 while on the school’s basketball team.
But Providence College initially said Austin was suspended for violating the school’s code of student conduct and declined to share further details with the Providence Journal, citing federal privacy laws.
Austin denied wrongdoing and was not charged with a crime.
Austin was able to transfer to the University of Oregon, where he was again accused of sexual assault, along with other players.
Police investigated the claims, and the local district attorney declined to press charges.
And it doesn’t apply when a student is “seeking or intending to enroll” at another college.
He blamed the overuse of the law on fear of being sued.
While most U.S. employers conduct background screening, according to trade group data, those inquiries typically focus on criminal history.
Social media receives far less attention even though that is where people are most likely to share their unguarded thoughts.
Undertaking a full review of a person’s social media presence is more difficult than just checking an applicant’s Facebook page.
Does an applicant have an account on X, formerly Twitter?
How about an account with Discord, an online platform frequented by gamers, where leaked Pentagon documents were recently shared?
Or what about a Telegram account, a messaging platform popular among white nationalists?
Further complicating things, it’s common on sites like Reddit for users to adopt usernames and describe experiences with little to no ties to reality.
A little digging, however, can turn up a lot of dirt.
His time as a student and instructor at Kent State is absent.
That is the same handle used on Reddit by someone with a special interest in face paint.
Other posts mention a “clown fetish.” In a forum titled “Creepy,” he wrote, “I convince pretty girls to let me paint their faces,” along with a photo with multiple women in white face paint.
That and other similar posts remained live for years until they were taken down after the Nicholls students published their story in late March.
USA TODAY Network reporters captured screenshots before they disappeared.
With dates in 2019, the posts feature a young woman wearing a Kent State T-shirt.
The material would have been available to administrators at Northern Illinois before the start of the fall 2019 semester.
Joe King, a spokesman for Northern Illinois, said departments hiring new graduate students are “not required to check social media or investigate a disciplinary history.” He added some departments may reach out to the graduate students’ former advisers.
But there are signs the behavior continued.
She said she declined to do it but was aware that other Northern Illinois students had participated.
She asked, had anyone complained?
Many students would find a reason to complain, as Nicholls State student journalist Sally-Anne Torres learned firsthand.
It started in January when one of her fellow reporters picked up an odd rumor: a professor was offering extra credit for students willing to paint their faces like clowns.
Initially, Torres dismissed it because it seemed too unusual and there weren’t a lot of leads to follow.
He blamed his departure on giving too many A’s.
That seemed suspicious to Torres.
“It wasn’t just this innocent thing that a lot of these girls thought it was,” Torres said.
Some, she said, were followed on Twitter by him while others opted into an extra credit assignment he offered.
The women told Torres he sometimes giggled and laughed as they painted their faces in his office.
It seemed unusual at the time, Price said, because his friend wasn’t in the class.
It became more concerning to him on reading the student newspaper’s report.
“I feel frankly disgusted and disappointed that Nicholls couldn’t do a proper background check on this professor, because this is unacceptable,” Price said.
Ramos learned that the person behind the account was likely a professor at the university.
She posted about the behavior in January 2022, but nothing came of it.
On March 27, the same day the student newspaper published its piece, Ramos posted screenshots of her discoveries on Twitter with the message, “Found a Nicholls state university professor on Reddit.”
“I wish the university had acted sooner because all this information was public on the internet,” she told USA TODAY.
No one from the university, she said, has ever reached out.
He can be reached at CCampo@gannett.com.
The United Nations is calling for Israel to rescind an immediate evacuation order it issued for about a million Palestinians living in Gaza, with the U.N. calling the order "horrendous" and warning of a deepening humanitarian crisis.
The Israeli military announced the Gaza evacuation Friday.
It's an unprecedented order for about half the population of the sealed-off territory ahead of an expected ground invasion against the ruling Hamas militant group.
Palestinians have said there is no real escape in Gaza, which has been under a suffocating 16-year blockade imposed by Israel and Egypt.
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East said in a Friday statement.
Hamas, which staged a shocking and brutal attack on Israel nearly a week ago and has fired thousands of rockets since, dismissed the evacuation as a ploy and called on people to stay in their homes.
Alarmed civilians and aid workers, who were already in distress from Israeli airstrikes and a blockade, were sent into chaos.
Israel-Hamas War newsletter:Sign up to get the latest news and analysis from USA TODAY into your inbox.
∎ The number of Palestinians displaced increased by 25% over the past 24 hours, according to an early Friday update from the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
∎ Airstrikes have left cities and refugee camps in ruins.
And Gaza has been experiencing a full electricity blackout amid Israel's siege of the territory, "which has brought essential health, water and sanitation services to the brink of collapse, and exacerbated food insecurity" according to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Israeli Energy Minister Israel Katz has said electricity, water and fuel will not be provided until Israeli hostages are returned.
∎ Public officials and law enforcement agencies across the United States have expressed concern over potential protests on Friday in response to Hamas leadership's call for a global "Day of Rage."
The D.C. region has enhanced its security in the area, including in the U.S. Capitol complex, and other major cities have also been on alert.
The State Department designated Hamas a terrorist group in 1997.
Several other nations also consider it a terrorist organization.
In 2006, Hamas won parliamentary elections, and in 2007 the group violently seized control of Gaza from the Palestinian Authority, which was controlled by the rival Fatah movement that still governs the West Bank.
There have been no elections since.
The group calls for establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel and believes in the use of violence to carry out the destruction of Israel.
Hamas receives financial, material and logistical support from Iran, though so far, international leaders, including in Israel, have said there is no evidence that Iran was directly involved in Hamas’ attack.
Gaza, or the Gaza Strip, is a densely populated Palestinian exclave of about 2.3 million people.
The narrow strip of land − about 150 square miles, or less than half the size of New York City − is about 25 miles long and six miles wide.
Gaza shares a northern and eastern border with Israel and a southwestern border with Egypt while its western side abuts the Mediterranean Sea.
Hamas won the 2006 parliamentary elections and in 2007 seized control of the Gaza Strip from the internationally recognized Palestinian Authority.
The Palestinian Authority, controlled by the rival Fatah movement, administers semi-autonomous areas of the Israeli-occupied West Bank.
Hamas has fought four wars against Israel since taking power.
Contributing: The Associated Press
WASHINGTON – A giant chunk of marble at least two feet long crashed into an interior courtyard of the Supreme Court last year, according to an Associated Press report Friday.
No one was injured, though the courtyard is used regularly by the justices and their aides.
Justice Elena Kagan and her law clerks had been in the courtyard earlier in the day, the AP reported, citing court employees.
It's not the first time such an incident has taken place at the Supreme Court.
A basketball-sized chunk of marble fell off the building in 2005, landing on the court’s front marble steps.
No one was injured in that incident.
A Supreme Court spokeswoman did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
The courtyard is currently closed for renovation, the AP reported, work that had been planned before the marble fell.
Civilians and aid workers who were already struggling amid the war between Israel and Hamas have been sent into chaos following an order to evacuate Gaza City.
A spectacular solar eclipse will darken the sky Saturday.
Here we go with Friday's headlines.
The Israel Defense Forces called for the evacuation of all civilians in Gaza City early Friday, on the heels of what the United Nations said was a warning they received from Israel to evacuate 1.1 million people living in the north of Gaza within 24 hours.
The Israeli alert could signal an imminent ground offensive.
Israel has been bombarding Gaza with airstrikes, killing more than 1,500 people.
A White House spokesman said Thursday the U.S. death toll from the Hamas attacks last weekend rose to 27 and 14 remain missing.
More on the Israel and Hamas War from USA TODAY:
What's the weather today?
Check your local forecast here.
Americans need to stand behind Israel − and that includes former President Donald Trump, Republican presidential candidate Nikki Haley said Thursday.
“While we have their back now that they’ve been hit, what’s more important is that we have their back when they hit back,” Haley said at a New Hampshire town hall sponsored by the USA TODAY Network.
The former ambassador to the United Nations said Hamas must be eliminated and “we need to remember who the true backer of all this is – Iran.” Read our recap of the town hall.
Talks bitterly broke off between Hollywood actors and studios this week, killing any hopes that the three-month strike by performers would come to an end anytime soon.
The studios announced that they had suspended contract negotiations, saying the gap between the two sides was too great to make continuing worth it, despite an offer as good as the one that recently ended the writers strike.
The actors union decried their opponents’ “bullying tactics” and said they were wildly mischaracterizing their offers.
Kansas City stifled the Denver Broncos 19-8 on “Thursday Night Football.” It's the Chiefs’ 16th straight victory over their AFC West rival.
Chiefs quarterback Patrick Mahomes didn’t play a great game by his standards, but he was still the best player on the field Thursday.
Mahomes went 30-for-40 passing for 306 yards.
He tossed one touchdown and one interception and finished with a passer rating of 94.4.
In another epic National League Division Series battle between the NL East rivals, the Phillies dispatched the 104-win Braves for the second consecutive year, as three home runs and one throat-grabbing bullpen escape keyed a 3-1 win in Game 4 Thursday night at Citizens Bank Park.
Nick Castellanos, who hit a pair of home runs off Atlanta ace Spencer Strider, becoming the first player in major league history to hit two home runs in consecutive playoff games.
Want to send Nicole a note?
Shoot her an email at NFallert@usatoday.com or follow along with her musings on Twitter.
Support journalism like this – subscribe to USA TODAY here.
Associated Press contributed reporting.
The attacks came by land, sea, air – and online.
Some Hamas officials have since walked back the threat.
The videos and images from the deadly attacks posted by Hamas-affiliated accounts were shared by Hamas allies and unwitting participants around the globe, Clarke said.
“This is the nature of asymmetric warfare – you've got to utilize tools that are going to make you seem bigger and more powerful than you are,” Clarke said.
“For Hamas, it costs them nothing to videotape something and send it out there, and now everyone thinks that they're creeping around every corner.”
Hamas fired off posts from official accounts on the encrypted messaging and social media app Telegram that ricocheted to X, formerly Twitter, and beyond.
Telegram – which allows messaging between users but also has a “Channel” function that works similarly to X – has a long history of being used by terrorists, among them the Islamic State, or ISIS.
X, which gutted its trust and safety teams under new owner Elon Musk, was unprepared for the wave of terror propaganda that then spread to other social media platforms and messaging apps like WhatsApp.
This week, X said it was removing newly created Hamas-affiliated accounts and coordinating with industry peers “to try and prevent terrorist content from being distributed online.” It also recommended that people adjust their sensitive media settings if they don’t want to see disturbing content.
The U.K. summoned social media executives Wednesday to demand platforms remove violent content of the Hamas attacks on Israel.
Telegram and X did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
If social media sites continue to erode guardrails and safeguards, Clarke warned, what is happening today will get worse.
“This is just the facet of what’s called ‘fourth generation warfare,’ or ‘modern warfare’ in this era,” he said.
“So, whatever the next conflict is, it doesn't really matter, you're going to see this on steroids.”
Once propaganda and disinformation reaches X, the platform is allowing it to be shared and even monetized, a report from the Tech Transparency Project found.
The report, an advance copy of which was provided exclusively to USA TODAY, found several premium subscriber accounts – which pay a fee of $8 a month to the platform – sharing Hamas propaganda including violent and graphic images of the attacks on Israel.
It also appears to violate an X policy stating that the platform will remove accounts sharing content produced by terrorists, the report states.
It also notes that in some cases, X ran advertisements in the comments under the video posts.
The TTP report found several instances of “verified” X users, some with more than 500,000 followers, spreading uncensored Hamas propaganda videos.
One clip posted to X shows bodycam footage of Hamas militants going room-to-room in an Israeli military base firing automatic weapons.
Bloodied bodies lie on the ground in the video, which has been watched more than 60,000 times.
“The amount of content is going to be more than any team, whether it’s at a platform or a research team like mine, or a journalism outlet or organization could possibly sift through,” he said.
“This includes the possibility that a range of terrorist and violent extremist networks and groups may seek to exploit the conflict for their own purposes, as we have seen in past events.”
Facebook, YouTube and TikTok say they have poured resources into moderating content from the Israel-Hamas war.
“After the terrorist attacks by Hamas on Israel on Saturday, we quickly established a special operations center staffed with experts, including fluent Hebrew and Arabic speakers, to closely monitor and respond to this rapidly evolving situation,” Meta said in a statement.
The major platforms prohibit content produced by terrorist organizations including Hamas as well as footage showing hostages.
Apple’s fall device drop gets all the love, but Google wants you to remember it’s here, too – with lots of shiny new tech and some seriously impressive artificial intelligence upgrades coming soon to a phone near you.
Let’s break down everything Google just announced and see how the Pixel 8 stacks up against the new iPhone 15.
That’s how much the Google Pixel 8 Pro costs (OK, it’s $999) – up $100 from the top-tier 7 model.
For a grand, it includes Google’s zippy Tensor G3 chip and a camera good enough to rival the iPhone 15.
Neat feature: Zoom Enhance lets you go in and add details after you’ve taken the shot and want to zoom in on a pic.
The other random but excellent addition is a temperature sensor that can accurately measure how hot or cold a surface, object and even your forehead is.
It comes in black, porcelain and light blue – shipping is expected on Thursday.
Speaking of Google … 20 Google Search tricks, hidden utilities, games and freebies
What about the non-Pro?
The Pixel 8 is going up $100, too.
It’s faster and slightly smaller than the 7 – and gets access to Google’s sweet new AI photo editing tools (along with the 8 Pro).
◾ Magic Editor uses AI to change the scenery in a photo, remove distracting elements and even move people around.
◾ Best Take is a group-shot game changer.
The idea is you take several pictures, and then you can choose the best face for each subject and merge them into one final image.
Finally, everyone looks good!
◾ Audio Magic Eraser tones down distracting sounds in audio tracks that are ruining your video.
The 8 is $699, or $799 if you’re buying from Verizon.
It comes in rose, black and hazel and is expected to ship on Thursday too.
Updates till 2030
Hey, at least if you spend all the money, you know your phone will work for many years.
Google says the 8 and 8 Pro get seven years of “OS, security, and Feature Drop updates” for both phones.
Security 101: Your phone tracks everywhere you’ve been – See (and delete) it
How do they stack up against the new iPhones?
For most people, it comes down to what ecosystem you prefer.
If you’ve been using one or the other for years, you know exactly how they work and are comfortable with the OS.
Perhaps you’re not so brand loyal.
Let’s compare some specs, shall we?
We’ll stick with the base models.
iPhone 15 vs. Pixel 8
◾ Cost: $799 to $1,099 (iPhone); $699 to $749 (Pixel)
I’ll let you draw your own conclusions, but on specs alone, the Pixel models are totally solid for the price.
(And yes, I say that as an iPhone devotee.)
Beyond the phones, here’s what else Google is working on.
More battery life, better sensors
The Pixel Watch 2 looks like the original, but the insides got a significant upgrade.
The improved Qualcomm Snapdragon W5 processor means up to 24 hours of battery life, even with the always-on display enabled.
You’re looking at $349.99 for the GPS version or $399.99 for LTE.
Pick from silver and blue, silver and white, gold and hazel, or all-black.
Can you hear me, Buds?
The Pixel Buds are Google’s answer to the AirPods.
The upgraded Buds Pro get light blue and porcelain options to match the new phones, along with audio upgrades for “fuller and clearer” sound.
Assistant gets smarter
It wouldn’t be 2023 if there weren’t some AI talk.
Google Assistant is getting a Bard AI upgrade “in the coming months.” It’ll connect with your Google apps – like Gmail, Drive and Calendar – to plan trips, caption pictures, make lists and find that dinner reservation you forgot about.
Keep your tech-know going
Search for it wherever you get your podcasts.
For your convenience, hit the link below for a recent episode.
Plus, heading back to the office?
Here's what to know about bosses tracking you.
I chat with caller Sharon from Oregon about finding good animation software for her grandson.
Plus, high-speed police drones, and a heads-up: hackers are targeting travelers.
Listen to the podcast here or wherever you get your podcasts.
Kim takes calls and dispenses advice on today's digital lifestyle, from smartphones and tablets to online privacy and data hacks.
For her daily tips, free newsletters and more, visit her website.
I really like the new Apple Watch Series 9.
It reminds me a lot of my Apple Watch Series 8.
I’ve been evaluating the latest smartwatches from Apple, Samsung and Google.
And at first blush, separating this year’s models from their predecessors seems a little like deciphering whether that SUV in the parking lot is a 2019 or 2020 Chevy Tahoe.
That’s good news if you splurged for a new smartwatch last fall, because your investment is anything but obsolete.
By the same token, there’s more to this year’s models than powder-coated wheel finishes and trim decals.
So if you’re considering an upgrade after a few years – or even switching teams – there’s plenty to consider.
Apple and Samsung have turned it up to … 2,000.
That’s 2,000 nits, a measure of brightness, Which is, like, really bright.
The Google Pixel Watch 2 (starting at $349.99, $399.99 as tested with LTE) checks in at 1,000 nits, the same as the inaugural Pixel Watch as well as last year’s offerings from Samsung and Apple.
Although it pales in comparison to the 2,000-nit displays, I can still read the 1,000-nit screens outside.
And if you’re more likely to read a message in Scarsdale than Scottsdale, then the new 2,000-nit options may not have the same appeal.
Apple Watch Series 9 (iOS)
Apple also upgraded the Watch’s internal processors, which the company credits for a few new features, like “Double Tap.” The Double Tap hand gesture – the Watch detects when you quickly press your thumb and middle fingers together – can help control the device when you can’t reach over with your other hand to answer a call or scan alerts.
In my beta-testing of the feature, it worked a lot like “Assistive Touch,” which Apple introduced two years ago, only a bit snappier.
The added horsepower also gives Siri offline capabilities that improve the voice assistant’s speed and accuracy.
iOS updates again?
Why you should do it now.
Samsung Galaxy Watch 6 Classic (Android)
The Watch 6 Classic is livelier and more responsive than the Watch 5 Pro, with better graphics for alerts and more engaging apps.
And sleep tracking seems to be more reliable, accurate and – as a consequence – relevant.
Although the processor and sensors are largely identical, the Watch 6 Classic is easier to visually identify because Samsung brought back a popular engagement tool: the rotating bezel.
Google Pixel Watch 2 (Android)
The Google offering, available Thursday, endured the most substantial changes year over year, by far.
But it is just the second iteration of a formidable undertaking to meld the popular fitness platform from Fitbit, which Google bought four years ago, with the premium Wear OS smartwatch ecosystem.
It’s already spawned a worthy contender.
But there’s still a lot to do.
It has an upgraded processor and more durable glass.
It also runs the new Wear OS 4, just like Samsung’s Watch 6 series.
The Fitbit/Wear mix-and-match journey is most evident when the two platforms have a different approach to the same task.
For example, Fitbit’s all-in-one app is at odds with how Wear OS – and other vendors as well, for that matter – on-board and configure hardware.
That has made it challenging for Fitbit to add Google features to its devices, just as it has been for Google to add Fitbit’s app to its devices.
It is also making it challenging to swap back and forth between the Pixel Watch 2 and the original Watch or – more difficult – traditional Fitbit devices.
I’m juggling three wearables right now – the new Fitbit Charge 6 as well as the two Pixel Watches – and it can be downright aggravating.
Conversely, that process is automatic and hassle-free for those swapping Apple or Samsung devices.
Samsung’s relative ease at handling the task is particularly illustrative, given that Google’s own Wear OS is managing the handoff.
I wish Google would offer two sizes, as Apple and Samsung do.
Hopefully Google will get around to that in future revisions.
I also wish Google would offer better battery life.
But I’m not holding my breath.
Online hate surge:Online hate surges after Hamas attacks Israel.
Why everyone is blaming social media.
Unfortunately, Big Tech seems content to offer mediocre battery life for their pricey, high-powered smartwatches.
Apple has never promised more than a waking day between charges on full power.
That obviously hasn’t hurt Apple – and Samsung has taken a cue.
The Watch 6 Classic simply matches Apple battery life, rather than beating it with 36- to 48-hour battery life, as in previous generations.
Most disappointing is Google, which is foregoing Fitbit’s multiday battery legacy by providing up to just 24 hours of power in the Pixel Watch 2.
Multiday battery life would be a major upgrade.
It’s not only more convenient.
It also makes smartwatches more engaging.
For one thing, it dramatically boosts the likelihood of tracking sleep, one of the most crucial health indicators.
Battery life aside, these are three very good watches to choose from.
So if you’re kicking the tires on a new model, don’t let the recycled styling dissuade you.
The Apple Watch and Samsung Galaxy Watch series are both locked in after years of refinement.
And while it’s comparatively early on for the Pixel Watch series, Google has done a good job so far combining two very established platforms.
Reach him at mikef@feibustech.com.
The concept that we are all computer-generated characters occupying a world as real as the ones gamers explore on their PlayStation consoles isn't exactly a new one.
As far back as 1999, Morpheus was entering "The Matrix" to break Neo and a few other chosen few out of a simulated reality created by advanced machines in order to use humans as an energy source.
That's what happened this week when a physicist at the University of Portsmouth in the United Kingdom proposed that a new law of physics could support the theory that what we see as our reality is in fact a complex virtual simulation running on a cosmic computer.
"Any normal person will think, could it be that maybe we already are in some kind of digital virtual reality world?"
Psyche mission, explained:What to know about NASA's long-awaited trip to a strange metal asteroid
In principle, anything can be simulated with a computer with sufficient power.
The theory is popular among many notable figures, including Elon Musk.
The Tesla founder and CEO weighed in at a 2016 conference, stating that in his opinion, the odds that we're living in what he called "base reality" — in other words, the real universe as opposed to a simulated one — are “one in billions.”
So are we not unlike the characters we oversee in the Sims, confined to a superficial, restricted sandbox while more advanced beings are spectators to our existence?
In fact, 2020 research authored by David Kipping, an astronomer at Columbia University, found that the odds of us living in a base reality are pretty much 50-50, with the odds only slightly in favor of our universe not being simulated.
Prada in space:Famed Italian fashion house will help design NASA's spacesuits for mission to the moon
"My questions was, where is that information going when the bit is at equilibrium and is stored information?"
"Energy can't exist on its own, it needs to be in some form."
That law essentially dictates that any naturally occurring process will result in a loss of energy and increase in a system's measure of disorder, or entropy (think of an ice cube that gradually melts when placed in a cup of water at room temperature.)
In short, it's a process he said could support the idea that we may be living in a Matrix-style artificial reality akin to a computer simulation, where we and anything else we perceive is nothing more than a virtual facsimile.
"It underpins the concept through empirical evidence, but it doesn't mean necessarily that is totally the consensus that is happening; it is one possibility."
Reach him at elagatta@gannett.com
The movie "Snakes on a Plane" dramatized perhaps the worst things to encounter on a flight, but imagine being stuck on a real-world plane with a swarm of mosquitos.
It happened to a local flight in Mexico, which was delayed for more than two hours from its scheduled departure time of 4:30 p.m., due to a mosquito infestation, local media reported.
Cabin crew and ground staff tried to get the situation under control by spraying mosquito and insect repellent in the cabins.
It eventually took off at 6:59 p.m., according to the flight's history.
Stop clipping your toenails:These are the 'most offensive' airplane behaviors
Don't bring bedbugs back home:How to avoid the bloodsuckers while traveling
Video footage from the incident, recorded by a passenger, shows the airplane's cabin filled with fumes as flight attendants spray insect repellent to counteract the swarm of mosquitoes buzzing around the cabin.
The flight appeared to be ready for takeoff, with all passengers seated.
Some of them could be heard screaming in the video, while others swatted the insects away.
As the airlines staff sprayed the mosquito repellent, the insects became more agitated reported the local media outlet El Sol de León.
This is not the first time that a swarm of mosquitos attacked a flight taking off from the Guadalajara International Airport.
A similar incident took place in 2019.
El Sol de León said that the area in which the airport is located is close to contaminated water bodies and vegetation, both of which are ideal breeding grounds for mosquitoes.
Favorable weather conditions also contribute to increasing mosquito populations.
Airport authorities have recognized this as a problem, reported El Sol de León, and have taken steps such as draining water, pruning grass and spraying insecticides to curb the problem.
'It's a party plane':Young man and woman caught having sex on flight to Ibiza
Pray or move?40% of surveyed Americans experience 'unexplained' phenomena in homes
Reach her at sshafiq@gannett.com and follow her on X, the platform formerly known as Twitter @saman_shafiq7.
Gallegos said around seven members of the community were already onboard because they saw the movie together and were in on the plan from the beginning.
The house concepts include:
Photos:Barbie's Malibu dream house is back on Airbnb, but this time Ken is hosting for free
We have historically gone pretty big for Halloween.
Kenzie, worked with the residents of Daybreak, as the creative director of the setup, sourcing decorations and props for them including a life-size horse, signs for the houses and other custom-built items.
In fact, there is a gravestone dedicated to Ruth Handler, the founder of Mattel, the company that produces Barbie dolls.
"Some people were very much into Halloween, and they didn't want to lose sight of it, so they went with themes like haunted Barbie and graveyard Barbie," Kenzie said.
Daybreak is a housing community in South Jordan, with one part of it situated on an island and surrounded by a moat.
"I mean, we knew that people in Daybreak would care because they love Halloween," said Gallegos.
She said that she posted a few videos on TikTok on the suggestion of her friends, and they soon went viral, with people sending in requests to come and see the setup.
At least two of the videos hit more than 2 million views on TikTok.
"I feel like it's a landmark or something," said Gallegos.
Gallegos said that the local police force was also taken aback by the number of people and traffic jams.
However, Gallegos and her neighbors do not mind the attention or influx of people.
"It honestly makes me so happy because there's a lot of really sad stuff in the world right now," Gallegos shared.
A new record:Costumes, candy, decor fuel $12.2 billion Halloween spending splurge in US
'Come on Barbie, let's go party':Will Ferrell is surprise DJ at USC frat party during parents weekend
Reach her at sshafiq@gannett.com and follow her on X, the platform formerly known as Twitter @saman_shafiq7.
A fishing trip became a life-changing event for Phil Garner when he came across an orphaned duck.
Phil was at a fishing pond with his son when a bedraggled duckling latched onto them.
With no sign of the duck’s family, Garner was encouraged by the pond owner to take the bird home as otherwise it would most likely have died.
After 18 months of living with them, Freda disappeared.
But a few months later, she returned with a big surprise for her owners.
Watch the video below to see what Freda brought back when she returned to her home
Humankind is your go-to spot for good news!
Click here to submit your uplifting, cute, or inspiring video moments for us to feature.
Also, click here to subscribe to our newsletter, bringing our top stories of the week straight to your inbox.
A birthday party is a treat many kids can take for granted.
With a limited income and four children to provide for, Ángel's mom said she'd never had the money to throw him a party.
Together with Ángel's classmates, they hatched a plan to surprise him with a birthday party at school.
His heartfelt reaction was priceless!
Watch the video below to see a young boy shed tears of joy at his first-ever birthday party.
Humankind is your go-to spot for good news!
Click here to submit your uplifting, cute, or inspiring video moments for us to feature.
Also, click here to subscribe to our newsletter, bringing our top stories of the week straight to your inbox.
Jurors convicted a Colorado police officer Thursday and acquitted a former officer of charges in the 2019 death of Elijah McClain, a Black man who died after being stopped by police in a Denver suburb, restrained and injected with ketamine.
A local prosecutor initially declined to bring criminal charges over McClain's death partly because of an inconclusive initial autopsy report, but the group was indicted in 2021 after Colorado Attorney General Phil Weiser launched a grand jury investigation.
Aurora Police Chief Art Acevedo also released a statement Thursday, saying the department respected the verdict handed down by the jury.
As a nation, we must be committed to the rule of law.
The jury began deliberating Tuesday afternoon after attorneys delivered their closing arguments.
Prosecutors reminded jurors Tuesday that McClain, a massage therapist, was simply walking home from a store on Aug. 24, 2019, when he was stopped by police and violently restrained.
McClain was not armed or accused of committing a crime, but a 911 caller had reported a man who seemed “sketchy.”
He died days later.
The city later agreed to pay $15 million to settle a federal civil rights lawsuit brought by his parents.
Prosecutor Duane Lyons said in his closing argument the officers failed to de-escalate the confrontation and ignored McClain’s pleas, Colorado Public Radio reported.
"This is not just a tragedy, this is a crime," he said.
An amended autopsy report released last year determined McClain died because of "complications of ketamine administration following forcible restraint" and lists his manner of death as "undetermined."
Over the course of two weeks, prosecutors played video of the struggle and witnesses testified that though the ketamine killed McClain, he likely inhaled vomit into his lungs while he was being restrained, which made it harder to breathe, and his condition deteriorated before he was given the sedative.
The defense attorneys closed their case on Oct. 6 without calling any witnesses.
Contributing: The Associated Press
Online hate has surged in the days since Hamas launched brutal terrorist attacks against Israel, and social media companies are once again under fire for failing to quell the chaos.
Meanwhile, swastikas are on display in New York and California, and hate speech invades Bay Area city council meetings.
It’s the week in extremism.
Hateful and extremist speech on social media platforms has surged in the days since Hamas launched its brutal terrorist attacks on Israel on Saturday, USA TODAY reported Wednesday.
In response, civil rights organizations are calling on tech companies to get much better at enforcing their terms of service and quelling hateful content.
The conflict in Gaza has brought out American anti-Semites.
In addition to the online hate, there have been at least two incidents of people displaying swastika flags in the last week, at either end of the country.
Several California cities have had to pause or cancel remote public comment sessions in recent days and weeks after meetings were hijacked by trolls shouting racist or anti-Semitic slurs.
He will be missed!
Fresh off attending the premiere of her "Eras Tour" movie in Los Angeles on Wednesday, Taylor Swift is off to Kansas City for another one of her passions: watching Kansas City Chiefs football games.
Swift was spotted Thursday arriving at the Chiefs' game against the Denver Broncos.
The singer wore a black dress, paired with a red varsity jacket.
Ahead of her game day arrival, Kansas City mayor Quinton Lucas welcomed Swift back to the city in a social media post Thursday morning.
The "Karma" songstress also linked up with another star athlete's plus-one for some game-time celebration.
Swift stood next to Chiefs quarterback Patrick Mahomes' wife, Brittany Mahomes, and the peppy duo excitedly cheered during the match.
Taylor Swift 'Eras' movie review:Concert film a thrilling revisit of her live spectacle
The game was the most-watched matchup of the week, drawing 24.3 million viewers and ranking first among women ages 12 to 49.
We script it all, ladies and gentlemen.
It was just impressive.
Broncos vs. Chiefs live updates:Predictions, odds, how to watch 'Thursday Night Football'
Swift turned the Chiefs' Oct. 1 game against the New York Jets into a star-studded affair when she brought a full entourage to the Big Apple event.
Lively's husband Ryan Reynolds also attended with his "Deadpool 3" co-star and fellow Marvel actor Hugh Jackman.
Meanwhile, "Game of Thrones" star Sophie Turner was spotted in the booth and later walking out with the Grammy-winning singer at the end of the game.
PHILADELPHIA – Another juggernaut got dismissed here Thursday night, the 104-win Atlanta Braves once again meeting their end at Citizens Bank Park.
The 100-win Los Angeles Dodgers are home, the 101-win Baltimore Orioles not yet ready for prime time, and any notion of “top seeds” still alive in this made-for-TV tournament masquerading as the baseball playoffs is pretty much dead.
The Philadelphia Phillies play on, a concept the man who laid out more than $1 billion in salary to produce a club that’s equal parts talented, tough and together tries not to overanalyze.
“I think luck has to be a factor in life,” John Middleton, a man worth an estimated $3.7 billion and assembler of this baseball bacchanalia in South Philly, was saying in the wee hours of Friday morning, streams of champagne and Anheuser-Busch products trickling by him.
“And if anybody who’s successful doesn’t acknowledge that luck has played a part in their success, I think they’re just not paying attention to reality.”
Reality is suddenly this for Middleton and the club he owns: The Phillies are advancing to the National League Championship Series for the second consecutive year, will be heavily favored to defeat the Arizona Diamondbacks and claim back-to-back NL pennants, and somehow have turned a pair of unsettling baseball trends on their ear.
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
And much of it almost certainly wasn’t luck.
Spending big bucks on talent doesn’t work out?
(As the Mets, Padres and Yankees discovered that this year).
Since 2019, Middleton has committed $1.04 billion to Bryce Harper, J.T.
All took their “welcome to Philly” lumps – and have come out the better for it.
Superstars don’t correlate with playoff success?
Well, just ask the Braves how that’s working out in Philly.
In their series-ending 3-1 victory, Castellanos, signed to a $100 million deal in March 2022, hit a pair of home runs for the second consecutive night – the first person in playoff history to pull that off – including a game-tying shot that eerily resembled his Game 3 equalizer.
As for Harper?
Middleton planted his flag with the then 26-year-old, signing him to a $330 million contract that preceded all the rest.
It took four years, but what Harper’s done to Atlanta the past two postseasons almost defies belief:
Fourteen hits in 29 at-bats, five home runs – two in a stunning Game 3 revenge game – and 10 RBI.
Strangely enough, Middleton just kept coming with his checkbook – all the while adding players seemingly as relentless as his spending.
Adding Castellanos to the mix was poignant, in some ways.
They shared a moment Thursday night, after Castellanos tied the game with a booming shot off Strider and later ended his night with a 112-mph rocket, the hardest-hit ball in his career.
Because of those big moments.
And obviously we're not in their category yet.
They’re working on it.
The Phillies will roll out Wheeler and Aaron Nola in NLCS Games 1 and 2 and will welcome the Diamondbacks to a ballpark where they’re now 26-11 in the postseason – 10-2 in this two-year run.
The Braves, the Padres, the Marlins – they’ve all discovered in the past two years how hard it is when Citizens Bank is in full throat, as it was with 45,831 on hand for Game 4.
It makes sense: By the time a club acclimates to this atmosphere, the series is over.
After all, it took all the Philly stars time.
Castellanos acknowledged that year one last year moved too quickly.
Just to get his head right.
It worked: Turner finished the year strongly and perhaps reinforced his belief that failure is nothing to fear.
Harper and Turner’s response in Games 3 and 4?
Nine hits in 15 at-bats, four homers, potential sainthood in Pennsylvania.
And you're not going to be perfect throughout the season.
You're not going to be perfect in the postseason.
So we got a good group, man.
I think that's the only way to put it is someone messes up, so what.
We can fix it.
We can overcome it.
And I think that belief is true.
Again, Middleton believes there’s nothing coincidental about that.
“Ultimately, when we handed Harper $330 million guaranteed, he was going to respond,” Middleton said of his bell cow.
I need to earn this.
As opposed to, I’ve earned it, now I can coast.
I’ve got it made.
How are they going to fit in?
As for the early struggles?
Middleton is quick to credit the fans for providing both accountability and full-throated support when his stars struggle – along with internal support in the clubhouse.
“Let’s give the fans some credit for that,” Middleton says of Castellanos’ and Turner’s trial periods.
And when you channel passion positively, it’s an extraordinary motivating force.
If there’s a unifying theme for both smaller-market teams and analytically inclined big-budget clubs like the Dodgers, it’s that the aim is to provide your team a chance to win in as many years as possible.
The Phillies’ approach feels much more scorched earth – see a need, sign a guy, fill the hole.
At some point, the spigot will be turned down, if not totally off.
The Phillies are getting close to their ideal, a gritty but wildly talented club that’s both entertaining and successful.
Monday, they’ll take aim at the Diamondbacks, and perhaps will get a revenge date with the Houston Astros in the World Series.
If they fall short, it certainly won’t be for lack of effort – from the owner’s suite to the front office, from the grandstands to the clubhouse, all the factors combining to shoo away the bad playoff mojo that’s befallen so many titans of the game this autumn.
“Winning teams find ways to win,” says Harper, shirtless and clad in socks amid the Phillies’ booming celebratory playlist.
“At all costs.”
From getting stuck in traffic and the extra effort put into getting dressed, many employees would much rather clock in from home.
However, a recent survey found that one of the biggest reasons could simply be how costly it is to make money.
Owl Lab's 2023 "State of Work" report found 66% of U.S. employees who returned to the office to work five days a week or full time, spend an average of $51 every workday.
Working in the office costs pet owners an extra $20 a day on average, the report states.
The survey shares information on what work tasks are easier to complete during a remote shift, what perks exist at the office and which work models managers feel their teams better thrive in.
The report found that employees working at the office pay about $51 a day on the following expenses:
Your connection with your coworkers can often make or break a job.
Owl Labs found that 46% of employees find it easier to build colleague relationships when working from home.
23% found doing so harder with a remote job while 26% said it made no difference whether they saw their fellow staff in-person or not.
Between August and September 2022, around 27% of the U.S. workforce worked remotely at least part-time, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Multiple academic servers suggested that actually about half of Americans worked remotely at least part-time, the MIT Sloan School of Management reported in June.
Some say they are already seeing more visitors, while others point to anecdotal evidence that interest is on the rise.
Black museums across the country – large and small – have provided a space for people to learn about Black history.
That mission is even more important now, historians said.
At the African American Museum in Dallas, the 100-person seat auditorium is often packed for Thursday night panels.
In the past, only 25 visitors would be in the space.
None of the other museums in the city focus on the Black experience, he said.
He said movements to ban some books mostly by Black authors have also spurred interest.
In response to growing interest, the museum plans to restart a community African American history course this month.
Educators are looking to supplement history lessons and find ways for students to access more history, including through museums, said Neil A. Barclay, president and CEO of the Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History in Detroit.
Black churches in Florida buck DeSantis: 'Our churches will teach our own history.'
Historians said there has always been a debate over how much of the history of Blacks in America should be taught.
That fight in part helped spur the push for more Black museums, they said.
The National Museum for African American History and Culture opened in Washington, D.C., in 2016 with much fanfare.
Plans for the International African American Museum had been in the works for years.
The museum, which opened in June and has had 50,000 visitors, is in Charleston, once one of the busiest slave ports in the country.
Part of the challenge, she said, is to sustain interest without another tragedy fueling support.
The museum broke ground in 2019, four years after a white gunman killed nine Black churchgoers at Mother Emanuel Church in Charleston.
Construction of the museum was underway during the 2020 protests over the murder of George Floyd in Minnesota.
Those tragedies sparked interest in people wanting to learn more about the history of Blacks in America, Matthews said.
It also increased support for the museum.
Black museums often experience a spike in visitation when there’s civil unrest or a social justice movement, said Coleman-Robinson.
She likened the restrictions on teaching Black history and book bans to social injustice.
“We also see a spike because people are like, ‘Okay, well, we got to know where we came from in order to know where we're going.’ ”
Michael Morris, director of the Museum of Mississippi History and the Mississippi Civil Rights Museum, said he took notice one recent Saturday when he saw a group of about 20 Black boys visiting from New Orleans.
It didn’t appear to be a traditional school field trip.
It was a weekend.
The group spent hours exploring the museum.
Morris said he doesn’t know if there’s more interest in visiting the museum, which is still recovering after closing four months during the COVID pandemic.
More than 600,000 people have visited the museum since it opened six years ago.
Morris said he doesn’t feel pressure to not tell the “unvarnished truth.”
With the loss of civil rights legends such as Bob Moses in 2021 and Hollis Watkins, a Mississippi native, last month, Morris said preserving Black history is more important than ever.
Some other groups that focus on sharing Black history have also seen interest grow.
The community is home to descendants of enslaved Africans who because of their isolation on the island was able to hold onto some African customs and create a unique and rich culture.
In the last five years more Black customers have joined the tours, said Irvin Campbell, one of the founding partners of the 27-year-old company.
Unlike in the past, most customers in recent months have been Black.
Campbell said he’s expecting more Black customers and plans to train more guides and drivers.
“It would do wonders for our community…to know more about who we are and what we’re about,” he said.
The first school resource officer came into existence in the late 1950s under the guise that having a police officer in the school would "improve" the relationship between youth and law enforcement – a novel claim that helped SRO programs multiply.
It's estimated that 20% of schools have an officer.
Yet, despite this original claim that relationships with the youth would improve, there has not been any conclusive evidence that an officer presence improves youth relationships with law enforcement.
In fact, the research is quite mixed.
Uh oh, it's Friday the 13th.
We’ve been told it's a very unlucky day.
So why is it so scary for us?
One explanation is that Friday and the number 13 both have violent historical connections to Christianity.
It was on a Friday that Jesus was crucified, and ever since, the day has been associated with a "general ill omen," Michael Bailey, a history professor at Iowa State University who specializes in the origins of superstitions, tells USA TODAY Network.
In the Middle Ages, for instance, weddings were not held on Fridays; likewise, it was not a day someone would set out on a journey, Bailey says.
Thankfully, Friday the 13th doesn’t happen all too often.
The majority of years, like 2023, we have two Friday the 13ths, but occasionally there is just one in a month.
Three of the unfortunate days occur in particularly unlucky years, such as 2026.
Unable to view our graphics?
Click here to see them.
You may not be alone in your fear.
According to a recent survey by YouGov.com, Americans who are 25 to 34 years old may be the most anxious about the spooky date.
Of that age group, nearly a quarter (23%) stated they were very superstitious.
If Friday the 13th is an unlucky day for you, you might want to decrease your chances of getting bad luck, by just lying in bed all day and avoid everything.
We recognize that mistakes may happen – or that new information can emerge after a story is published – and we pledge to address all concerns quickly, fairly and transparently.
If a correction or clarification is warranted, we will highlight that in the original file and explain to readers why the change was made.
Any correction or clarification would also be published on our corrections log.
To report corrections & clarifications, contact:
Please indicate whether you're responding to content online or in the newspaper.
The following corrections & clarifications have been published on stories produced by USA TODAY's newsroom:
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated who is affected by this rule.
The story has been updated to reflect the proposed rule affects satellite and cable providers.
Money: A previous version of this story misstated the number of people 62 and older who have student debt loans.
Sports: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed the locations for Big Ten games.
"5 Things" podcast: On the Oct. 5 show in our segment about school psychologists, we misstated the ratio of counselors to students at a school in Hershey, Pennsylvania.
At 1 to 1000, it is half of the recommended ratio.
Money: An earlier version of this story mischaracterized the competitiveness of Capital One's savings-account interest rates.
The reference has been removed.
Jarrett Payton covers the Chicago Bears.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the amount of Fox Corp.'s settlement with Dominion Voting Systems in a defamation lawsuit.
Money: The UAW strike affects 38 locations across 20 states.
An earlier alert undercounted the number of states affected.
See the list.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly identified an organization.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified the Higher Education Advisory Group.
Sports: A headline on the story incorrectly described Christian Coleman's winning time in the men's 100 meters.
He won with a time of 9.83 seconds, tied for the world's fastest time this season.
News: This article was updated to remove incorrect details about math courses and departments at the University of California, Santa Cruz.
News: A previous version of this video misstated the Longwood Garden's distance from the prison.
His personal security guard ran onto the field to restrain the person.
A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the name of the home team.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified Chester County Prison.
It's the University of Pennsylvania.
News: A previous version of this video misstated how many co-defendants had been booked.
Money: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed among states with no Social Security tax Minnesota, which expanded in May 2023 a state tax exemption for benefits without eliminating the tax.
News: An earlier version of this story contained inaccurate or incomplete facts about the history of language.
Social media: A previous version of this post graphic contained a name misspelling of Scooter Braun.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the extent of the standing water around Dodger Stadium.
Sports: The USA TODAY Sports’ MLB power rankings in the Aug. 15 edition misstated the leader of the American League Central Division.
The Minnesota Twins lead the division.
News: A previous version of this video misidentified USA TODAY’s National Political correspondent, David Jackson.
Entertainment: The location of the bookstore in an earlier version of this story was incorrect.
Wild Geese Bookshop is located in Franklin, Indiana.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the next opponent for the U.S. women should they advance from their Round of 16 game vs. Sweden.
The Americans would then play the winner of Japan vs. Norway in the quarterfinals.
Money: Due to a typo, an earlier version of this story misstated total U.S. sales of the Kia Stinger.
The automaker has sold more than 65,000 Stinger sedans in the U.S. since the model's launch.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees between Madrid, Spain, and a mountainous area in Spain.
It also misstated a temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees in reference to average temperatures in Tunisia.
News: An earlier version incorrectly identified Victoria McQueen's title at her high school.
She is student body president.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified the Norwegian Gem.
It is a Jewel-class cruise ship.
News: A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the origins of Blue Moon.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the Iowa State teams being investigated by the Iowa Racing and Gaming Commission.
The school does not have a baseball program.
News: This article has been updated to include additional nonpartisan sources of data and research.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated 10-year-old J'Adore's diagnosis date.
News: In a 1A story on July 5 about primary care doctors, the relationship between physicians and health professionals such as nurse practitioners and physician assistants was unclear.
Paraprofessionals generally work under the supervision of a licensed physician.
Entertainment: A photo included in an earlier version of this report was misidentified as The Beatles.
The new record featuring John Lennon’s vocals will be a song.
Graphics: A previous version of this story misstated the number of competing teams in the Tour de France.
News: This story has been updated to clarify how many people died on the Titanic.
Money: This story has been updated to clarify details about local liquor laws.
News: A June 19 article on Page 2A misstated the year the 13th Amendment was passed.
Life: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated when the rescue was made.
Travel: A previous version of this story incorrectly described the Airbus A321 with new livery.
The aircraft is part of JetBlue’s existing fleet.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the number of states under red flag warnings.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly named ISR courses.
The courses are called Infant Swimming Resource courses.
News: This story has been updated to correct how far away the body was found from where the missing doctor was last seen.
News: An earlier version of this story did not make clear which versions of the AP African American Studies course framework excluded the word "queer."
It has been updated to clarify that versions in May 2022 and February 2023 did not include the word.
Travel: An earlier version of the story incorrectly listed how police resolved the case.
News: A previous version of this article incorrectly referred to the tornado data provided by the Storm Prediction Center of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Sports: A story on the documentary movie “It Ain’t Over” in the May 12 edition misstated the number of league MVP titles won by Yogi Berra.
The Yankees legend won three.
The information has been updated.
Those portions have been removed.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the Australian Open women's singles champion.
News: In some editions, the March 30 1A story about attackers targeting schools misstated the partners in the mass killing database.
They are USA TODAY, The Associated Press and Northeastern University.
News: This story originally included an inaccurate detail related to one woman's application for a domestic violence restraining order.
The information on Alison Kessler has been updated.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the comparative price between electric vehicles and gas-powered vehicles.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the year of Paul Walker's death.
News: A previous version of this article misstated Terry Wilson's employment status.
He remains a Fresno State employee but was granted leave from the position to serve as a staff-wide union representative.
News: An earlier version of this podcast incorrectly stated that USA TODAY ran the Dilbert comic strip.
It was the USA TODAY Network, not USA TODAY.
News: USA TODAY did not publish the Dilbert comic strip.
A previous version of this article was incorrect.
Facebook: A previous version of this post contained photos from other events earlier this month in Florida.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated salary figures of bartenders and pharmacists.
News: A story on Page 1A Feb. 16 about corporate diversity gave the incorrect date of Southern Co.’s annual meeting.
It takes place later this year.
News: A previous version of this graphic misstated the title of a movie.
News: A previous version of this article misstated the number of Maryland’s Eastern Shore counties.
Social media: An earlier version of this video had an incorrect description.
News: An earlier version misstated the requirements in the Biden administration’s proposed Title IX rule for determining the outcome of sexual assault cases.
The proposed regulation would require schools to use the “preponderance of evidence” standard most of the time.
News: An earlier version of this video misstated the status of a House Ethics Committee investigation.
Social media: A previous post misidentified the award Beyoncé won.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the home state of Sen. Chris Coons.
He is from Delaware.
Social media: A previous version of this post included an incorrect year of death.
News: An earlier version misstated the name of Hillsdale College's spokesperson, Emily Stack Davis.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated the new price of the Tesla Model Y.
It is $52,990.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this gallery included a photo incorrectly identifying Paige Butcher.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified who created Seven Principles of Leave No Trace.
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2016
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2017
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2018
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2019
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2020
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2021
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2022
The USA TODAY Opinion section publishes analysis, argument and essays on a wide variety of subjects.
We're looking for timeliness (pegged to news), persuasion pitched to the other side, new information, novel arguments, revelatory insights, passion without partisanship, first-person experience, original reporting that reveals fresh angles and makes news, expert knowledge, and/or a topic that will drive conversation on social media and in the real world.
We accept only pieces that are submitted exclusively to USA TODAY.
We do not accept material that has been published on blogs, social media or anywhere else.
Columns typically run 550 to 750 words.
They should be pasted directly into an email and sent to theforum@usatoday.com.
Pieces should include links (URLs, not headlines or footnotes) to back up quotes and factual material.
People featured in columns must be identified by their real, full names.
We do not publish open letters, class projects or material that has been submitted to multiple outlets.
Rebuttals to editorials and columns published in USA TODAY should be submitted as letters to the editor, not as full-length op-eds.
Due to the volume of submissions, we can’t respond to all columns sent to us.
If our Opinion team is interested in yours, you will hear from us within three business days.
Submissions may be edited for accuracy, clarity, style, standards and length.
Please include with your submission a short biography, two sentences at most, to run at the end of your column, as well as a current photograph, to which you own publishing rights.
If you or a business, trade group or other institution with which you are associated stands to gain financially or in any other way from your column, you should disclose that information in detail.
In most cases, it should also be included in the body of the piece or in the author's biographical information.
Columns are accepted for online publication; print publication is not guaranteed.
All columns published by USA TODAY are available for use online and in print by the more than 250 properties in the USA TODAY Network.
They include Austin; Bergen County, New Jersey; Burlington, Vermont; Cincinnati; Columbus, Ohio; Des Moines; Detroit; El Paso, Texas; Indianapolis; Louisville, Kentucky; Memphis, Tennessee; Milwaukee; Nashville, Tennessee; Phoenix, Reno, Nevada; Palm Beach, Florida; and Wilmington, Delaware.
Authors may post their columns elsewhere 48 hours after they are published at USA TODAY.
By submitting a column to USA TODAY and agreeing to its publication, authors are granting exclusive rights to the piece to the USA TODAY Network for 48 hours and non-exclusive rights thereafter.
To get a sense of our range, preferences and requirements, check out our op-ed section, follow us on Twitter and Facebook, or sign up for our daily Opinion newsletter.
If you're interested in joining conversations about topics in USA TODAY, email letters@usatoday.com, comment on Facebook or use #tellusatoday on Twitter.
Letters are edited for accuracy, clarity and length and to conform to our editorial style and standards.
Submissions of 200 words or fewer have the best chance of being published.
Letters must include a name, address and phone number.
Corrections to published letters or columns follow USA TODAY guidelines.
She had fun learning the chants that fans perform at football games.
“I knew that I was in a safe space.”
This has in the last two years become an important consideration for college-bound students from all backgrounds and beliefs.
The digital tables also list, for every four-year institution in the country, such things as racial and gender diversity among students and faculty, the number of student veterans enrolled, the incidence of on-campus race-motivated hate crimes, free-speech rankings and if the university or college serves many students from rural places.
Students have long picked schools based on their academic reputations and social life.
But with campuses in the crosshairs of the culture wars, many students are now also taking stock of attacks on diversity, course content and speech and speakers from both ends of the political spectrum.
They’re monitoring hate crimes, anti-LGBTQ+ legislation, state abortion laws and whether students like them ‒ Black, rural, military veterans, LGBTQ+ or from other backgrounds ‒ are represented and supported on campus.
When they look at colleges in various states now, she said, “There are students who are asking, ‘Am I really wanted here?’”
For some students on both sides of the political divide, the answer is no.
In the chaotic new world of American colleges and universities, many say they feel unwelcome at certain schools, while others are prepared to shut down speakers and report faculty with whose opinions they disagree.
It’s too early to know how much this trend will affect where and whether prospective students end up going to college since publicly available enrollment data lags real time.
But there are early clues that it’s having a significant impact.
One in 4 prospective students has already ruled out a college or university for consideration because of the political climate in its state, according to a survey by the higher education consulting firm Art & Science Group.
Among students who describe themselves as liberal, the most common reason to rule out colleges and universities in a particular state, that survey found, is because it’s “too Republican” or has what they consider lax gun regulations, anti-LGBTQ+ legislation, restrictive abortion laws and a lack of concern about racism.
Students who describe themselves as conservative are rejecting states they believe to be “too Democrat” and that have liberal abortion and gay rights laws.
Of these, 8 in 10 say they would prefer to go to a state with greater access to reproductive health services.
“We have many young women who will not look at certain states,” said Levine.
One of her own clients backed out of going to a university in St. Louis after Missouri banned almost all abortions following the Supreme Court’s Dobbs decision, she said.
Institutions in Alabama, Florida, Louisiana and Texas are the most likely to be knocked off the lists of liberal students, according to the Art & Science Group survey.
They’re generally most likely to steer clear of the South and Midwest, while conservative students avoid California and New York.
One in 8 high school students in Florida say they won’t go to a public university in their own state because of its education policies, a separate poll, by the college ranking and information website Intelligent.com, found.
“You are attacking kids who are already vulnerable,” said Javier Gomez, an LGBTQ+ student in his first year at Miami Dade College.
It’s not yet evident whether the new laws are affecting where LGBTQ+ young people are choosing to go to college, said Casey Pick, director of law and policy at The Trevor Project, which supports LGBTQ+ young people in crisis.
But LGBTQ+ adults are moving away from states passing anti-LGBTQ+ laws, she said.
And “if adult employees are taking this into account when they decide where they want to live, you can bet that college students are making the same decisions.”
“The real attack here is on the feeling of belonging,” said Jeremy Young, who directs the Freedom to Learn program at PEN America, which tracks laws that restrict college and university diversity efforts and teaching about race.
“What it really does is hoist a flag to say to the most marginalized students, ‘We don’t want you here.’”
More than 40% of university and college administrators say the Supreme Court ruling curbing the use of affirmative action in admissions will affect diversity on their campuses, a Princeton Review poll found as the school year was beginning.
College students of all races and political persuasions report feeling uncomfortable on campuses that have become political battlegrounds.
It found that those who answer in these ways are more likely to frequently experience stress and more likely to drop out.
Nearly two-thirds say that faculty and administrators don’t understand the challenges they face, and 70% say the same thing about their non-veteran classmates.
Colleges should be “safe and affirming spaces,” said Pick, of the Trevor Project ‒ not places of isolation and alienation.
Of those, 72% say they worry their opinions would be considered unacceptable by classmates and 45%, by their professors.
Conservative students are less likely than their liberal classmates to believe that all points of view are welcome and less willing to share theirs.
“Is that really an intellectually diverse environment?” asked Sean Stevens, director of polling and analytics at the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression, or FIRE, which has launched a campus free-speech ranking based on students’ perceptions of comfort expressing ideas, tolerance for speakers and other measures.
“Anecdotally and from personal experience, there’s certainly a pocket of students who are weighing these factors in terms of where to go to college,” Stevens said.
Eighty-one percent of liberal students and 53% of conservative ones say they support reporting faculty who make comments that they find offensive, the same survey found.
It used sample comments such as, “There is no evidence of anti-Black bias in police shootings,” “Requiring vaccination for COVID is an assault on individual freedom” and “Biological sex is a scientific fact.”
A professor at Texas A&M University became the subject of an investigation when a student accused her of criticizing the state’s lieutenant governor during a lecture, though she was ultimately exonerated.
An anthropology lecturer at the University of Chicago who taught an undergraduate course called “The Problem of Whiteness” said she was deluged with hateful messages when a conservative student posted her photo and email address on social media.
More than half of all freshmen say that colleges have the right to ban extreme speakers, according to an annual survey by an institute at the University of California, Los Angeles; the College Pulse poll says that sentiment is held by twice the proportion of liberal students as conservative ones.
A group of Stanford students in March disrupted an on-campus speech by a federal judge whose judicial record they said was anti-LGBTQ+.
When he asked for an administrator to intervene, an associate dean for diversity, equity and inclusion confronted him and asked: “Is it worth the pain that this causes and the division that this causes?” The associate dean was put on leave and later resigned.
“Today it is a sad fact that the greatest threat to free speech comes from within the academy,” pronounced the right-leaning American Council of Trustees and Alumni, which is pushing colleges to sign on to its Campus Freedom Initiative that encourages teaching students about free expression during freshman orientation and disciplining people who disrupt speakers or events, among other measures.
“I have to imagine that universities that have a bad track record on freedom of expression or academic freedom, that it will affect their reputations,” said Steven Maguire, the organization’s campus freedom fellow.
Some colleges are now actively recruiting students on the basis of these kinds of concerns.
Colorado College in September created a program to ease the process for students who want to transfer away from institutions in states that have banned diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives; Hampshire College in Massachusetts has offered admission to any student from New College in Florida, subject of what critics have described as a conservative takeover.
Thirty-five have so far accepted the invitation.
Though many conservative critics of colleges and universities say faculty are indoctrinating students with liberal opinions, incoming freshmen tend to hold left-leaning views before they ever set foot in a classroom, according to that UCLA survey.
Fewer than 1 in 5 consider themselves conservative.
Three-quarters say abortion should be legal and favor stricter gun control laws, 68% say wealthy people should pay more taxes than they do now and 86% that climate change should be a federal priority and that there should be a clear path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants.
Prospective students say they are watching as new laws are passed and controversies erupt on campuses and actively looking into not just the quality of food and available majors at the colleges they might attend, but state politics.
Florida’s anti-LGBTQ+ laws prompted Javier Gomez to leave his native state and move to New York to go to fashion school.
“People ask me, ‘Why the hell are you back in Florida?’” said Gomez.
It’s overwhelming at times.
It can be very mentally depleting.
Sign up for our higher education newsletter.
Thousands of Israelis and Palestinians have been killed and Palestinians have been ordered to evacuate from the northern Gaza Strip ahead of Israel's impending ground invasion, leading to a humanitarian crisis that has brought protests from the United Nations and around the world.
The U.N. said about 1 million Gaza residents have been displaced in just a week, about half of them finding refuge in U.N. schools and other facilities where water supplies are diminishing.
The war has claimed more than 4,000 lives since Hamas launched an unprecedented surprise attack Oct. 7.
Meanwhile, the World Health Organization pleaded with Israel on Sunday to immediately reverse evacuation orders for hospitals in northern Gaza, saying the deadlines are impossible to meet and risk additional loss of life.
"Evacuation orders by Israel to hospitals are practically impossible to implement and are a death sentence for the sick and injured."
Here are several organizations that are providing aid to people caught in the conflict.
How to cope:The videos out of Israel, Gaza are graphic, but some can't look away
"Our members are speaking loudly and clearly about the values that unite our community: Opposition to this horrific violence, and a commitment to Israeli/Palestinian partnership on the path to ending it, and achieving peace and equality," the agency said in a statement.
The organization is asking for donations to improve access to essential services like water and to support livelihood projects.
Doctors Without Borders is a nongovernmental organization that describes itself as an "independent, impartial and neutral" charity that provides humanitarian aid to people affected by conflict, disease outbreaks and natural and human-made disasters.
The agency is seeking donations to continue to provide medical care in the area.
The agency has reported overcrowding in hospitals, a lack of medical supplies, and dangerous working conditions as it tries to support the thousands injured by the fighting.
UNRWA has designated shelters to host the estimated 127,000 people displaced in Gaza.
The agency is seeking donations to support its work.
The Jewish Agency for Israel North American Council, an American charity organization, is accepting donations to help victims of terrorism.
Save the Children issued an emergency alert in response to the conflict, noting that escalating violence has left 1.2 million children in need of humanitarian aid.
The agency is accepting donations.
National and international organizations that aid victims in the conflict include the Palestine Children's Relief Fund (PCRF), which works to provide lifesaving medical relief and humanitarian aid.
Founded by former President Jimmy Carter and his wife, Rosalynn Carter, in partnership with Emory University, The Carter Center is a humanitarian aid organization that has been promoting peace and a viable two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict for decades.
After Israel declared war, The Carter Center released a statement condemning the targeting of Israeli and Palestinian civilians and called for international action to end the violence.
Families separated at the U.S.-Mexico border under former President Donald Trump’s “zero tolerance” policy would receive an easier path to asylum, permission to work in the U.S. and medical, legal and housing benefits, under a settlement filed Monday in a long-standing lawsuit between immigrant advocates and the federal government.
If approved, the settlement would also expand the total number of families who qualify, from 3,900 to more than 4,400.
And it would bar the federal government from launching similar policies in the future.
The proposed settlement would be one of the first among dozens of lawsuits filed on behalf of families separated by border authorities under the Trump administration.
While it would end one case, it doesn’t address monetary compensation for families, which is being sought in other lawsuits.
The Trump administration’s zero-tolerance policy directed Border Patrol agents to separate young children from their families, as their parents were tried in federal court on misdemeanor charges for crossing into the United States without proper documentation.
Department of Homeland Security officials initially defended the policy, saying they were abiding by the law – parents entering the country had been charged with a crime, and children couldn’t stay with them.
But as the numbers mounted, so did public backlash.
Children were held in emergency Border Patrol facilities and in a variety of shelter settings overseen by government contractors.
Images of separated youths circulated in the media, along with audio and video of toddlers in holding facilities, crying for their parents.
The administration rescinded the policy within months.
By then, thousands of children had been taken from their parents, many of whom had already been deported.
In February 2018, as separations ramped up, the ACLU and other advocate groups filed a lawsuit on behalf of a Congolese mother who was separated from her 7-year-old daughter at the border.
That lawsuit, known as Ms. L. v. ICE, or Immigration and Customs Enforcement, was the basis for a federal judge to order the practice stopped and all families reunited.
It grew to become a class-action suit on behalf of all separated families.
Over the years, though, both sides fought over how to tally the true number of families separated by the government – and how best to reunite them.
In 2021, President Joe Biden ordered the creation of the Interagency Task Force on the Reunification of Families to help locate and reunite families.
As of October, the task force has helped reunite more than 750 families.
Monday’s 46-page settlement proposal, if approved by a court in December, will expand the definition of families separated to include those from the first six months of the Trump administration, during a so-called “pilot program” that predated the full policy.
The settlement will also include adults who were not parents but can show they were a child’s legal guardian at the time of separation.
These moves open the door to more than 500 more families.
Advocates believe at least 500 and up to 1,000 children remain separated from their families because of the policy.
Many families separated at the border and later reunited are still awaiting a ruling on their immigration status, said Conchita Cruz, co-executive director of the Asylum Seeker Advocacy Project.
The settlement would help them through the process faster and grant them work permits while their cases proceed.
It would also set agreements that would be adhered to for years to come, regardless of who’s in the White House, she said.
“It impacts all the families that were separated under zero tolerance, including the pilot program,” Cruz said.
“This has been a long time coming.”
Even as it settles this case, the federal government continues to fight monetary damages for separated families in a slew of other lawsuits.
Investigation:Biden said Trump-era family separations were 'abhorrent.'
So why is DOJ fighting relief claims?
Though the new settlement does not address monetary payouts, it offers medical and behavioral health services for families, something that immigrant rights activists had been pressing for years.
Youths separated from their parents at the border, some of whom were as young as 6 months old, have displayed signs of post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, trouble sleeping and anxiety months after returning to their families, according to activists.
For years after, Angie suffered from nightmares and panic attacks.
“Day to day, we still relive it,” he said.
Migrant children:At age 12, he fled the Taliban to try to save his family.
Then he faced years in US custody
Another key part to the settlement is drastically limiting how the government can separate immigrant families in the future.
Under the agreement, migrant children would not be separated from their families except for a few limited reasons, such as if the parent or legal guardian poses a threat to the child, or if they’re wanted for a felony.
“The practice of separating families at the southwest border was shameful,” Attorney General Merrick Garland said in a statement.
All separations must be documented in shared databases between DHS, the Department of Health and Human Services and other agencies involved in housing migrants.
Also, immigrant attorneys must be promptly notified and allowed to challenge the separations.
At a CNN Town Hall meeting in May, Trump said he wouldn’t rule out reimplementing family separations at the southern border if elected president again, saying, “When you have that policy, people don’t come.”
“It was essential for us not only to help the families who had been separated under the Trump administration but to ensure no future administration repeats this,” he said.
Justice Department special counsel Jack Smith asked for the order to stop Trump’s speeches and statements on social media that attack witnesses, prosecutors and the judge in ways that can sometimes provoke his supporters to threaten violence.
But Trump opposed the order as political interference and a violation of his First Amendment right to speech in the 2024 presidential campaign.
For example, Trump can no longer call Smith a "thug" or "deranged," she said.
But the judge said Trump can’t mount a “smear campaign” against prosecutors and court personnel.
Trump announced in a post on Truth Social that he would appeal the decision.
He could appeal the decision to the D.C.
Circuit Court of Appeals and the Supreme Court.
Trump's presidential campaign issued a statement calling the decision "an absolute abomination" and "another partisan knife stuck in the heart of our Democracy."
"President Trump will continue to fight for our Constitution, the American people’s right to support him, and to keep our country free of the chains of weaponized and targeted law enforcement," the statement said.
Derek Muller, a law professor at the University of Notre Dame, said the bench order appeared narrowly tailored, but enforcing the eventual written order could still become a challenge.
“It leaves a lot of political speech available for former President Donald Trump,” Muller said.
If trials are held as scheduled, they could sideline him from the hustings for months at a time and the court order could stifle his prolific posts on social media.
“We have no interest in stopping the defendant from running for office or defending his reputation, nor does our proposed order do this,” senior assistant special counsel Molly Gaston said.
Here is a sample of Trump's posts or statements before requests for gag orders:
Prosecutors argued that a gag order was necessary to prevent Trump from threatening or intimidating witnesses or victims in his case.
Smith warned about potential harm to public officials and intimidation of witnesses.
John Lauro, one of Trump’s lawyers, accused prosecutors of “seeking to censor a political candidate in the middle of a campaign.” Lauro said Trump had not violated his pretrial conditions, and those were enough to keep him in check for the future, telling the judge: “What you have put in place is working.”
“I’m going to have to take issue with that,” the judge said, citing Trump's remarks about the jury pool in Washington, Smith and his staff.
Trump's lawyers had said language in the 45-page indictment "read very much like a campaign press release" that could "poison President Trump's defense."
The lawyers argued prosecutors wanted to strip Trump of his First Amendment rights during the presidential campaign.
Trump is fundraising off the dispute.
In an email Oct. 4 seeking contributions, Trump said the Justice Department is trying to censor him and is interfering in the 2024 election.
"In other words, in just a few short weeks, Crooked Joe’s weaponized DOJ may very well get away with stripping Biden’s leading opponent (ME) of his First Amendment right to freedom of speech in the 2024 presidential election," Trump wrote.
Fired Michigan State University football coach Mel Tucker dropped a bomb in the campus sexual harassment case against him when he and his legal team sent the media a trove of private text messages between the woman who accused him and her deceased assistant.
An Ingham County, Michigan, judge granted the woman – prominent rape survivor and activist Brenda Tracy – an emergency restraining order the next day, temporarily barring Tucker, his attorney and their associates from releasing more.
A hearing Tuesday will determine whether the order should hold.
Tucker’s attorney touted the messages as evidence that Tracy had fabricated her allegations against Tucker.
On social media, some echoed his claims, including a sports director for a TV news station in Lansing, Michigan, who proclaimed the texts proved Tracy had lied.
The station fired her the next day and apologized to Tracy.
While the messages may have already damaged Tracy’s reputation in the court of public opinion, three of the nation’s top legal experts on Title IX and sexual abuse said the texts do not exonerate Tucker, who was accused by Tracy of masturbating over the phone without her consent.
Context, the experts consulted by USA TODAY said, is everything – and so far that context is missing from the subset of messages released.
Would they stand the test of seeing these comments and texts in a bigger text chain?
“It may look completely different.”
Among other things, the messages show that Tracy dated a coach who had hired her years earlier and that she was struggling financially when she filed a complaint against Tucker – all of which Tucker and his attorney called “key evidence” in the sexual harassment case.
Tracy’s civil lawsuit seeking the restraining order said the phone also contains confidential business records, personal information and highly sensitive discussions regarding sexual abuse survivors who interacted with her nonprofit, Set The Expectation.
The judge’s order granting the request said Tucker appeared to have obtained the messages illegally.
Tucker’s attorney appears to have gained access to the cellphone through Alvarado’s widowed husband or another family member.
According to Tracy’s lawsuit, Alvarado and her husband – Agustin Alvarado – were estranged and divorcing.
It alleges he stole the phone from her estate.
The texts raise reasonable questions about whether Tracy’s story is as “clean” as initially portrayed, said David Ring, a California attorney who frequently represents victims of sexual harassment and abuse.
But most speak primarily to Tracy’s character and personal life, he said, and only loosely relate to her allegations.
“All of this is a power play by Tucker to one, intimidate her; two, try to get her to back down; and three, make Michigan State think twice about trying to fight Tucker” in court, Ring said.
“I want to be so clear on this: None of these text messages that were released somehow prove Mel Tucker is innocent,” Ring added.
“At the end of the day, all these text messages might be much ado about absolutely nothing.”
For the texts to be considered in the campus case, Tucker would have to appeal the school’s decision and ask to admit them as evidence, a process that cannot start until the hearing officer issues her findings.
Three things could stand in his way.
Confidential and privileged information is generally only admissible in Title IX cases if the party who owns it consents to its release, Mathis said.
If Ingham County Judge Wanda Stokes determines the messages are confidential or privileged, they might not be admissible in the university case without Tracy’s consent.
To admit new evidence on appeal, Tucker also must demonstrate it was unavailable when the decision was made and that it could affect the outcome, according to the school’s sexual harassment policy.
And Michigan State could determine that the messages are irrelevant because they are tangential to the central facts of the case, the experts said.
Even if the school admits the texts, it could assign them little weight.
The phone call at the center of the sexual harassment case took place in April 2022, after Tucker had hired Tracy to speak to his football team about sexual misconduct prevention.
Tracy said that by then, Tucker had pursued her romantically for months.
The fact that she was a university vendor, with an ongoing business relationship with the school, underpins both the college’s decision to investigate her complaint and the athletic director’s decision to fire Tucker on Sept. 18 – just over a week after Tracy went public with her allegations in a USA TODAY investigation.
Investigation:Michigan State football coach Mel Tucker accused of sexually harassing rape survivor
Tucker denies sexually harassing Tracy but does not deny masturbating during the call.
In his version of events, he and Tracy had been in a romantic relationship and had consensual “phone sex.” That admission alone, athletic director Alan Haller said, was sufficient grounds for termination.
Tracy filed a complaint with the university’s Title IX office in December.
The outside attorney the school hired to investigate completed her fact-finding investigation in July.
A formal hearing took place over Zoom on Oct. 5 before a second outside attorney, who has until Oct. 25 to determine whether Tucker likely violated Michigan State's policy barring sexual harassment and exploitation.
Tucker and his attorney did not show up to the Oct. 5 hearing, saying Tucker couldn’t participate because of a “serious medical condition.” Instead, 14 minutes in, they emailed the media an eight-page letter addressed to the university’s interim president and Board of Trustees and 98 heavily redacted pages of Tracy’s text messages with Alvarado.
The letter also said they had obtained testimony from a new witness they declined to name.
“These texts have nothing to do with the case,” Tracy told USA TODAY.
“Tucker has had his opportunities to comply with MSU’s process, and he has refused to do so.”
Tucker’s letter said the texts show Tracy had “simultaneous consensual personal relationships” with Tucker and a basketball coach.
In fact, while the texts indicate Tracy had a romance with a basketball coach, they do not show she had a romantic relationship with Tucker.
Tracy told USA TODAY she has been friends with the basketball coach since the 1990s and went on a few dates.
She dated him again briefly in 2021.
“I have known him for many years and did not meet him through work,” Tracy told USA TODAY.
Evidence and questions about a complainant’s sexual history are prohibited under MSU’s sexual harassment policy.
And outing Tracy’s private relationship in a press release naming the man is unnecessarily vindictive, said Diane Rosenfeld, an attorney and founding director of the Gender Violence Program at Harvard Law School.
“That shows real desperation, as does the idea that they would skip the hearing and then, in the middle of the hearing, do this press release,” Rosenfeld said.
“It’s just a publicity tactic.”
The investigation report, however, does not indicate Tracy made that claim to the investigator.
Rather, the report shows it was what she said she told Tucker when he asked during a November 2021 phone call if she would date him.
“She could have just said that because she was trying to dissuade him from pursuing a relationship,” Mathis said.
“That’s why I think the context of the actual interview is important.”
It’s a tactic that those accused of sexual misconduct employ to influence juries and public opinion.
Research has found it effective with those unfamiliar with it.
It plays on common prejudices people have about victims, including that they are crazy, promiscuous or gold-diggers.
“It all becomes about her, and it’s never about him,” Rosenfeld said.
“When we put the focus on her all the time, we’re never going to hold the perpetrators accountable.”
Tucker’s letter also raises the specter of a new witness who it claims has come forward with explosive evidence.
If Tucker is serious about trying to admit this person as a witness in the case, that person will need to be interviewed by the investigator and cross-examined at a hearing, Mathis said.
Until then, he said, it’s not really evidence.
“I don’t put much stock in it,” Mathis said.
“Making a bare statement that there’s someone out there that is making these statements, to me, doesn’t carry much weight.”
According to the letter, the new witness also said that Tracy slept over at Alvarado’s house after her death and repeatedly asked family members for access to her phone and computers.
Tracy told USA TODAY that she asked for access to Alvarado’s computer for the same reason she filed for the restraining order: Because Alvarado was her employee, the computer contained business records she needed.
Tracy said she did not intend to delete anything.
As for the phone, Tracy said she did not want to access it herself; she said she had raised concerns with Alvarado’s family members about whether Alvarado would want her husband, from whom she was separated, to have access to it.
“Even after her death,” Tracy said, “my friend has a right to privacy.”
“He’ll do it.”
Earlier in the same conversation, Tracy mentioned the $95 million contract extension Tucker had signed with Michigan State that week.
Tracy told USA TODAY the project is a video-based learning curriculum her nonprofit has been building for several years.
They planned to film engaging, documentary-style videos for the program, which she hoped teams and schools would adopt.
“Tucker on multiple occasions pledged to support my nonprofit financially and with resources, including introductions to people and companies,” Tracy said.
“Tucker was just one of the people we are asking to support this project.”
The investigation report, however, tells a different story.
It shows Tracy told the investigator that she did not accept any “personal gifts” after Tucker asked her if she would date him.
Tracy also specifically distinguished between personal and nonprofit gifts, the report shows, noting she accepted a $2,500 donation Tucker made to her nonprofit in 2022 “because that was not a personal gift.”
“Money is my only recourse to make him feel like there is a punishment,” Tracy wrote to Alvarado.
“When they do the money I should make him pay me 10k directly.”
Tracy told USA TODAY the “10k” refers to the $10,000 speaking fee she lost out on when Tucker abruptly canceled her planned July 2022 campus visit to provide anti-sexual violence training to the football team.
Tracy told the investigator she believes Tucker’s inappropriate behavior was the real reason for the cancellation.
In other texts, Tracy mentioned her own difficult financial straits, saying that her bank account was down to $5.
Tracy has long dealt with financial hardships, including filing for bankruptcy in 2010.
It’s common for people who have been injured or harmed to discuss resolving the matter outside of court or the Title IX process, said Mathis, or for money to factor into the considerations.
If the harassment occurred, he added, Tracy’s motivation for reporting it is irrelevant.
According to the investigation report, Tracy told the investigator during a June 2023 follow-up interview that she had not mentioned money once in connection with Tucker’s behavior.
The investigation report does not capture the full context of what she said in her interview, according to Tracy.
In private conversations with her attorney and her friend, Tracy said she considered all avenues for a resolution and ultimately decided against settling, declining both of Tucker’s proposals.
Based on Tracy’s explanation, Rosenfeld said Tracy’s statement is “not really even an inconsistency.” To the extent the hearing officer might perceive it as a credibility concern, Rosenfeld said, she would have to weigh that against the numerous contradictions in Tucker’s accounts.
“If you just apply common sense, who’s more credible in the situation?” Rosenfeld said.
“I think (Tracy) wins on the common sense, hands down.”
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
As President Joe Biden considers traveling to Israel in a show of solidarity, about 2,000 U.S. troops have been told to get ready to deploy in anticipation of an Israeli ground invasion of Gaza aimed at crushing the Hamas militant group that rules the war-battered enclave.
The American soldiers would not be sent to Israel but could be assigned to other countries in the region for support roles such as medical assistance or providing security at gate crossings, the Associated Press reported Monday, citing U.S. officials.
Later in the day, Hamas said it's holding 200 to 250 hostages − the upper end is about 50 more than previously believed − and added that it would release the non-Israeli ones when it was feasible.
Netanyahu spoke at an Israeli parliamentary session that required a 40-minute break when rockets fired on Jerusalem forced attendees to take cover in bomb shelters.
"Today, the price you will pay will be far heavier."
Hezbollah later said its fighters targeted five Israeli posts along the Lebanese border Monday afternoon.
Secretary of State Antony Blinken returned to Israel on Monday − his second visit in less than a week − after a whirlwind tour of six Arab states aimed at keeping the war from expanding across the Middle East.
Blinken met with Netanyahu, reaffirming U.S. determination to provide Israel whatever is needed to protect its citizens, Blinken said in a statement.
The two also discussed coordination with the U.N. and "regional partners" to provide humanitarian aid to civilians as well as the U.S. commitment to the speedy release of hostages, Blinken said.
Their meeting was interrupted twice by air raid sirens indicating incoming rockets, prompting them and others to seek shelter in a bunker.
No spillover:Blinken says Arab leaders don't want spillover from Israel-Hamas war
∎ A senior Biden administration official, who spoke to The Associated Press on condition of anonymity, said Biden was pondering a trip to Israel.
Biden abruptly called off a trip to Colorado but made no announcement of alternative travel plans.
Last week Israel ordered an evacuation of northern Gaza, an edict that fueled chaos across the Israeli-occupied territory of about 2.3 million Palestinians.
∎ The Israeli military has ordered people living in 28 communities near the Lebanese border to evacuate amid increasing cross-border fire between Israel and the Lebanese Shiite militia, Hezbollah.
∎ The European Union said it has tripled humanitarian aid for civilians in Gaza to nearly $80 million and will send two flights this week through Egypt with provisions for the territory's residents.
∎ Russian President Vladimir Putin, who ordered the current invasion of neighboring Ukraine that has killed tens of thousands and led to war crime charges against him, urged Netanyahu to seek “a peaceful settlement through political and diplomatic means,” the Kremlin said.
The head of Israel's domestic security agency took responsibility for the failure to thwart the Oct. 7 Hamas onslaught that claimed more than 1,400 lives.
Shin Bet said at least 10 of its members were killed by Hamas forces.
Almost 300 Floridians who had been trapped in Israel because of flight cancellations have arrived in Florida on a flight arranged by the state and the global rescue agency Project Dynamo.
DeSantis said the state also is sending medical supplies, hygiene products, clothing and children’s toys to Israel to help Israelis affected by the war.
"As president, the number of people I will bring in from Gaza is zero," he said.
The death toll on both sides of the war has surpassed 4,000, and thousands more are wounded.
At least 199 people were being held hostage in Gaza, Israeli officials said.
The U.S. death toll rose to 30, and the State Department said 13 Americans remained missing but could provide no count on the number of U.S. hostages.
"State Department personnel have been in contact with their families," a spokesperson said.
Thieves using trucks purportedly from the Gaza Health Ministry have stolen desperately needed fuel and medical supplies from a U.N. agency compound in Gaza City, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency says.
The agency was forced to evacuate the compound Friday and has no access to the site.
Security cameras at the entrance and exit to the compound were damaged, the agency said.
"@UNRWA fuel & other types of material are kept for strictly humanitarian purposes − any other use is strongly condemned," the agency said in a social media post.
Palestinians crowded into hospitals and schools Monday as supplies of food, water and medicine ran low during a tight Israeli blockade of Gaza.
Some relief was not far away but still unreachable.
Gaza’s only border link to Egypt was shut down several days ago following Israeli airstrikes.
"War will bring nothing but destruction and horror."
The alleged assault has evoked fears among Arab Americans of possible reprisals stemming from the war.
“No one in the United States of America should have to live in fear of violence because of how they worship or where they or their family come from,” Attorney General Merrick Garland said in announcing the hate crime investigation.
The national average for a gallon of gas fell last week despite a tumultuous period for oil prices after Hamas launched the attack on Israel.
A gallon of regular unleaded fell about 12 cents to $3.628 on Friday, according to AAA, a nonprofit federation of motor clubs that tracks fuel costs.
The decline comes even as oil rose by about $5 to around $90 per barrel last week.
The price of crude, which is refined into gasoline, makes up more than half the price of a gallon of fuel.
The cost at the pump is dropping because of lower demand from drivers and less expensive blends of winter gasoline coming into the market, AAA says.
“As long as this war does not spread to include more countries in the region, the effect on the oil market will remain muted,” AAA spokesperson Andrew Gross said in a statement.
Read more here.
Numerous organizations are attempting to provide assistance to civilians in need on both sides of the confrontation.
And Doctors Without Borders is a non-governmental organization that provides humanitarian aid to people affected by conflict, disease outbreaks and natural and human-made disasters.
For links and other options, read more here.
Monday is the official tax deadline for those who requested an automatic six-month extension for filing 2022 income taxes, but the Internal Revenue Service is providing a special extension of nearly another year to "individuals and businesses affected by the terrorist attacks in the State of Israel."
The relief applies to an individual with a principal residence in Israel, the West Bank or Gaza Strip, as well as a business or sole proprietor whose principal place of business is in the covered area.
Other circumstances qualify, too.
More details here.
Health situation is 'dire':Groups providing aid as Israeli-Palestinian crisis worsens
Hamas has been responsible for numerous suicide bombings and other deadly attacks in Israel since the militant group was formed in 1987.
On Oct. 7, about 1,000 Hamas fighters stormed across the Israeli border by land and sea.
The Jerusalem mosque is located on a holy site for Jews, who refer to it as the Temple Mount.
But Hamas leaders also blame unrelenting Israeli crackdowns and a 16-year blockade in Gaza and the West Bank, continued construction of Israeli settlements − which the international community considers illegal − and Israel's tight military control of Gaza.
Also, the attack came amid thawing relations between some Arab nations and Israel.
Hamas refuses to recognize Israel, and the attack and Israel's harsh response could slow or derail those diplomatic overtures.
The State Department designated Hamas a terrorist group in 1997, a decade after its founding.
Several other nations also consider Hamas a terrorist organization.
In 2006, Hamas won parliamentary elections, and in 2007 the group violently seized control of Gaza from the Palestinian Authority, which was controlled by the rival Fatah movement that still governs the West Bank.
There have been no elections since.
The group calls for establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel and believes in the use of violence to carry out the destruction of Israel.
Hamas receives financial, material and logistical support from Iran.
So far, however, the U.S. and other nations have said there is no evidence that Iran was directly involved in Hamas’ attack.
Contributing: The Associated Press
The boy was stabbed at least 26 times.
His mother, who was stabbed at least a dozen times, survived.
His death has led many in the Arab-American community to worry about whether more violence will come their way.
Outside the Mosque Foundation, which was established nearly 70 years ago in this Chicago suburb, hundreds of people, some of them bearing Palestinian flags, pleaded for action.
At times, wailing pierced the gathering.
Attorney General Merrick Garland has announced a federal hate crimes investigation.
“No one in the United States of America should have to live in fear of violence because of how they worship or where they or their family come from,” Garland said in his announcement of the federal investigation.
They removed their shoes and packed the prayer room, leaving some mourners to watch TV screens in the carpeted hallways.
Federal investigation:Stabbing death of 6-year-old Muslim boy in Illinois to be investigated as hate crime
The mother and son were rushed to a local hospital in critical condition.
In an autopsy Sunday, the weapon, a 12-inch serrated military-style knife, was removed from the boy's abdomen, the sheriff's office said.
Ground Zero for the Hamas attacks:Here is how the police and military are trying to find the gunmen.
Samara told USA TODAY.
"Obviously, it's not only my school, but I know there are other Islamic schools around the area that have done the same," Syed told USA TODAY.
"It is hitting very hard in our community, and they're trying to obviously protect the children however they can."
Syed said she was disheartened by the feeling that anti-Muslim sentiment was returning.
"It's just unfortunate that it's history repeating itself again, the dehumanization of Palestinians and Muslims," she said.
"It's just hard to walk around thinking that these people have this feeling towards us again."
News of Saturday's attack was compounded by the loss of six members of his family in Gaza, he said.
"How do you balance mourning with this kind of energy of making sure that the community is staying together and protecting itself?"
"This is exactly what we warned people about," she told USA TODAY, referring to an increase in hate crimes against Palestinians and Muslims.
She added that her community is now not only mourning deaths of children in the Middle East but on American soil.
"The fear is real and natural."
"I would say to others, please check in with your brothers and sisters, your friends and allies who are facing this and share the love during this time," he said.
"It really does make a world of a difference."
Rite Aid filed for bankruptcy Sunday and plans to close an untold number of stores across the United States as it battles slumping sales and a slew of opioid lawsuits.
One of the largest pharmacy chains in the country, Rite Aid has in recent years struggled to keep up with bigger drugstore chains like CVS and Walgreens as it faces legal hurdles related to accusations that it helped fuel the raging opioid epidemic.
Rumors of its impending plans to file for bankruptcy began circulating at the end of August amid the company’s mounting billions of dollars of debt, declining sales and more than a thousand federal, state and local lawsuits claiming it filled thousands of illegal prescriptions for painkillers.
Here’s what you need to know about the filing, the legal woes and Rite Aid’s plans to stay afloat.
The company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in New Jersey.
The Chapter 11 filing means Rite Aid plans to stay in business while restructuring its debts through a court-controlled process.
Rite Aid even said in a Sunday statement that it has raised $3.45 billion in financing from lenders as it continues to operate its stores while in bankruptcy.
When the company last filed a financial report in June, it had $3.3 billion in debt, compared to the $135.5 million in cash it had on hand.
In the statement about Chapter 11 filing, Rite Aid laid out a restructuring plan that includes closing underperforming stores.
UAW Strikes:How does autoworker union pay compare to other hourly jobs?
Founded in 1962, Philadelphia-based Rite Aid is one of the largest pharmacy chains in the nation with more than 2,000 stores in 17 states.
Most customers won’t have to worry about the bankruptcy filing disrupting their ability to shop or fill prescriptions at their local stores — unless, of course, that store is now slated to close.
Rite Aid, which has closed several stores in recent months, said in its media release that it's preparing to close more.
"Rite Aid regularly evaluates its store portfolio to ensure it is operating efficiently while meeting the needs of its customers, communities and associates," the company said in a statement.
"These efforts will further reduce the company’s rent expense and are expected to strengthen its overall financial performance."
Rite Aid said in the statement that it will communicate with customers of stores that will be closing and ensure they are able to get access to the services they need at other nearby locations.
Employees at closing stores will also be transferred "where possible," Rite Aid said.
Rite Aid plans to use the bankruptcy to resolve its legal disputes and also sell some of its businesses, including prescription benefit manager Elixir Solutions that it bought in 2015 for $2 billion.
As part of the bankruptcy plan, Rite Aid appointed on Sunday a new CEO to lead restructuring, Jeff Stein, who will also serve as a member of its board.
Elizabeth Burr had been serving as interim CEO since January and will remain on the company’s board, Rite Aid said.
Stein, the founder of financial advisory firm Stein Advisors, said in a statement the company plans to remain in business for the long term.
“My priorities will include overseeing the actions now underway to strengthen the company’s financial position and further advance its journey to reach its full potential as a modern neighborhood pharmacy,” Stein said in the statement.
“I have tremendous confidence in this business and the turnaround strategy that has been developed in recent months.”
Inflation:How inflation is reshaping what employees need from their benefits
Rite Aid's legal troubles related to its alleged role in the nationwide deadly abuse of opioids only further contributed to its mounting debt.
The many lawsuits filed against Rite Aid accuse the company of knowingly filling prescriptions for the addictive painkillers that did not meet legal requirements.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says the rise in U.S. opioid overdose deaths can be tied to the uptick in opioid prescriptions starting in the 1990s.
Drug overdose deaths from prescription opioids jumped from 3,442 in 1999 to 16,706 in 2021, according to data from the National Institute on Drug Abuse.
Contributing: Bailey Schulz
Reach him at elagatta@gannett.com
"A true icon and overall amazing human being."
"She was a sweetheart!!!"
Grief is different for everyone, and experts say mourning someone you didn't personally know − a phenomenon called collective or public grief − is a complicated, yet valid, experience.
"Collective and public grief, as I call it, is always unique in how we attach," David Kessler, grief expert and founder of Grief.com, previously told USA TODAY.
This form of grief can be further compounded when the death of a beloved public figure is read about unexpectedly in the news.
"The suddenness of the loss may be too much to process and feel too unreal for a person to immediately grasp."
"However, it is still hard to prepare for anything that is life-altering, whether a person knew it was coming."
More:The Titanic submersible passengers have died.
It's OK to grieve.
You feel close to them like they're your friend or relative.
Just because collective or public grief doesn't match how one might grieve someone close to them, that doesn't make the experience any less real.
"It's a fascinating thing that people don't realize we really can grieve people we didn't know," Kessler added.
"And it doesn't mean we're going to grieve them like our spouse or mother, father, or sister or child, but we will grieve them."
If you're trying to comfort someone going through loss, don't try to minimize it or put a timetable to the grieving process.
If you're going through loss yourself, talk about it.
The deaths of public figures may also serve as opportunities to widen discussions on grief.
"We have a relationship with death that we don't quite know how to explore as a society," Kessler said.
So we know we're all going to die someday, intellectually, but we don't know, is death the great enemy?
Is it the great comforter, when we're in pain?
Contributing: David Oliver and Pamela Avila
On Oct. 16, 1923, Walt Disney was a fledgling filmmaker in LA when he signed a distribution deal for a series of live-action/animated comedy shorts about a girl in a cartoon world based on "Alice in Wonderland," and the company was born.
Originally called Disney Brothers Cartoon Studio, Walt and sibling Roy Disney soon changed it to what we all know: the Walt Disney Studio.
A century later, the Mouse House has given us, of course, Mickey (who debuted in the 1928 short "Steamboat Willie") but also countless characters, movies, TV shows and theme parks, making Disney a part of pretty much everyone's life at some point.
Disney has created the celebratory short film "Once Upon a Studio," now streaming on Disney+ and featuring many of the company's iconic personalities assembling for the mother of all group photos.
But we're also digging into our own Disney history to shout out some of our favorite things:
Generations have grown up with the classic Disney animated movies, dating back to 1937's "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs."
They haven't all been winners – looking directly at you, "Alice Through the Looking Glass" – but standouts like "Cruella," "Cinderella" and "Maleficent" have added nuance to familiar tales and characters.
'The Little Mermaid':A definitive ranking of the Disney live-action remakes
What do you get with a classic Disney movie?
A classic Disney song.
Everyone from Elton John to Christina Aguilera has contributed to the Mouse House's musical canon, and the company still commands the best talent.
(In this case, it's definitely all right to talk about "Bruno.")
Looking through Disney history, there are a few that top our charts – like "Feed the Birds" from "Mary Poppins," a fave of Walt's back in the day, and the title love song of "Beauty and the Beast."
And if you don't dig them, well ... let it go.
Ranked:The 25 best classic Disney songs, from 'Mary Poppins' to 'The Lion King'
Since Woody, Buzz and the crew first stole our hearts in 1995's "Toy Story," Disney's Pixar has launched a slew of great animated movies.
To date, the studio has won 23 Academy Awards – including 11 for best animated feature – and two films, "Toy Story 3" and "Up," were nominated for best picture.
'Elemental':The definitive ranking of all 27 Pixar movies
No one puts comic-book icons on screen like the Marvel Cinematic Universe.
The MCU started with 2008's "Iron Man," yet it really soared when Disney took over with 2012's "Avengers" film.
Dozens of movies later, the MCU has delivered cinematic phenomenons and worldwide hits like "Avengers: Endgame," "Black Panther" and "Spider-Man: No Way Home."
For us, "Captain America: The Winter Soldier" and "Guardians of the Galaxy" are top-tier MCU choices in a universe that continues to grow.
But the best stuff is still Lucas' old-school "The Empire Strikes Back" and original 1977 "Star Wars," proving alongside other Disney classics of the past 100 years that vintage is often a good thing.
Contributing: Patrick Ryan and Kelly Lawler
Every bit of integrity the International Olympic Committee had is going to be in shreds by the time Thomas Bach walks out the door.
The IOC’s despot has already debased the Games he so claims to love with his devotion to Vladimir Putin and refusal to do anything while Russia blatantly undercuts the principles of the Olympic movement time and again.
Under the current Olympic charter, which Bach himself helped write, the IOC president can serve a maximum of 12 years.
Bach was first elected, to an eight-year term, in September 2013, then re-elected for four more years in 2021.
Which means his tenure as president should end in September 2025, following the election of a new president.
But lo and behold, some “concerned” IOC members raised the idea Sunday of Bach staying beyond the term limits.
It would require the Olympic charter to be rewritten and for a key anti-corruption measure enacted after the Salt Lake City bid scandal to be removed.
But what’s a little banana republic governance when it’s to Bach’s benefit!
This reasoning, if you can call it that, is nonsensical.
Or Los Angeles in 2028?
Or Brisbane in 2032?
Or … you get the picture.
And if the preparations for Paris are so fraught the IOC can’t possibly spare the mental bandwidth for an election, whose fault is that?
If the city isn’t ready, that’s on Bach, and is further reason to move on from him, not keep him around even longer.
There also hasn’t been a parade of IOC members declaring their wish to be the Olympic governing body’s next president.
And unlike Bach, he’s been steadfast in holding Russia accountable for its many transgressions against the Olympic movement.
He was similarly tough in Tokyo, when fewer than a dozen Russian athletes were cleared to compete.
The only resolve Bach has shown is to sell out the Olympics at every turn.
Imagining and implementing a sophisticated doping program to rig the medal count, as Russia did, goes against everything the Olympics represent.
So, too, its blatant defiance of sanctions that were already laughably light.
But not for Bach!
There’s no sin by Putin and Russia he can’t forgive.
China has a well-documented history of abusing human rights, and its treatment of the Uyghur population in Xinjiang has been characterized as genocide.
The Winter Olympics in Beijing made a mockery of the IOC’s supposed priority of sustainability.
To Bach, however, President Xi Jinping and China were ideal partners!
Being the IOC president is a political job, yes.
But it’s also a sacred trust.
The Olympics are supposed to represent the best of humanity and remind us what we’re capable of when we strive for greatness and refuse to accept the limitations put on us.
The IOC, and its president in particular, have no greater responsibility than to foster and protect that environment.
Maybe Bach believed in that mission once, but his actions since taking office have repeatedly betrayed both the ideals behind the Olympics and the people whose sweat and sacrifice make them so awe-inspiring.
He’s done enough damage, and doesn’t deserve the chance to do more.
The cost of a gallon of gas keeps falling despite a tumultuous period for oil prices after Hamas launched an attack on Israel earlier this month.
The national average for regular unleaded fell about 3 cents to $3.60 -- from $3.628 on Friday, -- according to AAA, a nonprofit federation of motor clubs that tracks fuel costs.
The decline comes as oil hovers around $90 per barrel.
The price of crude, which is refined into gasoline, makes up more than half the price of a gallon of fuel.
Oil prices rose after Hamas' surprise attack on Israel 10 days ago, but the spike was far less than the roughly $40 per barrel temporary surge following last year’s invasion of Ukraine by Russia, AAA says.
The critical difference is that Russia is a significant oil producer, while Israel and the Palestinian territories are not, it said.
“As long as this war does not spread to include more countries in the region, the effect on the oil market will remain muted,” AAA spokesperson Andrew Gross said in a statement.
At a statewide average of $5.621 a gallon, Californians may not feel much relief at the pump.
But prices are lower, down more than 18 cents from a week earlier, from $5.804, AAA says.
Pump prices are dropping in the Golden State, as they are in the rest of the country, because of lower demand from drivers and less expensive blends of winter gasoline coming into the market.
California introduced its winter blend earlier than usual this year, and it contains a larger amount of a cheaper ingredient that helps cars start at lower temperatures.
Typically, California doesn't make the switch until the end of October.
California gas is generally more expensive than the rest of the nation due to:
Mideast watch:Israeli bombing kills hundreds; first plane carrying US armaments lands in Israel: Updates
Yes, according to experts.
More than 20% of global liquid petroleum in 2018 moved through the Strait of Hormuz, which is located between Oman and Iran, and connects the Persian Gulf with the Gulf of Oman and the Arabian Sea, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration.
The five states with the most expensive gallon of gas, on average, as of Monday, according to AAA:
According to AAA:
You can reach her at mjlee@usatoday.com and subscribe to our free Daily Money newsletter for personal finance tips and business news every Monday through Friday morning.
WASHINGTON − While grappling with gun charges and a tax investigation, Hunter Biden faces potentially a third set of charges: His decision not to register as a "foreign agent" while working with companies in Ukraine and China.
But after Russian interference in the 2016 election, the department ramped up criminal enforcement with maximum penalties for violations of five years in prison and a $250,000 fine.
The results of criminal prosecutions have been mixed.
Several high-profile associates of Donald Trump were convicted – and he pardoned them.
Other defendants accused of being foreign agents had charges dismissed or won acquittals.
In this highly politicized atmosphere, Justice Department special counsel David Weiss is investigating whether Hunter Biden should have registered his overseas work.
Congressional Republicans argue Biden is getting preferential treatment as the president’s son.
Congress adopted the Foreign Agents Registration Act in 1938 – and updated it many times – to reduce the influence of foreign propaganda.
"Foreign agents," who are defined as operating under the direction or control of a foreign government that seeks to influence U.S. policy, must register with the Justice Department to disclose their efforts.
A related statute prohibits acting as a foreign agent.
The problem with the act, according to legal experts, is determining when somebody is just advocating for another country and when the person is acting under the foreign government's "direction or control," as the statute states.
Likewise, people might advocate for Israel in its war against Hamas but don't need to register with the government, according to William Taylor, another lawyer who won the acquittal of a defendant in a case related to the act.
“It’s not always easy to distinguish between what somebody does because he’s in favor of a particular policy or wants to do something to benefit a country he likes – and somebody who’s got an agreement with the country to advocate on its behalf for money.”
The statute says “any person engaged in legal commercial transaction” is exempt, but should register if operating in the U.S. “subject to the direction or control of a foreign government or official.” The statute also has a five-year limit on prosecutions.
"If it's just commercial activity, that's exempt."
The arrangement raised concerns about potential conflicts because the Obama administration was trying to influence Ukraine's policy.
The department’s Justice Manual, which offers written guidance about how to pursue cases, directs inquiries about the act to the registration unit.
In past decades, if authorities notice a potential violation, the department traditionally sent a letter asking the person to register retroactively, according to congressional testimony and legal experts.
No prosecution is to begin without the authorization of the National Security Division, the manual says.
Michael Horowitz, the Justice Department’s inspector general, reported in September 2016 that prosecutions and other enforcement under the act were “rare.”
FBI agents expressed frustration with a perceived reluctance to pursue, although the National Security Division denied the criticism.
Investigations by special counsel Robert Mueller and agencies in the intelligence community found Russia interfered in the 2016 election by hacking Democratic Party emails and spreading favorable information about Republican nominee Trump while discrediting Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton.
Mueller's team and other prosecutors won several convictions under the act.
Criminal prosecutions under the act targeted several of Trump's allies:
◾ Paul Manafort, Trump’s campaign chairman in 2016, pleaded guilty in 2018 to a conspiracy charge based, in part, on failing to register as a foreign agent for Ukraine and former President Viktor Yanukovych.
Manafort was also convicted at trial of defrauding banks and taxpayers.
Trump pardoned Manafort.
◾ Michael Flynn, Trump’s first national security adviser, pleaded guilty to lying to the FBI about meetings with Russians during the transition from the Obama administration.
Flynn registered retroactively as a foreign agent in February 2017 and disclosed he received $530,000 from a Dutch firm with ties to Turkey’s government.
Trump pardoned Flynn.
But the Justice Department dropped the charges in September, after two trips to the Fourth U.S.
Circuit Court of Appeals.
◾ Tom Barrack, who was chair of Trump’s 2017 inauguration, was acquitted in November 2022 of charges he was a foreign agent who used his access to Trump to promote the interests of the United Arab Emirates.
But Craig testified in his own defense saying he didn’t view himself as doing the bidding of Ukraine.
“The case was about Greg’s trying to correct the statements about a report he’d written,” said Taylor, his lawyer.
“They charged an innocent man with a crime and took away his liberty.”
An assistant to Barrack, Matthew Grimes, was also acquitted of charges he was a foreign agent.
Grimes was represented by Lowell, a lawyer now representing Hunter Biden.
Lowell told CNN after Grimes' acquittal the case represented "overreaching and overcharging."
"The system needs more supervision to prevent these kinds of cases from being filed," Lowell said.
Lowell declined to comment on the Grimes case or the Hunter Biden investigation.
But he has not been charged with any violations.
House Republicans released an email Lesley Wolf, an assistant U.S. attorney in Delaware, wrote on Aug. 7, 2020, about a draft search warrant.
In July, Hunter Biden was expected to plead guilty to two misdemeanors for not paying taxes in 2017 and 2018, and entering a pretrial program for a gun violation.
“Yes,” replied Leo Wise, one of the prosecutors.
But Christopher Clark, one of Hunter Biden’s lawyers, disagreed.
“As stated by the government just now, I don’t agree with what the government said,” Clark said.
◾ Rep. Jason Smith, R-Mo., who heads the Ways and Means Committee, released more documents on Sept. 27 about Hunter Biden’s business deals.
“Even more alarming, the Biden family foreign influence peddling operation suggests an effort to sway U.S. policy decisions,” Smith said.
“Today, the Department of Justice revealed Hunter Biden is under investigation for being a foreign agent,” Comer said July 26.
The charges against Trump’s inner circle – combined with the lack of charges against Hunter Biden – is why some Republicans contend there is a two-tier system of justice.
Without mentioning foreign registration specifically, Attorney General Merrick Garland has said the investigation of Hunter Biden will be handled fairly.
Weiss will produce a report about what charges he chose to pursue or decline as special counsel.
"The Justice Department treats everyone alike regardless of party, regardless of ethnicity, regardless of wealth," Garland told the House Judiciary Committee on Sept. 20.
House Republicans have tried for years to tie Hunter Biden's overseas business deals to the president, but witnesses at a Sept. 28 House Oversight hearing said there was not enough evidence for charges yet.
White House spokesperson Sharon Yang called the hearing a "baseless stunt" by Republicans and a waste of time for "peddling debunked lies."
"This flop was a failed effort to distract from their own chaos and inability to govern that is careening the country towards an unnecessary government shutdown that will hurt American families," Yang said.
A few days later, Rep. Matt Gaetz, R-Fla., said in arguing to oust Speaker Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., “it is difficult to champion oversight when House Republicans haven’t even sent a subpoena to Hunter Biden.”
She had fun learning the chants that fans perform at football games.
“I knew that I was in a safe space.”
This has in the last two years become an important consideration for college-bound students from all backgrounds and beliefs.
The digital tables also list, for every four-year institution in the country, such things as racial and gender diversity among students and faculty, the number of student veterans enrolled, the incidence of on-campus race-motivated hate crimes, free-speech rankings and if the university or college serves many students from rural places.
Students have long picked schools based on their academic reputations and social life.
But with campuses in the crosshairs of the culture wars, many students are now also taking stock of attacks on diversity, course content and speech and speakers from both ends of the political spectrum.
They’re monitoring hate crimes, anti-LGBTQ+ legislation, state abortion laws and whether students like them ‒ Black, rural, military veterans, LGBTQ+ or from other backgrounds ‒ are represented and supported on campus.
When they look at colleges in various states now, she said, “There are students who are asking, ‘Am I really wanted here?’”
For some students on both sides of the political divide, the answer is no.
In the chaotic new world of American colleges and universities, many say they feel unwelcome at certain schools, while others are prepared to shut down speakers and report faculty with whose opinions they disagree.
It’s too early to know how much this trend will affect where and whether prospective students end up going to college since publicly available enrollment data lags real time.
But there are early clues that it’s having a significant impact.
One in 4 prospective students has already ruled out a college or university for consideration because of the political climate in its state, according to a survey by the higher education consulting firm Art & Science Group.
Among students who describe themselves as liberal, the most common reason to rule out colleges and universities in a particular state, that survey found, is because it’s “too Republican” or has what they consider lax gun regulations, anti-LGBTQ+ legislation, restrictive abortion laws and a lack of concern about racism.
Students who describe themselves as conservative are rejecting states they believe to be “too Democrat” and that have liberal abortion and gay rights laws.
Of these, 8 in 10 say they would prefer to go to a state with greater access to reproductive health services.
“We have many young women who will not look at certain states,” said Levine.
One of her own clients backed out of going to a university in St. Louis after Missouri banned almost all abortions following the Supreme Court’s Dobbs decision, she said.
Institutions in Alabama, Florida, Louisiana and Texas are the most likely to be knocked off the lists of liberal students, according to the Art & Science Group survey.
They’re generally most likely to steer clear of the South and Midwest, while conservative students avoid California and New York.
One in 8 high school students in Florida say they won’t go to a public university in their own state because of its education policies, a separate poll, by the college ranking and information website Intelligent.com, found.
“You are attacking kids who are already vulnerable,” said Javier Gomez, an LGBTQ+ student in his first year at Miami Dade College.
It’s not yet evident whether the new laws are affecting where LGBTQ+ young people are choosing to go to college, said Casey Pick, director of law and policy at The Trevor Project, which supports LGBTQ+ young people in crisis.
But LGBTQ+ adults are moving away from states passing anti-LGBTQ+ laws, she said.
And “if adult employees are taking this into account when they decide where they want to live, you can bet that college students are making the same decisions.”
“The real attack here is on the feeling of belonging,” said Jeremy Young, who directs the Freedom to Learn program at PEN America, which tracks laws that restrict college and university diversity efforts and teaching about race.
“What it really does is hoist a flag to say to the most marginalized students, ‘We don’t want you here.’”
More than 40% of university and college administrators say the Supreme Court ruling curbing the use of affirmative action in admissions will affect diversity on their campuses, a Princeton Review poll found as the school year was beginning.
College students of all races and political persuasions report feeling uncomfortable on campuses that have become political battlegrounds.
It found that those who answer in these ways are more likely to frequently experience stress and more likely to drop out.
Nearly two-thirds say that faculty and administrators don’t understand the challenges they face, and 70% say the same thing about their non-veteran classmates.
Colleges should be “safe and affirming spaces,” said Pick, of the Trevor Project ‒ not places of isolation and alienation.
Of those, 72% say they worry their opinions would be considered unacceptable by classmates and 45%, by their professors.
Conservative students are less likely than their liberal classmates to believe that all points of view are welcome and less willing to share theirs.
“Is that really an intellectually diverse environment?” asked Sean Stevens, director of polling and analytics at the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression, or FIRE, which has launched a campus free-speech ranking based on students’ perceptions of comfort expressing ideas, tolerance for speakers and other measures.
“Anecdotally and from personal experience, there’s certainly a pocket of students who are weighing these factors in terms of where to go to college,” Stevens said.
Eighty-one percent of liberal students and 53% of conservative ones say they support reporting faculty who make comments that they find offensive, the same survey found.
It used sample comments such as, “There is no evidence of anti-Black bias in police shootings,” “Requiring vaccination for COVID is an assault on individual freedom” and “Biological sex is a scientific fact.”
A professor at Texas A&M University became the subject of an investigation when a student accused her of criticizing the state’s lieutenant governor during a lecture, though she was ultimately exonerated.
An anthropology lecturer at the University of Chicago who taught an undergraduate course called “The Problem of Whiteness” said she was deluged with hateful messages when a conservative student posted her photo and email address on social media.
More than half of all freshmen say that colleges have the right to ban extreme speakers, according to an annual survey by an institute at the University of California, Los Angeles; the College Pulse poll says that sentiment is held by twice the proportion of liberal students as conservative ones.
A group of Stanford students in March disrupted an on-campus speech by a federal judge whose judicial record they said was anti-LGBTQ+.
When he asked for an administrator to intervene, an associate dean for diversity, equity and inclusion confronted him and asked: “Is it worth the pain that this causes and the division that this causes?” The associate dean was put on leave and later resigned.
“Today it is a sad fact that the greatest threat to free speech comes from within the academy,” pronounced the right-leaning American Council of Trustees and Alumni, which is pushing colleges to sign on to its Campus Freedom Initiative that encourages teaching students about free expression during freshman orientation and disciplining people who disrupt speakers or events, among other measures.
“I have to imagine that universities that have a bad track record on freedom of expression or academic freedom, that it will affect their reputations,” said Steven Maguire, the organization’s campus freedom fellow.
Some colleges are now actively recruiting students on the basis of these kinds of concerns.
Colorado College in September created a program to ease the process for students who want to transfer away from institutions in states that have banned diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives; Hampshire College in Massachusetts has offered admission to any student from New College in Florida, subject of what critics have described as a conservative takeover.
Thirty-five have so far accepted the invitation.
Though many conservative critics of colleges and universities say faculty are indoctrinating students with liberal opinions, incoming freshmen tend to hold left-leaning views before they ever set foot in a classroom, according to that UCLA survey.
Fewer than 1 in 5 consider themselves conservative.
Three-quarters say abortion should be legal and favor stricter gun control laws, 68% say wealthy people should pay more taxes than they do now and 86% that climate change should be a federal priority and that there should be a clear path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants.
Prospective students say they are watching as new laws are passed and controversies erupt on campuses and actively looking into not just the quality of food and available majors at the colleges they might attend, but state politics.
Florida’s anti-LGBTQ+ laws prompted Javier Gomez to leave his native state and move to New York to go to fashion school.
“People ask me, ‘Why the hell are you back in Florida?’” said Gomez.
It’s overwhelming at times.
It can be very mentally depleting.
Sign up for our higher education newsletter.
Garland warned that the incident would raise fears among Muslim, Arab and Palestinian communities about hate-fueled violence.
But he said the department would “use every legal authority at our disposal to bring justice to those who perpetrate illegal acts of hate.”
“On behalf of the entire Justice Department, I want to express my deepest condolences to his family and his community as they grieve his loss.”
“No one in the United States of America should have to live in fear of violence because of how they worship or where they or their family come from.”
Law enforcement agencies reported 11,643 incidents of hate crimes in 2022 motivated by bias against race, religion or sexual orientation, the FBI announced in an annual report released Monday.
The total represented a nearly 7% increase from the 10,891 incidents of hate crimes reported in 2021, as more law enforcement agencies participated in reporting, the FBI said.
Incidents of crimes motivated by religion rose to 2,044 last year from 1,613 the previous year, the FBI said.
President Joe Biden issued a statement urging Americans to “reject Islamophobia and all forms of bigotry and hatred.”
“The child’s Palestinian Muslim family came to America seeking what we all seek − a refuge to live, learn, and pray in peace,” Biden said.
“This horrific act of hate has no place in America, and stands against our fundamental values: freedom from fear for how we pray, what we believe, and who we are.”
JB Pritzker in a statement posted on X, formerly Twitter, said the "killing in the name of bigotry is nothing short of evil."
"This wasn't just a murder – it was a hate crime."
They were rushed to a local hospital in critical condition.
His mother was expected to recover, according to law enforcement.
“We have full confidence in the authorities to investigate this heinous incident as a hate crime and to do so swiftly.”
As is always the case, preseason polls are speculative ventures at best.
1 team missed the Big Dance altogether.
It is inevitable that somebody not rated at the start of the year will have a breakthrough season.
Who might that be?
Did we mention this whole thing is speculative?
In the era of the transfer portal, true dark horses are hard to identify.
It’s furthermore not totally accurate to consider a major conference program a dark horse.
But with all that in mind, we’ll attempt to pick a few teams not in the Top 25 that seem well positioned for a successful season.
This group has the potential to reach that goal and possibly compete for the Big Ten title.
Jerome Tang has already proven to be a masterful roster constructor in just one year in the Little Apple with the Wildcats making a memorable run to the Elite Eight that ended in a narrow loss to Florida Atlantic.
There's some rebuilding to do, and his mettle will be tested again as he relies on incoming talent to fill a lot of needs.
ROCK CHALK: Kansas leads preseason poll for the fifth time
OUTLOOKS:In-depth previews for every team in the preseason Top 25
It’s somewhat curious that highly regarded Purdue and Michigan State are the Big Ten’s lone representatives in the initial poll.
This is mainly due to how tightly bunched the middle of the pack wound up last year, but it stands to reason that at least a couple more league members will spend some time in the Top 25.
The Terrapins could be one of those teams, returning a trio of double-digit scorers.
Jaime Dixon slowly has built the Horned Frogs into a tournament regular with the team advancing to the second round the past two seasons.
That experience should be instrumental in helping weather a difficult Big 12 schedule and get TCU back into the tournament with a chance to make a run.
As San Diego State showed last year, the Mountain West is a league worthy of respect.
This could be the year that translates into a longer stay in March Madness.
He dropped some fashion pointers.
The teen was struggling to secure his tie, so Bryant stepped in to help.
Family members stood around smiling and laughing as he hyped the teenager up and made sure his tie was tidy and in place.
“You’re killing the game, young man,” Bryant said to the high school senior in a video shared online.
He reminded me of myself when I was coming up.
Bryant, a father of three sons and five girls, said he was passing along knowledge he had learned as a youngster himself.
An avid churchgoer since his youth, he often dressed up in nice suits and attended with his mother, father and godparents.
So Bryant learned to tie a tie at the early age of 10.
Bryant’s story made it to the local news Monday and was covered by FOX 32 Chicago.
His older sister called him to tell him about it.
“It made me feel good.”
'Life-changing':California dad who biked 16 miles roundtrip to work surprised with car
“We live here in Chicago where racial tension is so high, especially in our neighborhood, which is known to be super racist,” she said.
“It was just great to see two people reacting to each other regardless of color and that's the part that just really makes me happy.”
Bryant’s an awesome person for what he did, he said.
“It shows a lot about him,” Luke said.
“It shows that he will go out his way to do something for someone else.”
Bryant said he was taught to love everybody and sees everyone as equal.
In addition to the suit the teen wore for homecoming, Luke also put on a flashy watch and Burberry cologne, which Bryant loved.
When he saw the teen in his homecoming gear, Bryant had nothing but good things to say.
“You got it,” he said.
Tributes kept pouring in on social media following her death on Sunday.
She was 76.
"I hope that will assist her family's hearts in healing as they travel through this difficult time."
Her family was set to gather and celebrate her birthday and now will continue to honor her legacy.
"They will celebrate her extraordinary life, and want to thank her millions of fans and followers who loved her dearly," her publicist said.
It's OK to grieve.
Her fame in so many fields overshadowed her real talent as one of our greatest comedic actors, a loving mother, an amazing homemaker, and one of the world’s best cooks.
The two were friends for more than 40 years and were neighbors in the Palm Springs area.
"Sad so sad," Goldie Hawn commented on an Instagram post.
"She was a friend & supportive when I was diagnosed with black mold," she wrote on X, formerly Twitter.
"When we ran into each other, she would lean over & whisper, 'We're survivors!'"
Caitlyn Jenner shared on Instagram that "we lost a true American Icon today" alongside a photo of the two from the 70s in Southern California.
"You will be missed," Jenner wrote.
"It was always a pleasure and a riot working with you over the years!"
"You were a joy and forever young," Davis wrote.
I had the pleasure of getting to know her.
"What a wonderful person," Frankel concluded.
Sorry to Suzanne's family.
'A superb talent':Piper Laurie, Oscar-nominated 'Carrie' and 'The Hustlers' star, dies at 91
"I do my best not to let this insidious disease control me."
The actress was first diagnosed in 2000, and had previously battled skin cancer.
She appeared as the "Blonde in the white Thunderbird" in "American Graffiti," the 1973 coming-of-age drama film directed by George Lucas, as well as brief roles in the first episode of "The Love Boat" and a 1976 episode of "One Day at a Time."
While she appeared in many television shows in the 1970s, including "The Rockford Files," "Magnum Force" and "The Six Million Dollar Man," her most famous part didn't come until she landed the role of Chrissy Snow on the ABC sitcom "Three's Company."
"She read the poem and went to bed and later died peacefully in her sleep," said Hay.
I USE IT AT THE END OF EMAILS TO MY LOVING FAMILY.
I EVEN USE IT IN EMAILS TO CLOSE FRIENDS.
I USE IT WHEN I'M LEAVING THE HOUSE.
THERE ARE NO WORDS.
THERE ARE NO ACTIONS.
SO I WILL CALL IT, 'US', UNIQUELY, MAGICALLY, INDESCRIBABLY WONDERFUL 'US.'"
The couple was married for 46 years, after dating for a decade.
Disney 100th anniversary:Celebrate the Mouse's house with some of our favorite things
An updated COVID-19 vaccine has been available since last month, and more than 7 million Americans have gotten boosted since then.
But many people are still on the fence about whether and when to get a shot.
Experts say when and whether to get a COVID-19 booster should depend on your health status, risk tolerance, timing of last infection and other personal factors.
The new booster is targeted to the XBB.1.5 variant.
Here are a handful of things to think about before heading to an appointment and rolling up your sleeve:
People likely to get very sick if infected should take the most care to be protected, experts say.
Those at highest risk include people with weakened immune systems because of:
Is there something coming up you absolutely can't miss, like a wedding?
Or anything three to four months from now?
If the event is coming up, you'll want to get a shot sooner rather than later.
Chan School of Public Health.
To avoid infection until then, consider wearing a high-quality mask when you're in a crowded indoor space, like a concert hall, or when you take public transportation.
If you had a case of COVID-19 in late summer or early fall, you'll have protection against another infection for about three to four months, studies suggest.
Protection isn't like a light switch.
You won't be safe on Tuesday and vulnerable on Wednesday.
It happens gradually.
And it's impossible for experts to predict exactly when that protection will fade enough to leave you vulnerable or unexpectedly exposed to the virus.
This is a big unanswerable question.
For the past three years, the holiday season has triggered a spike in cases that peaked each year in January.
But it's unclear whether that pattern will repeat this year.
Unlike the flu, in which cases drop very low during the off-season, COVID-19 has continued to transmit since its first appearance, so it can take off anytime.
There isn't a COVID-19 season, per se.
But there have typically been two annual peaks with COVID-19 since its initial spike in early 2020: one in the summer, although this year's stretched on later – possibly because of a sweeping heat wave in July; and one starting around Thanksgiving and ending early in the new year.
Experts don't think the next peak will be as high as it has been in previous winters, just as this summer's peak was not as high as it was in 2020, 2021 or 2022.
The CDC says it's perfectly safe to get the two shots at the same time.
Only you know yourself.
If you're the type of person who's not likely to come back for a second shot, seize the moment and get both.
If you've had side effects from one or both ‒ spent a day on the couch after your last COVID-19 booster or had a sore arm for a week after a flu shot ‒ consider putting some space between them, but only if you're the kind of person who will come back for the second one.
There's not much difference among the three authorized vaccines.
Two, from Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna, are based on mRNA technology, which directs the body to make the spike protein found on the surface of the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
The third, from Novavax, provides the same protein directly.
All three remind the immune system what the spike protein looks like, so when an infection arrives, it will be ready to quickly respond.
If you have had rough side effects after getting an mRNA vaccine, you might consider getting the Novavax shot this time, said John Moore, a professor of microbiology and immunology at Weill Cornell Medical College in New York.
As for mixing shots, that has been part of the dialogue since COVID-19 arrived, and now there's more clarity: Studies haven't shown a significant benefit to mixing and matching vaccines.
The short answer is: probably not, as long as you don't mind being sick for a week or two.
People who are young, healthy and have already been infected or vaccinated more than once are very unlikely to get extremely sick or die from COVID-19.
The risk of contracting long COVID, in which symptoms linger for months or longer after an initial infection, has also been shown to be much smaller for people who are vaccinated, particularly those who have had three shots.
For young, healthy people, the main benefit of a COVID-19 booster will be small and short-lived: protection against infection for about three to four months and another hedge against the slight risk of severe disease.
Many people get an annual flu shot, not to avoid death but because they don't want to miss work or life or be miserable for a few weeks.
The same is true for COVID-19.
Also, as with the flu, if you don't get infected for those few months, you won't pass that infection on to someone else ‒ which is important for people with older friends or relatives and those who work around vulnerable people.
She was about 20 years old, Black and illiterate.
Her great sin, in the eyes of Delaware, was that she was an unmarried woman who gave birth to two children – both fathered by different white men.
The label of “procreative menace” was often slapped on women like Ethel.
While institutionalized, she underwent a procedure to correct these supposed emotional defects.
A doctor, with one of Delaware’s most prominent last names, made an incision into Ethel’s abdomen.
He removed both of her fallopian tubes.
He also cut out her clitoris.
Editor's note: Part one of a five-part USA TODAY series revealing why America hasn't solved its long struggle with Type 2 diabetes.
For chef Robin Ray, newly married with young stepchildren, the turning point came when a stabbing chest pain sent her rushing to the emergency room.
“I didn’t think you’d make it,” the doctor said.
The moments were turning points for all three to get serious about addressing their diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes, in which the body can’t properly regulate blood sugar, has become so common it’s almost considered inconsequential.
More than 1 in 10 Americans have the disease (though many don't know) and another nearly 4 in 10 are at risk for it.
In total, half of all adults and a quarter of teenagers have diabetes or pre-diabetes.
Its financial costs are astronomical.
The country spends more than $300 billion a year to address diabetes, accounting for $1 out of every $4 spent on health care.
And its personal tolls are even worse: heart attacks, amputations, blindness, kidney disease, double the risk of premature death.
It also causes what’s known as “diabetes distress,” the daily burdens and emotional toll of living with and managing a chronic ailment that can lead to regular dips in energy, foggy thinking and depression, and a sense of isolation.
The most frustrating aspect of Type 2 diabetes, experts say, is that it has long been largely preventable and controllable.
“We have made tremendous gains in understanding diabetes,” said Dr. Donald Berwick, a pediatrician and former administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Roughly 40% of people who died early in the coronavirus pandemic had Type 2 diabetes, a rate four times higher than people without the disease.
Even when elevated blood sugar levels are below the threshold for type 2 diabetes, the risk for heart disease jumps 30% to 50% compared with people with normal blood sugar levels.
(Type 1 diabetes, which accounts for 5% to 10% of diabetes, is caused by the immune system and is unrelated to diet or lifestyle.)
America’s failure to address Type 2 diabetes highlights larger problems with our food and medical systems, Berwick and other experts said.
A soda costs less than a bottle of water, a double cheeseburger and fries less than a carton of blueberries.
Patients wait months for medical appointments only to see the back of a white coat for the short time they’re allotted.
Treating disease costs society far more than preventing it but typically provides more profit for insurance companies, hospitals and the pharmaceutical industry.
The USA TODAY Health team spoke with scores of health care providers, researchers, community leaders and patients for this five-part series to understand why Type 2 diabetes continues to worsen in America despite known solutions.
The answer isn't simple.
It involves systemic problems facing everyone in society, not just those with diabetes: a food system designed to sell products; a medical system in which cutting off a leg is less expensive than saving it; the high cost of healthy living and the fact that breaking habits takes a lot more than just personal willpower.
This first story looks at what it takes for people to cope with or overcome the disease.
Then, we explore one community in a David vs. Goliath battle against a food system that fails to prioritize people's health.
More in series:Diabetes runs deep in rural Mississippi.
Locals have taken to growing their own solutions.
We next travel to Colorado, which has the lowest level of diabetes in the nation.
Yet even in this state, where hiking trails and gorgeous views abound, economic and other disparities make it easier for some people to avoid diabetes than others.
More in series:A diabetes disparity: Why Colorado's healthy lifestyle brand isn't shared by all
It's tough to manage a chronic illness in the face of high medical costs, scattered care and caregiver frustration and burnout, so we highlight that next.
More in series:The steep cost of Type 2: When diabetes dragged her down, she chose to fight
Finally, we explore solutions, addressing why it will take a combination of education, medication, medical devices and improved food access to solve this national problem.
More in series:Solutions exist to end the Type 2 diabetes dilemma but too few get the help they need
But it will take "sensible action" from across many sectors, including health care, science, nutrition, business, public health and politics to change the financial and other incentives that drive so many Americans toward sickness instead of health.
"If we do it incrementally or don't do it at all, we're all going to be toast in 50 years from diet-related illnesses and a depleted environment."
There’s no question personal responsibility plays a role in fighting diabetes.
They’ve reduced their dependence on daily medication and hope to have saved themselves the horrors of more amputations, blindness and dialysis.
They’ve extended their lives and improved the quality of that time.
But like many medical problems, the challenges of diabetes go well beyond individual responsibility and blame.
Agarwal recently led a series of studies in the journal The Lancet that looked at diabetes rates around the world.
Poverty, the studies showed, was a major driver of diabetes, along with racism and unequal access to healthy food and high-quality medical care.
Personal stories illustrate how these structural issues play out in the lives of so many Americans.
 “I’m healthy because of privilege – not diet, not exercise, not determination,” he said.
“It’s going to be all right after a while, as long as I keep this spirit,” he said.
Ray’s love for food began when she was 8 years old, watching Julia Child on TV.
During family gatherings, she would run around taking everyone’s dinner order.
Then she’d scurry back to the kitchen with a notepad full of scribbles.
Throughout her life, she made fried chicken, pork chops, baked mac and cheese, collard greens, and even a whole roasted chicken filled with wild rice and two sticks of butter – everything that made her soul sing.
In her world, food was home.
Food was family.
Food was love.
But that was some pretty tough love.
In 2002, Ray was diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes.
Her father, grandmother, aunts and uncles all had diabetes.
She knew what it meant.
“For you to tell me I can’t have ice blue raspberry Kool-Aid was like you shut down my world,” Ray said.
She didn't dwell on the diagnosis and continued with life.
Her culinary career took her to Italy, where she learned and fell even more in love with food.
She returned to St. Louis, got married and became a mom to her husband’s two children ‒ “beautiful bonus babies,” as she described them.
Through the years, she continued to express love through cooking and eating.
In 2015, a stabbing chest pain sent her to the emergency room.
Doctors assured Ray she hadn’t had a heart attack, but they warned that her life was on the line.
At 5-foot-2, she weighed 334 pounds and had an A1C, a measure of average blood sugar of 11%, well above the 6.5% cutoff to be considered diabetic.
Her diabetes – and her diet – were out of control.
She and her primary care doctor decided she would pursue weight loss surgery.
But she also decided to use her culinary prowess to transform her diet.
She reconfigured favorite foods, substituting healthier ingredients: Collard greens cooked in smoked fats or ham hocks turned into a kale, turnip and rutabaga recipe flavored with natural chicken broth fat, oils and seasonings.
She fostered her feelings into new recipes and brought them to North Sarah Food Hub, which partnered with Barnes-Jewish Hospital to make packaged, pre-made meals for St. Louis residents with diabetes and limited access to fresh food.
“I became excited about food again, and food became a joy.”
It isn’t always easy, of course.
Ray admits to an occasional cookie craving.
But now she takes the time to think about how her body processes that cookie and whether it’s worthwhile.
She hopes her cooking can help other people make the same transformation she did.
Her staff at North Sarah helps her create new recipes for others.
She wants to provide nourishment that allows people to avoid illness and medicine.
The lifetime risk of developing Type 2 diabetes if a parent has it is 40%.
If both parents have it, the risk jumps to 70%.
He knew he was at risk, but he pushed his luck, he said, by eating poorly during the pandemic and falling out of his exercise routine.
With the luxury of working from home, walking to the kitchen and bathroom was often the extent of his daily activity.
On Feb. 14, 2022 – Valentine’s Day – he went to an urgent care clinic, concerned his breathing trouble meant he had bronchitis.
His blood pressure measured 210 over 110, well above normal levels that top out at 120 over 80.
A chest X-ray showed fluid filling his lungs, leading to congestive heart failure.
The clinic sent him straight to a local emergency room, where he was diagnosed with a blockage of the left descending artery – a clogged artery made worse by diabetes.
If he had waited any longer, he would have had a massive heart attack, his doctor later told him.
After his release from the hospital, he went to the drugstore to fill his new prescriptions.
The pharmacist told him she couldn’t fill one because it would cost $1,000.
He’d have to wait until his insurance approved it.
“Please fill it,” he said.
She stressed the cost.
“Fill it,” he pleaded, putting the charge on his credit card.
Medication helped him lose 70 pounds in three months.
When his local drugstore ran out of the weight-loss drug, he easily drove to another pharmacy and then another to find what he needed.
His 100 hours of high-quality cardiac rehabilitation were fully covered by insurance.
He could devote all his energy to getting well because he didn’t have to focus on how to afford his care.
When they finally show up in the emergency room, “because they will,” they will cost the system far more, he said.
On the day Haynes stepped on a rusty nail in 2019, he walked all day as the nail pierced the sole of his sneaker and then his foot.
By the time he took off his shoe that night, his foot was infected.
He landed in the hospital for two months as doctors and nurses tried, mostly unsuccessfully, to get the infection and Haynes’ blood sugar under control.
By the time he was released, he knew enough about Type 2 diabetes to realize his daily blood sugar levels – typically in the mid-400s – were four times above what he had been told to shoot for.
But nothing he did or ate seemed to make a difference.
He had long since traded ribs for salads, beer for water.
His wife, Angela, barely noticed when James started wearing multiple pairs of socks, pouring powder on his feet and buying bigger shoes.
His feet tingled a lot, he said, but he was coping with it.
James ended up in the emergency room again, dehydrated and in need of antibiotics.
The doctor amputated the baby toe on his right foot, leaving a large open wound.
“I didn't like that we're not going to try to save anything, we're just going to start cutting.”
James was fading.
Antibiotics left him looking sickly, his voice so weak Angela could barely hear him.
“I felt like I was watching my husband slowly dying,” she said.
She thought it would take months to get James in to see the heart disease specialist, but the office called and asked if they could come the next day.
“We started looking forward to these visits because there was always hope,” Angela Haynes said, though she felt guilty they were taking up so much of the important doctor’s time.
Haynes had blockages in blood vessels on both legs.
Once he got the blood flowing again, Haynes began to feel better.
His flesh returned to its normal color.
The wound started healing at last.
Walking became easier.
Then disaster struck again.
On July 2, 2022, Haynes caught COVID-19.
"Everything went downhill after that," he said.
During his 13-day illness, the bacteria in his foot raged out of control.
Every week, a surgeon would come to the door of his hospital room and before even stepping all the way in ask Haynes whether he had decided to get his leg amputated.
I was born with this.
He was worried about how he’d get around, how he’d be able to work to support his family if he had only one leg.
No one took the time to explain why they thought the leg needed to come off or how he’d cope without it, Haynes said.
In late November, he was finally sent home in a wheelchair.
Back at the hospital, Haynes was told his foot was broken, essentially beyond repair.
He agreed to a below-the-knee amputation.
Released right before Christmas, he spent the next three weeks in bed wondering how he’d manage the rest of his life.
Finally, it looked as if his luck might be turning around.
With the leg gone, his diabetes improved.
His blood sugar dropped into the 120s or one-teens.
His blurry vision cleared up.
During his long hospital stay, he befriended nurses and learned about a program for people who needed prostheses.
The man who ran it called early in the year and said he had received a donated leg.
If it fit Haynes, he could have it while waiting for insurance to pay for a personalized one.
Miraculously, it did.
Haynes spent the next six months teaching himself to walk again.
The donor leg was heavy and uncomfortable.
He wasn't mobile enough to hold down a job.
One late spring night, picking up dinner at a nearby restaurant, he headed to the bathroom for a pit stop.
A sink had been leaking all day and Haynes slipped in the puddle, falling backward.
He's still recovering from the resulting wrist surgery.
He and Angela are living – barely – off her part-time salary as a secretary and a church organist.
Haynes has tried "at least three or four times" to receive government assistance, but they keep losing his paperwork, or not believing he's disabled, though he once checked himself out of the hospital and arrived at an appointment in his wheelchair to prove he didn't have a leg.
Still, he clings to his faith and the positive attitude he has long used to cheer up himself and others.
These are his secret weapons against diabetes and everything else life throws his way.
"I try to put a smile on other people's faces," he said.
"It keeps my day going."
This story is part of a reporting fellowship sponsored by the Association of Health Care Journalists and supported by the Commonwealth Fund.
Our goal remains the same: Provide book lovers with the best, most accurate snapshot of what people are reading by showing which titles are selling.
It is a master list, unbound by genre and format, of what’s selling broadly across the U.S.
Her novel "It Starts With Us" claimed the No.
1 spot in its first week, her highest debut ever, selling more than 800,000 copies on its first day of sales.
It was her fourth book to hit No.
1 in 2022.
The USA TODAY list is a ranking of the top-selling titles each week from a broad range of businesses including major chains, independent bookstores and online retailers.
It reflects combined sales of titles in print and electronic format, if available.
Our data team weighs and compiles those numbers to generate the week's 150 top-selling titles.
The rankings reflect sales from the previous Monday through Sunday.
The full list will publish online at 6 a.m. Wednesdays, with the top 50 titles publishing in print Thursdays.
The list, which began in 1993, went on hiatus in December.
It is the longest-running USA TODAY data journalism project.
In our continued commitment to bring readers more books coverage, USA TODAY is also excited to announce a new content partnership with The Novel Neighbor, an independently owned and operated bookstore in St. Louis.
They are expert booksellers and passionate readers who are deeply connected to what their community is reading.
With the partnership will come regular profiles of independent bookstores across the country, highlighting the important role of these businesses in their local communities.
Novel Neighbor will also be sharing expert book recommendations and fun takes on book trends.
We can't wait to see what you've been reading!
A second U.S. aircraft carrier strike force will join a group of six American warships in the eastern Mediterranean Sea in a growing military response to the attack on Israel by Hamas.
The five-ship USS Dwight D. Eisenhower Strike Group will bolster the five ships headed by the USS Gerald R. Ford, the U.S. Navy’s largest and most advanced nuclear aircraft carrier, the Pentagon said Saturday.
The Ford strike group arrived Tuesday.
"Their mission, as stated by the DOD, is to not let the neighbors join the party."
Military moves like this are often considered a show of force.
Though the Navy vessels can defend themselves if fired upon, they can’t initiate an attack without authorization.
It's joining the Ford strike group, "to deter hostile actions against Israel or any efforts toward widening this war following Hamas's attack on Israel," Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III said Saturday.
The Ford strike group, based in Norfolk, Virginia, was conducting naval exercises with Italy in the Ionian Sea last week.
Austin ordered the group's repositioning on Sunday.
The Eisenhower was scheduled to deploy to the Mediterranean on a regular rotation, and the Ford is near the end of its deployment, the Associated Press reported.
But the Biden administration may decide to extend the Ford’s deployment and keep both strike groups out there, White House spokesman John Kirby said Wednesday.
Strike group options include:
Much of this isn't new.
"It goes both ways."
The guided missile cruiser and destroyers also could help defend Israel from missile attacks from Iran, according to Breakingdefense.com.
The guided missile cruiser and three guided missile destroyers can "engage medium range ballistic missiles, the class of weapon Iran would use."
Rocket attacks from Gaza against Israel are a different matter.
Strike group weapons systems aren't designed to protect a wide area of land, as Israel's Iron Dome system is.
The strike groups also can help evacuate Americans from Israel if conditions worsen and airports close.
About 200,000 Americans, most of whom have dual U.S.-Israeli citizenship, are in Israel.
However, the Navy has other ships in the region that would take the lead in evacuations.
"There are about 800 Marines on it."
"The Marines are trained for noncombat evacuation operations."
Other evacuation ships include the USS Bataan and USS Carter Hall.
The USS Gerald R. Ford, CVN 78, is a $13 billion aircraft carrier with a crew of 5,000.
It carries up to 90 attack and support aircraft in eight squadrons.
The deployment is the carrier's first.
Its fleet of aircraft includes:
Those are in addition to unmanned air and combat vehicles.
The Ford strike group ships are:
USS Normandy, CG 60: A Ticonderoga-class guided missile cruiser.
It carries a crew of 5,600 and 90 aircraft.
Ships in its strike group include:
USS Philippine Sea, CG 58: A Ticonderoga-class guided missile cruiser.
The strike group includes Carrier Air Wing 3, nine squadrons with more than 70 aircraft.
SOURCE USA TODAY Network reporting and research; U.S.
Naval Institute; Associated Press; Breakingdefense.com; Navy Times; U.S. Central Command; Department of Defense
An Oct. 11 Facebook post (direct link, archive link) shows a photo of Qatar's head of state along with a warning he supposedly made about his country’s energy exports.
The post was shared more than 60 times in five days.
Fact check roundup: Israel-Hamas war sparks many misleading claims online.
Here's what's true and false.
A disinformation expert in Qatar says the emir has not made such a threat, and there are no credible reports of one.
The claim is “100% false,” a Qatar-based expert on Middle Eastern studies and disinformation campaigns told USA TODAY.
Qatar was the world’s third-largest liquefied natural gas exporter during the first half of 2023, behind the U.S. and Australia, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration.
Fact check: False claim that Qatar rejected German plane for LGBTQ symbol
So a legitimate threat that one of its leaders would shut off its natural gas valve certainly would have made global headlines.
But no credible news outlets have reported it.
In fact, on the same day the post was made, France said it would buy up to 3.5 million tons of liquefied natural gas from Qatar each year through 2050.
A day later, the emir visited Germany – which last year said it would import up to 2 million tons each year – amid criticism of Qatar’s ties to the Palestinian militant group Hamas, Politico reported.
Hamas’ attack on southern Israeli towns near the Gaza Strip on Oct. 7 led to the start of its latest war with Israel.
The conflict has left more than 4,000 dead on both sides, including 30 Americans, as of Oct. 16.
Qatar is seen as being a major sponsor of Hamas, Politico reported, but Qatari officials deny that, saying aid for Gaza is intended to improve life for Palestinians.
The claim originated in an Oct. 11 post on X from an account purporting to cover Qatari affairs, but it attributed the threat to the state of Qatar, not the emir.
The account has since been suspended.
It is not an official channel, and Jones said another version of the account was suspended previously.
USA TODAY reached out to both the Qatar embassy in Washington and the emir but did not immediately receive responses from either.
Qatar vowed in 2017 to not cut the gas supply to the United Arab Emirates even as that nation and others in the region severed diplomatic ties with Qatar and accused it of harboring terrorists, charges it has repeatedly denied.
During that diplomatic crisis, which lasted until 2021 and included a blockade, a number of accounts also appeared on the platform and spread misinformation about Qatar, Jones said.
USA TODAY reached out to the social media user who shared the post but did not immediately receive a response.
Thank you for supporting our journalism.
You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or e-newspaper here.
Our fact-check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook.
More celebrities are reacting to the war between Israel and the Palestinian militant group Hamas, where the death toll on both sides surpassed 4,000 on Monday, with thousands more wounded.
Meanwhile, the Academy Museum Gala postponed its annual fundraiser, and a red carpet for the upcoming Sofia Coppola film "Priscilla" has been canceled.
Last week, over 700 actors, comedians, musicians, and power players of the Hollywood community signed an open letter denouncing Hamas' "barbaric acts of terrorism" in Israel and calling for the return of hostages.
Here's what more celebrities are saying.
"These are indefensible war crimes," he continued.
"We need to put ourselves in the shoes of the people of Gaza, now, before we all walk past the point of no return."
The "Sound of Metal" actor also denounced the actions of Hamas, calling the attack "horrific and wrong."
Pink, who is currently on the North American leg of her Summer Carnival tour, claimed in an X post that she has received "many threats" from people who mistook Poi flags displayed at her live shows for Israeli flags.
The singer clarified that the flags "were used many, many years ago by the Māori people in New Zealand and because they and the Māori people are beautiful to me, we use them."
"I have been using Poi flags since the beginning of this tour," she said.
I believe in peace.
I am deeply saddened by the state of the world.
The war has caused reverberations in Hollywood, too.
On Oct. 12, the Academy Museum of Motion Pictures in Los Angeles announced the red carpet for its annual fundraising gala on Oct. 14 would be canceled "out of respect for the devastating conflict and loss of life happening overseas."
"The Academy Museum condemns all forms of hate and cruelty and stands in support of innocent Israeli and Palestinian lives affected by the ongoing violence," the museum's statement reads.
Meryl Streep, Oprah Winfrey, Michael B. Jordan and Sofia Coppola were set to be honored at the event.
"Out of respect for the events going on in the world, we will be forgoing a red carpet for the 'Priscilla' Los Angeles premiere," the studio said in an email to the press.
One of the world's most enduring and intractable conflicts connects to a century of competing claims to land, borders and rights in a region of deep historical and religious significance.
The United Nations in 1947 tried to divide the-then British Mandate of Palestine into separate Arab and Jewish states.
A year later, when the state of Israel was created, the first Arab-Israeli War broke out.
Ever since Israel's victory and following several other wars, Palestinians have gradually been displaced from territory that they also see as their rightful homeland.
Gal Gadot, Jamie Lee Curtis among700 entertainers denouncing Hamas' terrorism in open letter
A Royal Caribbean International cruise ship helped evacuate U.S. nationals from Israel on Monday.
“Now, with enhanced safety precautions in place, our ship is providing free passage, including accommodation and food, for Americans in the region wishing to leave and find safer ground,” Jason Liberty, president and CEO of the line’s parent company Royal Caribbean Group, said in an email to employees that was shared with USA TODAY.
The evacuation was conducted in partnership with the U.S. State Department, Liberty said.
The U.S. Embassy in Israel said in a security alert Sunday that boarding would begin in order of arrival on Monday at 8:00 a.m. local time, and the ship would sail from Haifa to Limassol, Cyprus.
The Rhapsody of the Seas ship can accommodate more than 2,400 passengers, according to Royal Caribbean’s website.
“Each traveler must be a U.S. national or the immediate family member (spouse/partner, children under age 21) of a U.S. national and have a valid passport,” the alert said.
The embassy said travelers would be responsible for arranging their own accommodations and travel from Cyprus, but that chartered flights were also being arranged.
“This has truly been an incredible effort as our teams worked tirelessly over the past week to make this mission possible,” Liberty added in the email.
“My heartfelt gratitude goes out to all involved and especially to the ship’s officers and crew for their unwavering support of this call to serve others in the midst of unimaginable tragedy.”
Escaping from Israel:U.S. families take tumultuous flights home after Hamas attacks
Many cruise lines changed itineraries following the conflict, in some cases suspending stops in Israel altogether.
The State Department has an advisory in place for the region, warning against travel to Gaza and urging travelers to reconsider going to Israel and the West Bank.
You can reach him at ndiller@usatoday.com.
An Oct. 10 Facebook post (direct link, archive link) claims an Israeli government official made a stark comment amid the Israel-Hamas war.
Our soldiers will not be held accountable for anything.
It was shared more than 40 times in four days.
Other versions of the claim accumulated thousands of additional shares across Facebook and X, formerly known as Twitter.
Fact check roundup: Israel-Hamas war sparks many misleading claims online.
Here's what's true and false.
There is no evidence Gallant said this.
Versions of the claim reference Gallant's message to Israeli troops along the Gaza border, but media accounts of those remarks include no mention of abolishing the rules of war.
Some versions of the claim include a lengthier quotation attributed to Gallant.
It says Israel is “moving to a full offense” and “Hamas wanted a change in Gaza, it will change 180 degrees from what it thought.”
Those comments roughly match Gallant’s message to troops along the Gaza border on Oct. 10, as reported by the Times of Israel.
There is no reference to Israel abandoning the rules of war in the remarks.
Though some versions of the claim attributed the supposed quote to Russian state-owned news agency Sputnik, there is no such quotation in any of the outlet’s articles on Gallant.
Fact check: Historic Gaza church open for services, undamaged by Israeli airstrikes
Both Israel and Hamas have been criticized for possible violations of the rules of war, including killing civilians and taking them as hostages, Reuters reported.
Israel has also been criticized for preventing food, water, medicine and fuel from entering Gaza following Hamas’ Oct. 7 attack.
A United Nations commission said it has been “collecting and preserving evidence of war crimes committed by all sides,” the Associated Press reported.
President Joe Biden has also urged Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to observe the rules of war in retaliating against Hamas, according to outlets including CNN, the Hill and PBS.
USA TODAY has debunked an array of false claims about the Israel-Hamas war, including that a video showed Russian President Vladimir Putin warning the U.S. to not interfere in the conflict, that the Department of Defense evacuated the U.S. embassy in Beirut and told Americans to leave Lebanon immediately and that a video shows Israel fabricating a child’s injuries.
USA TODAY reached out to several users who shared the post for comment but did not immediately receive a response.
Lead Stories also debunked the claim.
Thank you for supporting our journalism.
You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or e-newspaper here.
Our fact-check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook.
The undertow and the waves.
A black ski mask conceals the man’s face.
The anonymous YouTube channel host almost always sports a black baseball cap embellished with the channel’s logo above his mask.
The channel had nearly 9,000 subscribers and a catalog of 180 videos that offered advice, stories and tips on the process of crossing the Arizona-Mexico border.
Videos walked viewers through how much they would have to pay in smuggling fees and advice on how to cross without a guide or “coyote.”
She was about 20 years old, Black and illiterate.
Her great sin, in the eyes of Delaware, was that she was an unmarried woman who gave birth to two children – both fathered by different white men.
The label of “procreative menace” was often slapped on women like Ethel.
While institutionalized, she underwent a procedure to correct these supposed emotional defects.
A doctor, with one of Delaware’s most prominent last names, made an incision into Ethel’s abdomen.
He removed both of her fallopian tubes.
He also cut out her clitoris.
A comical but telling moment Thursday at the end of Ben Johnson’s weekly news conference said a lot about his success and his skyrocketing stock as a future head coach.
After the Detroit Lions' offensive coordinator was done fielding questions, which were mostly about his play-calling wizardry that has produced 76 points in two weeks, he began to walk off the podium before he briefly posed his own query.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
LAS VEGAS – Well, at least one thing hasn’t changed when it comes to the Patriot Way.
And there’s been so much of that lately.
If only it were that simple.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
They didn’t quit, cave or fold up the tent.
But they wound up with the same lousy result.
And the story again is that New England just isn’t good enough anymore.
The Patriots are 1-5.
Here’s another one: The Patriots had a grand total of -2 net yards in the first quarter.
The last time they were 1-5?
Go back to 1995 – the year after Robert Kraft bought the franchise.
Funny, the team wore the New England uniforms.
But somewhere along the way – or sometime after Tom Brady departed – they changed the definition of the Patriot Way.
Remember how it used to be?
During those glory years spanning two decades, they often came back because they could count on the other guys screwing up in crunch time.
Now, with Sunday providing another example, the shoe is other the other foot.
Start with this: The Patriots committed 10 penalties for 79 yards.
This is the undisciplined stuff that facilitates losing football games.
The flags came early, as in two penalties on two linemen on the first two offensive snaps.
And they came late, as in three penalties in the final three minutes.
A defensive pass interference call on third down extended a Raiders drive, then after New England forced a punt, holding and delay-of-game penalties backed up the offense and set up the disaster of a game-clinching safety with 1:47 remaining as Mac Jones was sacked in the end zone.
There was also a sweet catch-and-run by Ezekiel Elliott in the second quarter that went for a 74-yard touchdown…until it was called back by a holding penalty.
Yeah, there’s another type of Patriot Way showing up these days.
Jones, the third-year quarterback, led a promising drive into Raiders territory late in the second quarter that might have tied the game.
Then as he rolled away from pursuit on a second down, he threw across his body and way the head of tight end Hunter Henry.
"Just trying to do too much," said Jones, who passed for 200 yards but didn’t throw for a TD.
The football glanced off Parker’s hands, the receiver blowing an opportunity to at least position for a possible go-ahead field goal.
The collection of gaffes is more stunning when considering the man in charge.
For a coach who has preached details while enjoying so much success – including six Super Bowl championships with the Patriots – this has to turn his stomach to watch.
"Right now, it’s just about this game," he said.
"So, you can’t compare those."
There was a measure of progress.
Yet just like last week and the week before, the Patriots are left to process their reality.
As Jones put it, “You’ve got to watch the film with truthful eyes.”
There’s a lot of football left.
That can be interpreted as half-full or half-empty.
If the losing continues, the questions about the team’s focus and intensity will escalate.
"It’s up to us to look ourselves in the mirror and see who we are individually and what are we going to bring every day," said receiver Kendrick Bourne, who caught 10 passes for 89 yards on Sunday.
The morale is certainly being tested, if it isn’t shaken.
David Andrews, the ninth-year veteran center, is the only starter on offense or defense who remains from the last Super Bowl title team.
He doesn’t see much choice when it comes to the approach to this crisis.
"Football is like life," Andrews said.
You can’t lay down.
You can’t quit.
I don’t believe in that.
Never believed in that.
And lately, keep getting off the mat as another version of the Patriot Way.
Week 6 in the NFL brought some stunning upsets, including a pair that unseated the last remaining undefeated teams.
Elsewhere in the NFC, a team that had been waiting a long time to contend, the Detroit Lions, are balanced, versatile and looking poised to make a run.
Here are the winners and losers from Sunday of Week 6.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
On the back of an aggressive defense, the Jacksonville Jaguars (4-2) took down the Indianapolis Colts 37-20 for a season sweep against their AFC South rivals.
That gives Jacksonville a nice bump in the race for the division title, but if there’s any indication that that Jaguars may stick around, it’s the team’s turnover differential of +7, which ranks second in the NFL.
Jacksonville leads the NFL in takeaways with 15.
By comparison, the Jaguars had 27 last season, tied for fourth-best.
Their four takeaways against the Colts helped them build an early lead.
Jacksonville still allows far too many explosive passing plays (it allowed three completions of 40 or more yards Sunday) and will need to limit those moving forward.
The Lions (5-1), as the only team in the NFC North with a winning record, are running away with the division.
They have a two-and-a-half game lead on the next closest team.
They are balanced, with an offense capable of explosive fits and a defense that limits big plays.
What makes Detroit so fun to watch is that it is versatile enough to win in different ways.
And its players are maximizing effort, too.
In a 20-6 road win against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, quarterback Jared Goff lit up the box score to the tune of 353 yards and a pair of touchdowns.
In previous weeks, it had been David Montgomery and the rushing game posting big numbers.
The defense has been steadily productive and limited Tampa Bay to two third-down conversions and no red=zone touchdowns on two tries.
For the first time since 1969, the Lions have won four straight games by 14 points or more.
More may be coming.
It was still missing Aaron Rodgers, yet the Jets defeated the Eagles 20-14 for the first time in franchise history.
The Jets (3-3) are hanging around in the AFC East, though the offense with Zach Wilson (19-of-33 for 186 yards) under center remains anemic.
The Jets converted just two-of-11 third-down attempts (18.2%).
They went just one-of-four in the red zone.
Those numbers alone make it remarkable that New York upset the Eagles, but it also shows the proficiency of the defense.
This was a statement victory.
But unless the offense eventually shows it can bear some weight, this style will prove unsustainable.
By no means is he a finished product, and he still needs to sustain this production over a longer sample size, but second-year Washington Commanders quarterback Sam Howell is taking steps toward becoming a reliable option.
Howell, 23, ranks ninth in the NFL in passing (1,500 yards) and is posting an above-average completion rate (67.8%).
In a 24-16 win against the Atlanta Falcons, Howell recorded his first three-touchdown game.
He also did it against a team that came into Sunday with the eighth-ranked passing defense (190.8 yards per game allowed).
Yet, what has made Howell’s performance this year so impressive is that he’s doing it behind a tattered Washington (3-3) offensive line that has yielded more sacks (34) than any other in the NFL.
Some of those sacks, of course, are on Howell, but his ability to evade pressure and release the ball quickly should give him some staying power in the league.
San Francisco, the most consistent team in the league thus far, failed to seize opportunities against the Browns in a 19-17 defeat.
And while a pair of missed field goals loom large, second-year quarterback Brock Purdy played the worst game of his career.
Rookie third-round place kicker Jake Moody pushed a 41-yard field goal that would have won the game, and he also hooked a 54-yarder in the first quarter.
This was a game in which P.J.
Walker started at quarterback for the Browns, who were also Chubb, their longtime offensive engine.
But New York (1-5) settled for a pair of field goals Sunday night after it had marched the ball down to Buffalo’s 11-yard line and failed miserably in the red zone.
There was the end of the first half, when New York got it down to the Bills’ 1-yard line.
Then there was the final play of the game, an untimed down with the Giants again at the Buffalo 1-yard line.
This time New York did opt to pass, but the attempt fell incomplete, cementing a 14-9 loss.
New York ended the game 0-for-5 in red zone tries and 0-for-3 in goal-to-go spots.
Against weaker teams, maybe those missteps aren't fatal.
Against the Bills, you’re asking to lose.
They recorded 24 first downs to Cincinnati’s 15.
They held the ball for eight more minutes.
But Seattle was just 1-of-5 in red-zone situations, including 1-of-4 in goal-to-go scenarios.
The Seahawks had a couple of shots at the end zone inside the four-minute mark in the fourth quarter.
The first time, Smith was sacked twice in four plays.
The second, he couldn’t connect with receiver DK Metcalf twice for the game-winning touchdown.
All in all, it wasted a solid defensive performance.
They’ve had a winning record in four of the last five years.
Tennessee has claimed the division twice and has made three trips to the postseason.
Now, as it heads home from London after a 24-16 setback against the Baltimore Ravens and goes into the bye week with a 2-4 record and sitting in last place, Tennessee faces a crossroads.
He was never a star in Tennessee, but the offense was at its best when he could play turnover-free, clean football.
He has a 2:6 touchdown-to-interception ratio this year and is on pace for a career-low 71.9 QB rating.
It might be time to look to the future.
The 32 things we learned from Week 6 of the 2023 NFL season:
The number of undefeated teams remaining, the Philadelphia Eagles and San Francisco 49ers both suffering stunning upsets Sunday.
It’s obviously still early in the season, but boy does this field feel wide, wide open.
Power rankings won’t be revealed until Tuesday morning, and the depleted NFC West leaders went down in Cleveland, their 15-game regular-season winning streak snapped.
San Francisco QB Brock Purdy played poorly (12-for-27, 125 yards, TD, INT) while suffering his first loss in 11 regular-season starts.
His only other professional defeat occurred in the 2022 NFC title game, when he missed most of the contest with an injured throwing elbow.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Before leaving with an oblique injury, McCaffrey scored a touchdown in his 15th consecutive game (including playoffs), tying him for the second-longest streak in league history.
He needs to extend his run another two games to catch Baltimore Colts legend Lenny Moore.
McCaffrey’s TD marked the first time the Browns defense had surrendered points to an opponent on its first possession this season.
You wonder if going with Moody, one of five kickers since 2000 selected in the draft’s first three rounds, will be a miscalculation given Gould made nearly 88% of his field goals in six seasons with the 49ers and has never missed a kick in the playoffs.
But guessing those fans in Cleveland took extra delight in watching Moody, who hails from the University of Michigan, misfire.
In an often unwatchable game, the 49ers and Browns combined for 25 penalties, which added up to 224 yards' worth of infractions.
Are the Eagles the NFL’s best team?
Again, power rankings won’t be revealed until Tuesday morning, and Philadelphia’s first-ever loss to the New York Jets felt a touch fluky on a day when the reigning NFC champs turned the ball over four times against a defense that didn’t even have All-Pro CB Sauce Gardner (concussion), among several other injuries.
It was the Jets’ first win over the Eagles after losing the first 12 matchups between the franchises.
Are the Detroit Lions the NFL’s best team?
We mentioned power rankings won’t be out until Tuesday?
But they’re 5-1, too – their best record to start a season since 2011 – after thumping the Tampa Bay Buccaneers 20-6.
Few teams have the balance on both sides of the ball that Detroit does.
Are the Miami Dolphins now the NFL’s best team?
Another reminder that power rankings won’t be revealed until Tuesday morning … and it’s hard to foresee the Fins taking over the top spot two weeks after a four-touchdown loss at Buffalo.
But maybe the question that needs to be asked is this: Are we witnessing the best offense in league history?
Miami finished with 424 yards in Sunday’s win, amazingly nearly 100 shy of its league-best average entering Week 6.
The Dolphins needed 8 more to join the 2000 “Greatest Show on Turf” St. Louis Rams as the only teams with 3,000 yards of offense through six games.
Hill has expressed his desire to become the first man with 2,000 receiving yards in one season.
He’s currently on pace to finish with 2,306.
He became the sixth player since the 1970 AFL-NFL merger with at least 11 touchdowns through six games.
But it wasn't all bouquets for the Dolphins, who suffered the ignominy of punting on their opening drive for the first time this season ...
Miami routed the Carolina Panthers 42-21, meaning the NFL still has one winless outfit.
Rounding out the quintet of 5-1 teams?
How about the reigning Super Bowl champion Kansas City Chiefs – and maybe they’re atop the power rankings … even if it feels like they’ve been doing a bit of sleepwalking early in the season?
Or is it star gazing amid their All-Pro tight end’s new plus-one?
Every team in the AFC North has at least three wins, the only division that can make such a claim.
The New England Patriots scored their first touchdown in 12 quarters – the equivalent of three games, obviously – so minor sign of life offensively.
The victory was the 500th all time in the regular season for the peripatetic Raiders.
But they needed to be in that penalty box to get a feel for it.
Important reps for them in an otherwise unimportant game.
Indianapolis got mopped by the Jaguars 37-20 – meaning the Colts still haven’t won their annual trip to Jacksonville since 2014, when Andrew Luck was their quarterback.
Talk about execution.
First, the New York Giants couldn't execute near the Buffalo goal line at the end of the first half, situational mismanagement costing them at least a chip-shot field-goal attempt.
Then, at the end of the game – and again on the Bills' doorstep – the refs effectively executed the season for Big Blue (now 1-5) by failing to call a (warranted) second consecutive pass interference infraction as Giants TE Darren Waller was clearly obstructed on the game's final play in the end zone.
Houston Texans QB C.J.
The Texans (3-3) are at least .500 through six games for the first time since 2019.
The Minnesota Vikings have beaten the NFC North-rival Chicago Bears five straight times, winning Sunday’s "battle" of teams that began the day 1-4.
Decisive play in the Vikings’ 19-13 victory.
Far more heartening to see Harris give the thumbs-up sign on his way off and quickly regain movement in his extremities after absorbing a thundering hit.
A blocked extra point in London prevented Baltimore Ravens K Justin Tucker (6 field goals) from achieving a new career high for points in one game.
Tucker had 18 of the victorious Ravens’ 24 points.
Opposing Tucker on Sunday, Tennessee Titans K Nick Folk tied the record of the Baltimore sniper with his 70th consecutive field goal inside 40 yards.
Chiefs DT Chris Jones has a sack in eight consecutive games – three shy of matching his own franchise record.
The Chiefs’ 16-game winning streak against the Denver Broncos is tied for the third longest in league history by one team over another.
A win at Denver in Week 8 would allow K.C.
The Dolphins’ 20-game run over the Bills in the 1970s is the longest rule by one opponent over another.
Broncos QB Russell Wilson was sacked for the 500th time in his career in Thursday night’s loss.
Only Aaron Rodgers (531) has been taken down more among active quarterbacks than Wilson (501), who has been a starter four fewer seasons than the four-time MVP.
Speaking of sacks, Washington Commanders QB Sam Howell has been dumped 34 times, putting him on pace to suffer a record 96 at that rate.
Congrats to Falcons DL Calais Campbell, who’s always kept it 100 during his estimable 16-year career.
The 2019 Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year award winner collected his 100th career sack, the fifth player currently on an active roster to reach that threshold.
Follow USA TODAY Sports' Nate Davis on X, formerly Twitter @ByNateDavis.
Buffalo Bills running back Damien Harris, who exited Sunday night’s 14-9 win over the New York Giants after a neck injury, was released from a Buffalo-area hospital on Monday, ESPN's Jeremy Fowler reported.
On Sunday night, Bills coach Sean McDermott said that Harris had full movement in his body and his early scans looked good.
Speaking after the Bills' 14-9 win against the New York Giants, McDermott also said that he was told Harris' scans are also good so far.
"So, things are heading in a good direction right now for Damien," McDermott said.
Harris was injured with a little more than three minutes remaining in the second quarter when he was tackled on a 1-yard run up the middle.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
The officials ruled Harris had gained a first down, but he stayed on the turf.
Harris remained on the ground for a few minutes as concerned players from both teams looked on.
Harris was eventually placed on a stretcher and loaded onto an ambulance.
The running back gave the crowd a thumbs up as he was placed on the stretcher.
The Bills later announced that Harris suffered a neck injury and was transported to a local hospital.
He's our friend, and we know him personally.
To see him laying down … he just found out two days ago that he was having a boy.
They said that it was a neck injury.
Imagine if he can't hold his son off of one play?
That's scary, man.
Buffalo is all too familiar with frightening injuries.
A visibly concerned Hamlin was shown on the broadcast as Buffalo’s medical staff tended to Harris.
Harris is in his first season with the Bills.
The 26-year-old spent the previous four years of his career with the New England Patriots.
New England selected Harris in the third round of the 2019 NFL draft out of Alabama.
🎤 Former Arkansas Gov.
Asa Hutchinson, former South Carolina Gov.
Nikki Haley, North Dakota Gov.
Instead, voters made their priorities – and worries – clear, pressing 2024 White House hopefuls on their vision for the nation, USA TODAY’s Phillip M. Bailey reports:
⏰ Climate change, social security and concerns for the future: Those who showed up to speak with the candidates face-to-face wanted answers on how they would tackle America's long-term problems.
🐘 Compassionate conservatism: The candidates repeatedly emphasized how the voters who aren't paying attention yet want a solutions-oriented leader seeking common ground in 2024, not a bombastic style.
🤝 Pence praised after the Capitol attack: Voters told Pence that they wanted to specifically thank him for refusing to cave amid pressure from former President Donald Trump and threats from supporters who stormed the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021.
🎁 Voters are skeptical about moving on from Trump: Many voters who attended the forums this past week, said they fear former President Donald Trump has the primary wrapped up.
Read more here: Republican candidates flock to N.H. town halls, as voters search for Trump alternative
🗺️ Want to keep up with the Israel-Hamas war?
USA TODAY has launched a special edition newsletter to stay informed on the conflict, from the latest developments to contextual deep-dives on the repercussions of the war.
Sign up here to get the headlines delivered straight to your inbox.
Republican presidential hopefuls came to New Hampshire last week and answered questions directly from voters in a series of town hall forums.
Some of their responses checked out, but other claims were false or misleading.
Topics ranged from energy and the environment to taxes and the COVID-19 pandemic.
Here's where the candidates were on – and off – the mark:
You know what happens there?
Like many communities around the country, Philadelphia has a needle exchange program that provides clean needles for drug users to slow the spread of disease.
"Clean needles are an evidence-based intervention proven to save lives, included in the White House’s recommendations for addressing the overdose epidemic," Sarah Peterson, a spokesperson for the Philadelphia Mayor's Office, told USA TODAY in an email.
More:A new 'fentanyl fighter' hits a market crowded with overdose reversal drugs
The city’s website notes the benefits of such programs in preventing the spread of infections including hepatitis C and HIV.
But the website makes no mention of offering crack pipes – because there's no such program.
Peterson said the city distributes safe smoking kits, but those do not include pipes.
It echoes a similar claim that USA TODAY debunked in 2022, which asserted that President Joe Biden’s administration was spending $30 million on crack pipes as part of its program to reduce health risks tied to drug use.
The program allowed for grantees to purchase safe smoking kits, but crack pipes were not among the approved materials.
There's less clarity about exactly how much more likely other negative outcomes are as a result, though research shows the lack of a father figure increases the chances of other negative life outcomes.
More:'The streak is now broken': US poverty rate over time shows spike in 2022 levels
Other studies we found used slightly different metrics, confirming a correlation but with different figures.
"We cut taxes more than any other administration in history."
This claim by former Vice President Mike Pence is false.
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was signed into law by then-President Donald Trump in December 2017.
An analysis by the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Budget determined "it would definitely not be the largest in history," but would instead be the eighth-largest as a percent of gross domestic product since 1918 and the fourth-largest in inflation-adjusted dollars.
More:US government shutdowns used to be rare.
That’s increasingly no longer the case.
The Washington Post found Trump's tax cut amounted to nearly 0.9% of GDP, which means Trump's tax cut was smaller than tax cuts passed under several previous administrations.
For instance, the Economic Recovery Act of 1981 passed under President Ronald Reagan was 2.89% of GDP.
By the same measurement, Trump's tax cut was also smaller than two tax cuts passed under his predecessor, President Barack Obama.
"The virus came from a Chinese lab."
Some polls show many Americans believe COVID-19 leaked from a lab, but Pence's assertion is still far from settled.
The White House said in February there was not a consensus across the government on the origins of the virus, as USA TODAY reported at the time.
That announcement followed reports that the Energy Department had concluded the pandemic most likely was caused by an unintentional lab leak in China.
However, the department's conclusion was made with “low confidence,” meaning the level of certainty was not high, according to the Wall Street Journal and the New York Times.
More:Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine jointly awarded to scientists for COVID-19 work
Biden had previously asked intelligence agencies to investigate the origins of the virus, but they were not able to reach a consensus, according to The Washington Post, which noted that most of the agencies favored, with "low confidence," the "natural spillover" theory.
NPR reported in February that scientists who have studied the origins of the pandemic are far less divided, saying there is "very convincing" data and "overwhelming evidence" to indicate an animal origin.
I did that in South Carolina, I did it at the U.N.
Former South Carolina Gov.
Nikki Haley’s response to a question about political spending fails to note that she has specifically fought against donor transparency for her own political nonprofit.
Haley was asked about how to counteract the influence of big money donors in politics, and she said donors to political action committees and candidates must be disclosed, and that identifying large financial backers can help voters recognize potential influences.
More:Biden raises $71 million in 3rd quarter, far outpacing Trump and the Republican field
However, Haley founded a political nonprofit after leaving the Trump administration called Stand for America.
As a 501(c)(4) organization, it has the option to keep donors’ names private.
It did so, but Politico obtained an unredacted tax filing for the nonprofit from 2019 that identified dozens of donors who had not given to Haley’s PAC of the same name, where their donations would have been public.
Haley called the release a violation of tax law and threatened to sue the New York attorney general’s office because the released version of the filing had a marking indicating the office had been in possession of that copy.
USA TODAY could not find any media reports saying the lawsuit had been filed.
Open Secrets reported that Haley’s nonprofit raised more than $25 million in the four-plus years between its founding and when she joined the presidential race.
The nonprofit’s funds cannot be used for a campaign, but it is a way of staying connected to donors and funding policy promotion efforts between campaigns.
The claim is statistically correct, and the rate improved during the Haley administration, according to media reports.
South Carolina’s recidivism rate – defined as the percentage of prisoners released who return to state custody within three years – is a nation-leading 19%, according to a study by the Virginia Department of Corrections.
Other studies with different definitions also place recidivism around 20%.
More:'Persistent overcrowding': Fulton County Jail issues spark debate, search for answers
While governor, Haley introduced programs to prepare inmates for life after incarceration.
Those changes included job training, help with housing and other support services, steps that continued after she left office.
This is after leases have been made.
This is not an accurate description of what Biden did.
Former Arkansas Gov.
Asa Hutchinson appears to be conflating a pair of actions taken by the Department of Interior on Sept. 6.
The agency proposed a rule that would reduce the acreage available for drilling on Alaska’s North Slope while also canceling leases in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
The changes on the slope would not cancel any existing leases but would close off 10.6 million acres of the National Petroleum Reserve-Alaska from being used for drilling for oil.
The slope produced nearly 500,000 barrels of oil daily in 2022, about a quarter of its peak in 2008.
More:Alaska oil drilling: Willow project critics go viral with petition pressuring Biden
No private companies held the leases canceled in the Arctic refuge, an area of environmentally-sensitive federal land in Alaska, according to the Associated Press.
Nine leases were awarded at a 2021 auction, but an energy company and a real estate company both canceled their leases in 2022, according to media reports.
The remaining leases were all held by the Alaska Industrial Development and Export Authority, a corporation owned by the state government.
Alaska officials expressed interest in partnering with oil companies to develop and drill the land when it won the auctions, but that hasn't happened yet.
If Hutchinson meant to say opening up Arctic leases, their impact on gasoline prices is purely hypothetical.
The Energy Information Administration said in a 2018 report that it could take 10 years after leases are issued before oil from the refuge would enter the market because more studies must be performed, and infrastructure must be built.
This claim is largely accurate.
Thirteen states received waivers during the Trump administration to institute work requirements for at least some people in their Medicaid programs, although Arkansas was the only one to drop people from the program for non-compliance, according to a Kaiser Family Foundation analysis.
The others either paused implementation or held off on enforcing the requirements because of threats of litigation or the COVID-19 pandemic.
More:Helpers few and far between for rural Americans kicked off Medicaid after pandemic
But the Biden administration revoked all waivers in 2021, pointing in part to a federal report that found work requirements in Arkansas – even before the pandemic – did not increase employment and caused about 18,000 Arkansans to lose coverage.
However, Georgia won a court fight last year to implement a work requirement as part of a Medicaid expansion effort, applying the requirement only to people who become eligible for Medicaid under expanded criteria.
That program began on July 1 but was not a new waiver under Biden.
"The United States has taken more CO2 out of the air than any other country in the world."
This claim by North Dakota Gov.
Doug Burgum is true in terms of absolute numbers, but there's more to the story.
The U.S. reduced its carbon dioxide emissions by about 760 million metric tons per year from 2000-14, according to a 2018 report from the bipartisan Environmental and Energy Study Institute – the most recent version available.
The drop was about four times as large as the one in the United Kingdom, which ranked second with an annual cut of 170 million metric tons.
More:Visualizing climate change's wrath: Global warming's dire impact on Earth explored
But because the U.S. is also one of the world’s top carbon dioxide producers, that represents a relatively small percentage drop of 8%.
The report says most countries had cuts of at least 10%.
Denmark trimmed its emissions by 30%.
His figure is right, but he left out some important context by taking credit for it.
More:Do I really need that?
How American consumers are tightening purse strings amid inflation
The state constitution explicitly requires lawmakers and the governor to approve a balanced budget every two years.
Thank you for supporting our journalism.
You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or e-newspaper here.
Our fact-check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook.
"Clearly, it's going to be challenging," she said, but added that anything can happen in the historic "first-in-the-nation" primary.
"It's New Hampshire."
Less than 100 days from the Iowa caucuses that trigger the nomination process, non-Trump candidates are pursuing various campaign and media strategies designed to cut into Trump's massive poll lead in early contest states.
Their common goal: Get in the game with Trump.
“New Hampshire is so wide open,” DeSantis told reporters as the Florida governor filed Thursday to run in the New Hampshire primary expected to be held in January.
Voters said the challengers have no choice but to go straight at Trump, even at the risk of alienating many Trump voters.
Yet they are also skeptical about whether they can succeed, even with Trump's many legal problems and abrasive campaign style.
In addition to DeSantis and Haley, the Republican candidates trying to figure it out include former Vice President Mike Pence, former New Jersey Gov.
Doug Burgum, and former Arkansas Gov.
Among their efforts:
DeSantis, who had focused more on conservative media, is now appearing on more mainstream outlets – and seeking a comeback.
Once seen as the top Republican alternative to Trump - a candidate who was in a fairly strong second place in many polls – DeSantis has slid back to the rest of the pack amid a steady barrage of attacks from the former president and his allies.
In his new campaign phase, DeSantis is also amplifying his record in Florida and policy differences with Trump that include border security and federal spending.
He's also spending more time on Trump's indictments and other legal problems, saying they will turn off voters who would otherwise vote Republican because of President Joe Biden's record.
"A referendum on Joe Biden means we win if I'm the candidate," DeSantis said recently on MSNBC's “Morning Joe.” "I think a referendum on Donald Trump, if that's it, then I think the Democrats would win."
The former United Nations ambassador has seen upticks in fundraising and polls since attention-getting appearances in the first two Republican presidential debates.
A recent Suffolk University/Boston Globe/USA TODAY poll put Haley in second place in New Hampshire, ahead of DeSantis.
Like other competitors, Haley is also trying to establish herself as the consensus alternative to Trump.
Allies are suggesting that GOP donors and candidates consolidate behind her as the best bet against Trump.
That subtle strategy paid off this week when former Rep. Will Hurd, R-Tex., dropped out of the race and endorsed Haley.
During her USA TODAY Network town hall, Haley continued to promote herself as a "new generation" of leadership, in contrast to the last Republican president.
"I think Donald Trump was the right president at the right time," Haley said.
Pence is increasingly critical of the president who put him on the national ticket, hitting him over support for tariffs, increased isolation in the world, criticism of Israel and a populist style at odds with traditional conservatism.
"I'm the most qualified, most experienced and most tested conservative seeking the Republican nomination," Pence said during his USA TODAY Network town hall.
Pence probably has more at stake in Iowa, which has a high number of social conservatives that are a big part of his base.
The former New Jersey governor has been the race's fiercest critic of Trump and probably will continue to be, especially over the four criminal trials he faces.
Christie also figures to continue focusing on New Hampshire, as opposed to Iowa.
He is hoping to replicate what John McCain did in 2008: A long-shot candidate whose victory in New Hampshire propelled him through the primary process onto the nomination.
The businessman, author, and first-time candidate has always cast himself as the outsider candidate who is taking on "the establishment," an aggressive approach that has drawn verbal fire from other candidates.
The South Carolina senator is being more aggressive, both toward Biden and toward other Republicans, particularly since the outbreak of the Israel-Hamas war.
Witness his dust-up with Haley during the Sept. 27 debate in California.
The next Republican debate is scheduled for Nov. 8 in Miami.
The campaign is offering $20 gift cards to people who contribute as little as $1 to his campaign.
During his USA TODAY Network town hall, a visitor asked Hutchinson about the crowded field against Trump: How do you get attention with so many other rivals?
The former Arkansas governor said it takes hard work, talking to voters every day of every week right up to the Iowa caucuses and New Hampshire primary.
Like Christie, Hutchinson has been notably critical of Trump.
Trump supporters say it doesn't matter what the other candidates do: The former president is going to win in New Hampshire and cruise to the Republican nomination.
He also said there's nothing the other candidates can do about it: "Probably the best thing they can do is endorse Trump and give up."
Right now, they said, too many candidates are splitting the anti-Trump vote; a few GOP candidates should consider pulling a Will Hurd and get behind a single alternative.
CONCORD, N.H. — New Hampshire Democrats aren’t happy with their party over a move to strip the state of its first-in-the-nation primary status, but they’re not necessarily looking for a new one.
With the incumbent Democratic President Joe Biden unlikely to compete in the state’s contest amid the dispute, several national organizations urged Democratic voters in New Hampshire to drop their party affiliation before an October deadline so that they could vote in the state’s Republican primary early next year.
A small group of Democrats, who are based in Washington, D.C., say they canvassed in New Hampshire, too, and texted registered Democrats and unaffiliated voters in the state.
But few Democrats appear to have made the switch — only about 4% changed their party affiliation since August, according to data provided by the New Hampshire’s Secretary of State’s office.
That could be good news for Trump, who maintained an over 20-point lead in the latest USA TODAY/Boston Globe/Suffolk University poll in New Hampshire.
His next nearest rival Nikki Haley polled at 19%, followed by Ron DeSantis at 10%.
Christie was at 6%.
The small drift of Democrats may not impact the results of the primary.
The percentage of voters in each party held at roughly 30%, with 40% registered undeclared.
Overall, the state says it has 879,512 voters, including 265,113 registered Democrats, 269,779 Republicans and 344,620 undeclared voters.
The total number of registered voters in New Hampshire has shrunk since the beginning of August by about 17,000.
But residents of New Hampshire who are not currently registered to vote can still sign up.
New Hampshire residents can register to vote and cast a ballot at their polling place in January on the day of the expected primary.
Many Democratic voters who spoke to USA TODAY said they hadn’t heard of initiatives encouraging Democratic voters to switch affiliations, though some considered it.
She hasn’t decided who she’ll cast her ballot for yet, but said she’s considering Christie, former Vice President Mike Pence and former South Carolina Gov.
“I'm not a Republican, and it feels sort of like a moral betrayal to identify as one for even a split second,” Kane said, noting that he would have cast his ballot for Christie on the Republican side.
“He actually had some trans neutral comments … which made me have some respect for him, which is weird, because I'm from New Jersey,” Kane said.
“If Trump underperforms in New Hampshire, and then he underperformed in a number of states on Super Tuesday, then you would have very much talk of a competitive primary,” said Robert Schwartz, a foreign affairs professional who is spearheading the effort with a few of his friends.
Democrats who do opt to vote in their party’s primary are unlikely to see Biden on the ballot.
Last year, the president recommended a change to the Democratic primary calendar that ripped New Hampshire of its first-in-the-nation status, pushing the state’s primary to Feb. 6, on the same day as Nevada and three days after South Carolina.
State law requires New Hampshire to hold the country’s first primary, and its GOP-run legislature refused to change the statute to accommodate the Democratic National Committee effort.
Current and former Democratic officials in the state are exploring a write-in campaign to keep Biden from losing the first contest of his reelection campaign, and the state party chair, Buckley, poured cold water on the effectiveness of the party-switching campaigns.
“But I don't see it of any significance at all.”
“What is this treasure of a mountain going to become?”
That’s the question everyone's asking concerning the 374-acre property in Colorado that operated as a ski resort from the 1930s to the 1980s.
Formerly called St. Mary’s Glacier Ski Resort, the property was listed for sale on Sept. 19 and currently has an asking price of $7 million.
Part of Clear Creek County, the property is about 45 miles northwest of Denver and borders the Arapaho National Forest.
She is handling the listing along with broker associate Josh Jackson and one other realtor.
“It's a very iconic site,” she said.
It's amazing and surrounded by forest.
The associates are getting 6 to 12 requests per week regarding the former ski resort, including inquiries from large and small developers, entrepreneurs, hospitality companies and private equity firms.
Real estate market:Florida usurps New York to become the 2nd most valuable real estate market, Zillow reports
A couple that owned the property previously used it to run an affordable and accessible ski resort.
The new owners weren’t able to successfully do so and now, they want to sell it.
Jackson, another broker associate handling the sale, said the property is a former ski resort, yes, but the possibilities are endless.
Wisconsin:'What in the Flintstones go to Jurassic Park' is this Zillow Gone Wild featured home?
There’s so much more to it and what it could be.
“We’re selling … acres of pristine mountaintop at between 10,000 feet and about almost 12,000 feet that could be a ski resort,” he said.
It could be a residential development.
He called it a unique business opportunity for whoever buys it, adding that the property allows people to access hundreds of miles of trails, glaciated lakes, mountain peaks and untouched wilderness.
And whoever buys the property will be bound to make some money due to the attached parking lot and the property’s location.
St. Mary’s Glacier has snow on it year-round and is one of the most popular hikes in Colorado, he shared.
“It has a very intense following,” Jackson told USA TODAY.
“We're talking to hundreds, if not in some weeks, thousands of people come up every week to park in the parking lot that we've included in our offering.”
“It just has a lot of history and I think it's fun, seeing the interest that people have,” she said.
“It's kind of fun to see these dreamers and people really trying to paint a picture of, in their minds, what it will be.”
The IRS extended the tax-filing and payment deadline to Nov. 16 for most California taxpayers due to the winter storms earlier this year.
The agency announced the extension on Monday, which was the previous deadline.
Residents living in the 55 qualifying counties including San Francisco, San Bernardino, Los Angeles and San Diego can qualify for IRS relief, the agency said.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency offers reliefs based on three different disaster declarations including severe winter storms, flooding, mudslides and mudslides over a period of several months.
The IRS first extended the federal deadline in January and in March announced California would have their own extension.
It's time to do your taxes:No, really.
Unless you live in California, the final 2022 tax year deadline is Oct. 16.
Residents automatically have their tax deadline pushed to Nov. 16 as long as their address of record shows they live in one of the 55 qualifying California counties, the IRS said.
These residents do not need to provide documentation showing they were impacted by the storms.
According to the IRS, the following returns and payments are eligible:
The IRS previously postponed the deadline in much of California due to extreme weather, as well as parts of Alabama and Georgia.
California endured severe winter weather in early March leading to Gov.
Unusual snowfall and strong winds across the state left some cars are completely buried, snow piled up on roofs and even momentarily trapped residents in their homes in the mountains east of L.A.
Tax relief:IRS offers tax relief, extensions to those affected by Israel-Hamas war
At least not until he found out the car had only 977 miles on the odometer.
DeLorean Midwest specializes in repair, sales and parts distribution for these cult classic cars featured in the "Back to the Future" movie franchise.
He and his business partner Kevin Thomas met with the 90-year-old owner, Dick, in early October, and the trio found the car sunken like buried treasure into the dirt floor of a barn.
The men perused the vehicle, which was covered in about two decades of dust and filled with rodent droppings.
Check car recalls here:Ford and Mercedes-Benz among nearly 250,000 vehicles recalled
Despite the smell and the resident rodents, these DeLorean fans were smiling.
The factory tires were flat, but had plenty of tread left.
“To me, what’s cool about it, is it’s completely original down to the original tires that rolled out of the factory in Belfast, Ireland.”
The dark horse:A new 2024 Ford Mustang, is a sports car for muscle car fans
It will need a good bit of mechanical work, too.
“It’s very rewarding to take a filthy car like this and really transform it,” he said.
“People just want to see it brought back to its full glory.”
However, some can sell for much higher.
Bill Ford on UAW strike:'We can stop this now,' urges focus on nonunion automakers
It usually costs between $1,000 and $1,500 per year to maintain the car.
“It really makes for a unique car,” he said.
“If you could pick one car to sum up the 1980s, the DeLorean is the quintessential car.”
Contact Erik S. Hanley aterik.hanley@jrn.com.
Consumers who purchased certain trash bags over the past five years may be eligible for a share of a class action settlement.
Reynolds Consumer Products settled an Illinois lawsuit against it that alleged that the company mislead consumers by promoting certain Hefty and Great Value trash bags as recyclable when they were not.
The company did not admit fault in the settlement but agreed to pay up to $3 million and either recreate the bags to be recyclable or remove the claim from the product's packaging within six months.
The settlement has been preliminarily approved with a hearing on final approval set for November 15.
Asylum path:Deal would settle key lawsuit against Trump-era policy separating migrant parents from children
Customers who purchased certain Hefty and Great Value trash bags between July 20, 2018, and August 30, 2023, are entitled to a $2 payment per item, according to the settlement.
If a person is claiming less than six items, proof of purchase is not needed but for those who are claiming seven or more items proof of purchase is required.
A person can claim up to 25 items.
Those who wish to file a claim can do so at the settlement website, recyclingbagsettlement.com.
There is a limit of one claim per household, with a max of 25 items per claim, and claims must be filed by December 13.
The deadline to object to or be excluded from the settlement is October 25.
Don't mess with the sauce:Lawsuit claiming 'there is nothing 'Texas' about Texas Pete' hot sauce dismissed
Similar to how it is within the single digits, nine represents endings in numerology.
A new cycle of life may be on its way if you're seeing 999 in your daily life.
These repeating number sequences, known as angel numbers, are used as guides for deeper spiritual exploration.
From zero to nine, each numeral has its own significance.
The angel number 999 is associated with completion.
In this sense, seeing 999 means things in your current situation are coming to an end in order for new opportunities to present themselves.
Is it in the stars?
Free Daily and Monthly Horoscopes
"I always use the phrase 'God's closing doors, but opening windows,' and that is the number nine," said Summers.
There is also a creative and entertaining energy with the number nine, said Summers.
This angel number signals to trust the process of how your life is shaping out, what is meant to be will be, and don't get caught up in the drama.
If you're seeing 999, old loves from this lifetime or another may make reappearances.
"It does not last because it's the completion," said Summers.
Passion is a buzzword for this angel number and as a result, relationships can become very dramatic.
Try to remain emotionally neutral and detached, said Summers.
Be patient with yourself and life.
Maybe that person is not the love of your life after all, and someone new and exciting is coming your way.
"You have to stay calm, relax and allow (the guides) to finish it up for you to work through," said Summers.
Similarly, within your career, the angel number 999 is about accepting the outcome, whatever it may be, said Summers.
Maybe you decide to take a new job, meaning you have to rearrange your daily routine.
Or you are made to transfer offices, meaning you have to meet a new set of coworkers and say goodbye to your old ones.
It may seem like a rocky transition, but this old cycle has come to an end for a reason.
"Take your time as you move into it," said Summers.
"It's kind of a wiggle wobble in the ending."
What does 333 mean?
Get to know the angel number that will help you get unstuck.
The angel number 999 is associated with the hermit card in tarot, which also relates to completeness.
This card represents the understanding and development of personal consciousness and calls to search for the next goal on your spiritual journey.
The number nine is about experiences and allowing them to lead you your highest good and greatest joy.
While it may be hard to trust the path at hand, 999 reminds us to be compassionate and open-hearted to all possibilities.
"Just go with the flow," said Summers.
'Phoenix energy':444 angel number meaning and its role in your life
Even though things may not be going how you want them to or planned them to, do not resist or rebel, said Summers.
Stubbornness can come about with the appearance of 999.
It is key to practice non-resistance, having faith in the nine energy.
"Easy way or hard way, what's going to end is going to end whether you like it or not," said Summers.
It may be time to consider how you acted, what you gained or what didn't serve you in the past.
Take each situation on your journey as a learning experience, as 999 teaches us to reflect and mature.
"Once we have that humility and trust and faith, life only gets better," said Summers.
000 | 111 | 222 | 333 | 444 | 555 | 777 | 888 | 999
Before any number, there is zero.
As a result, in numerology, zero is often associated with potential and possibilities, and all that comes before the changes.
If zeros keep popping up in your life anywhere from receipts to invoices, these appearances may be signaling new opportunities and possibilities.
These repeating number sequences, known as angel numbers, are used as guides for deeper spiritual exploration.
From zero to nine, each numeral has its own significance.
Angel number 000 signals that something is coming and the potential behind this change.
Is it in the stars?
Free Daily and Monthly Horoscopes
"Usually, I see zeros as a pause," said Wilder.
You're gathering supplies or gathering energy.
Maybe you're seeing more job listings on LinkedIn, giving you the push to apply.
Or considering saying "yes" to a friend who won't stop talking about setting you up on a blind date.
Zero often makes appearances prior to the upcoming shifts, rather than signifying they are already underway.
"It's before anything else is happening, zero shows up," said Wilder.
"It's like the seed of life."
The angel number can also mean to slow down and consider your choices before making any decisions.
It emphasizes working things out for a better timeline and weighing your options.
Since 000 is heavily associated with possibility and the unknown, it's important to remember not to fall in love with someone's potential in relationships.
Be sure to assess all sides of forthcoming opportunities, especially when it comes to relationships.
Think of it like trying on new clothes, said Wilder.
Ask yourself questions about what you want out of this new relationship.
List your values, wants and needs.
"Does he like me, or will they pick me?"
"Instead, sometimes the question is, 'Do I like him?'"
The repeating appearance of 000 reminds us to take whatever view you have and flip it.
While your mind may be seeing the potential one way, the universe may be presenting it in another.
'Phoenix energy':444 angel number meaning and its role in your life
Much like in relationships, 000 reminds you to weigh your options in the workplace.
When applying to a new job, remember to adjust your mindset.
Think back to the list of things you want to know about this opportunity.
"Instead of thinking, 'I really got to impress them,' remember to make your little list of things to ask about," said Wilder.
What happened to the last person who had this position?
How long do people usually stay?"
These are good questions to ask.
By doing this, it will help you assess whether this role is worth it.
The angel number 000 allows you to see a situation for what it is worth and the possibilities that come with it, but it also recognizes the value of something as it is, not what it can be.
The endless potential of 000 is a major positive to encountering the angel number, said Wilder.
Just as the universe is infinitely creative, so are the possibilities in your life.
If you are seeing a lot of 000 in your life, the universe if presenting that something better is on its way.
If one door closes, another one will surely open, and that is what 000 reminds us.
"It doesn't really matter if not this thing, then something else," said Wilder.
"If whatever big thing you're working on is not working out, then there must be a better timeline."
While open creativity is wonderful, there's also a downside.
There may be great options coming your way, but there may also be not so great ones.
Don't put your eggs in one basket, said Wilder.
When one opportunity presents itself, do not jump to take it just because it seems the best at the time; a greater one could be coming, you just have to wait.
While zero is infinite, it is also empty, said Wilder.
Without contemplating or considering the situation at hand, you may jump in too early.
Take the time to find your incentive to push you along the journey that the angel number 000 is signaling.
"It needs something else to join it," Wilder said.
000 | 111 | 222 | 333 | 444 | 555 | 777 | 888 | 999
In your life, are things seemingly moving so fast-paced that you don't even have a chance to think?
While this is happening, is the number seven making repetitive and frequent appearances on everything from invoices, receipts to timers?
These repeating number sequences, or angel numbers, can be used as guides for deeper spiritual exploration as each numeral has its own significance.
The angel number 777 is connected to the individual self, said Summers.
Unlike others which are more focused on relationships, such as 222, the angel number 777 is about taking time to focus on yourself and to be alone.
Is it in the stars?
Free Daily and Monthly Horoscopes
This angel number calls you to sit with your actions and ponder things yet to come.
"The number seven is a thinking vibration," said Summers.
"There's also spiritual vibration, and it is a loner vibration."
If you're seeing a lot of repeating sevens, it may be time to slow down and be still.
This can be hard for some people, especially those who are action-driven, said Summers.
However, the angel number 777 has an energy of inner peace and clarity.
"It's all has to do with a slow-down period," she said.
The more you can be alone with your thoughts, the more you may realize you need less in your life, whether it be in your career or even relationships.
The number seven is also associated with the tower card in tarot, which signals to assess who you are and what you should do with the situations at hand.
The appearance of this angel number can signify to make choices within your relationships.
When it comes to 777, it is more about self-improvement, making sure you can find your own identity and worth outside of relationships.
Once you have a good sense of self, you can deal with partnerships, said Summers.
The quietness of the angel number 777 translates to career.
This angel number gives off an analytical and detail-oriented energy when it comes to work.
Writing is also associated with angel number 777, said Summers.
So, it may be time to sit and jot down that new pitch for work or start drafting the novel you always said you wanted to write.
'Phoenix energy':444 angel number meaning and its role in your life
Peace of mind and contentment are two positives associated with the angel number 777, said Summers.
It also has an intuitive energy.
The number is associated with spirituality, more related to getting in touch with your inner self; to raise your own consciousness about what you want and need on your journey.
Seven is related to evolution, growing and changing to reach your full potential.
On the flip side, with the presence of angel number 777, it is easy to want to isolate yourself.
"It is not the best number for relationships," said Summers.
"If (the number 7 is) the person's personality, they'll spend most of their lifetime alone."
While it is good to have alone time, it's also important to not burn bridges or remove yourself completely from others.
Or maybe it’s your computer storage that’s the issue, but you just can’t seem to get rid of sentimental old files.
Zip files to the rescue!
The “compress” function on your computer's operating system helps save space and can transfer files to other computers more efficiently.
You can even password-protect your zip files using a file encryption system to secure them further.
Here’s your guide to creating and working with zip files on both Mac and PC.
Creating the archive file is simple.
Here’s how you can make a zip file from a single folder or from several individual files, according to Microsoft:
Organize your data:How to freeze a row or column in an Excel spreadsheet
Here’s how to make a zip file on a Mac, according to Apple:
This will create a separate file of the original item with a .zip extension.
If you’re compressing a folder, it’ll retain the name of the original file with .zip at the end.
If you’re compressing multiple files, it’ll create a file called “Archive.zip.”
To unzip a single item in the folder, drag it out of the zipped folder to a different location.
If you’re looking to unzip the contents of the folder, right-click and select “Extract All.” From here, you’ll have to confirm the folder you want the files extracted from.
To unzip a compressed item on a Mac, just double-click on the zip file.
According to Apple, you can only open a zip file if you have enough space on your Mac for the item.
Dark mode:Follow these simple steps to change your Mac's appearance
Great news, America.
Criminal defendant and leading GOP presidential primary candidate Donald Trump has something new to whine about – a partial gag order placed on him by the federal judge in his election interference case.
She added: “His political campaign does not give him carte blanche to vilify public servants for simply doing their job.”
I made that all up, but would you be surprised if Trump wrote something similar?
And if you wouldn't be surprised, doesn't that suggest we're facing a serious problem?
Immediately after the ruling, Trump posted on Truth Social: "A TERRIBLE THING HAPPENED TO DEMOCRACY TODAY – GAG ORDER!"
There's little doubt the angry rants will get worse.
Prior to the gag order, Trump had labeled special counsel Jack Smith “a crackhead” and called him “psycho.”
In August, Trump posted what prosecutors viewed as a threat against witnesses, writing: “IF YOU GO AFTER ME, I’M COMING AFTER YOU!”
Prosecutors, in their filing requesting a gag order, wrote that “no other criminal defendant would be permitted to issue public statements insinuating that a known witness in his case should be executed; this defendant should not be, either.”
Judge muzzles Trump:McCarthy booted from House speaker, Trump gagged.
Trump will squeal desperately and claim his free-speech rights are being trampled, but even a low-functioning mollusk would know that’s nonsense.
Trump was president, true.
He isn’t anymore.
Trump is running for president, true.
But that doesn’t give him the freedom to say whatever the hell he wants about people involved in the multiple criminal cases in which he faces 91 state and federal felony charges.
I’m not above the law, you’re not above the law and Trump, sad as it may be for him to learn, is not above the law.
But at least now he has some new material to work with.
Let’s see how long it takes the whiner in chief to violate the judge’s gag order.
I’m guessing it comes in 3, 2, 1 …
The violence in the Middle East has come to the American Midwest in the most gruesome fashion.
It reminds me so much of my two boys when they were his age.
I fear that this is not going to be the only incident of the Israel-Hamas war having violent reverberations in the United States.
The principal of my son’s high school, a large and diverse institution on the north side of Chicago, sent out a message to all families saying she was concerned about violence in the school as a result of the war that began Oct. 7.
At Columbia University in New York, a 24-year-old Israeli student was beaten while hanging flyers condemning the Hamas attack.
Who is going to hold America together?
Because it sure feels like we are coming apart.
For years now we have been dangerously divided over controversial issues such as abortion and LGBTQ+ rights.
Now the conflict in the Middle East is creating new tensions in the United States.
Calling all athletic coaches, hospital nurses, elementary school teachers, high school principals, volunteer managers, small business owners and theater directors.
America is relying on you.
If you have a diverse school or team or staff, they very likely disagree on some fundamental things, such as the conflict in the Middle East.
Without minimizing the importance of their varying loyalties, your role as a leader is to focus their attention on working together on the task at hand, whether that is preparing food at a restaurant or fighting fires together in your community or playing hockey together on a team.
If you need some inspiration on the path of holding America together: Watch "Remember The Titans" starring Denzel Washington.
The movie, released in 2000, takes place in 1971, after T.C.
Williams High School in Alexandria, Virginia, was fully integrated.
The prior year, a Black teenager was killed by a white store clerk over the alleged theft of razor blades, touching off days of race riots.
Tensions were high, and racial injustice ran deep.
Then Black and white high school football players boarded buses to preseason training camp, led by newly appointed Black head coach Herman Boone.
Boone enjoyed telling people that he was not Martin Luther King Jr., Jesus Christ or the Easter Bunny – he was just a football coach.
His job was not to affect the broader racial tensions in the society; it was simply to coach a winning football team.
But to have a winning football team, he needed to make sure that the racial tensions in the society didn’t affect his players.
He paired Black and white athletes together as roommates and required them to learn some facts about one another.
Mostly, he relied on the game of football to teach his players that they needed to work together.
The white offensive linemen better block for the Black quarterback, or he’s not going to have time to throw a pass.
The white receiver better catch the pass from that Black quarterback, or the team is not going to score touchdowns.
The movie is cheesy in parts, but it carries a powerful message: Our society’s strength is in the institutions that bring people of diverse identities and divergent ideologies together to cooperate on concrete activities with common aims.
And it is in the leaders who focus people on the areas of cooperation, even amid our wider conflicts.
So who is going to hold America together?
The answer is: you.
You don’t just have an inspiring Denzel Washington movie on your side; there is academic research supporting this approach.
In the social psychology study called the "Robbers Cave Experiment," researchers found that the best way to dissipate conflict between rival groups was to give them concrete activities on which to cooperate.
They also found that the longer diverse people cooperated, the more their identities shifted: from adversaries to friends.
And that new identities for some can have wider implications for all.
In "Remember The Titans," as the integrated football team wins games, the broader Alexandria community finds its own racial tensions easing.
Black and white families start sitting together in the stands, forming friendships, building a collective identity as Alexandria – not just Black Alexandria and white Alexandria.
It is a picture of America at its best.
We can appreciate this, because we know how ugly the alternative is.
In the most powerful scene in the film, coach Boone takes his team on a grueling early morning run.
They arrive at the destination just as the sun is coming up and are shocked to be looking at gravestones.
It is Gettysburg, the battlefield turned cemetery where tens of thousands of Americans died in one of the most famous battles of the Civil War.
Of course, it was on that same site that President Abraham Lincoln gave the Gettysburg Address, which ended with the famous lines: “This nation, under God, will have a new birth of freedom – and that government of the people, by the people, for the people shall not perish from the earth.”
The American people hail from every race, religion and nation on this earth.
To achieve the goal that President Lincoln placed before us, we need to follow the path of coach Boone and realize that we need to cooperate across our differences, not let them divide us.
I believe the outsized fear of health risks that followed (anthrax, smallpox, West Nile virus, SARS) were tied directly to Americans' newfound vulnerability.
I also pointed out then that, despite our worries, we still lived in a much safer environment than Israel, a country with narrow borders surviving under the constant threats of invasion, rocket fire and suicide bombing.
In Israel, these regular dangers were studied and found to increase risks of depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder, especially in lower-income areas of southern Israel.
Yet, Israelis shouldered on, and visitors (including me), were reassured by the relative calm, business as usual, a regular police and military presence, religious faith and beautiful vistas.
Israel has always been much tougher and more resilient than we have been in America.
Videos of mutilated bodies circulated by Hamas and the discovery of decapitated bodies, which according the Jerusalem Post included babies, have shaken Israel and the world to its core.
A strong and growing military response has started to put salve on the wound as the borders have been re-secured and Gaza is under military assault.
Even so, the wound is deep, and for Israelis it might never fully heal.
They might never feel that they are fully safe again.
For the rest of us, the anxiety drawn from savagery permeates us with no treatment in sight, deteriorating into cycles of worry and anxiety as the Middle East further destabilizes.
As a Jew, I have always resisted any comparisons to the incomparable suffering and dehumanization of the Holocaust.
But the fact is that the atrocities committed by Hamas this month, the inhumanity and depravity, are reminiscent of the Holocaust, although on a much smaller scale.
What to do?
How to heal?
Strong emotions like fear involve the prefrontal cortex and amygdala of the brain.
This fear overrides reason, but it turns out that other strong emotions – including courage, love and empathy – also flow through the same area.
This is why compassion for the victims and for the families who have lost loved ones is the best response, as is courage.
For parents, it is best that you show courage, compassion and love to your children while answering their questions.
It also is helpful at a time like this to continue your daily routine with work and exercise and try to divert yourself from worry with activities that are meaningful and make you laugh.
Volunteering to help if you have useful skills or making donations toward the region's recovery are also therapeutic actions to take.
Perhaps most important during a time such as this is that we can look to leaders who have the strength to guide us.
Whatever you think of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu politically, he is such a leader − at least for now.
He knows that the main tool of terrorists is fear, not bombs, and he won’t succumb to it.
One of the best special operations units in the world, its purpose is to seek out and destroy enemies on their territory.
Terrorists prey on weakness.
He will use force and skill to seek out and destroy Hamas.
If he succeeds, it will help start to heal the psychic wounds.
Israel standing up for itself should inspire courage, not just throughout Israel but anywhere in the world where political agendas are not obfuscating the truth.
Courage and compassion will get us all through.
His latest book is "COVID: The Politics of Fear and the Power of Science."
Follow him on X, formerly Twitter: @DrMarcSiegel
She is part of the nonprofit Mothers of Murdered Columbus Children.
I want to start by saying I love you and I will always love you.
There’s not a day that goes by that I don’t think of you.
It's hard for me to sit here and write this letter knowing the things I’m about to write are the things that I thought about over and over again.
I have honestly questioned myself about if I had something to do with you physically not being here anymore.
March 1, 2004, was the happiest day of my life.
Nineteen years later, April 18, 2023, became the day that will haunt me forever.
It hurts me so bad that I am not able to see you, talk to you, touch you, or even just smell your scent.
Your sisters miss you dearly.
With you not being here there is a piece missing to what was once a perfect puzzle.
When you were little, I did everything possible to shelter you from the negativity of the streets.
I did not allow you to play with toy guns or even play video game that had guns in them.
I wrecked my brain wondering if that was a good idea, or did it just make you more curious later on in life.
Man, I wish you were here to answer.
I kept you active all year-round playing sports, just so you wouldn’t be bored or have idle time on your hands.
I’m sure you would remember coming home not being able to go outside until your homework was complete.
I even went as far as sending you to a Christian school.
I wish you were here to tell me when and where things went wrong.
I promise I tried my best, only to feel defeated in the end.
We would talk daily about things that made you happy, or even things that may have bothered you.
I wish I could ask you what caused you to look at life differently as you got older.
I hate that I’m asking or writing all of these questions, only to get no response.
It bothers me that you were only 19, you were still a kid with a lot more learning and growing to do.
Your life was not the only life that was cut short that night.
That night two other kids’ lives were taken away as well.
I can only be honest with you, and that’s something you know I had no problem with doing.
My life was shattered that night as well as others; it will never be the same.
Never in a million years would I have thought I would’ve had to see you (my one and only son), lying lifeless on a cold ground from night to early morning.
At that moment authorities were unable to tell me if that was you or not.
It is my job as a parent to protect you and that night I was unable to.
Moving forward, I made a vow to keep your name alive by telling your story, better yet “our story,” to other parents and kids.
I want them to know that when it comes to gun violence, there are no rules or exceptions.
As the old folks would say, a bullet has no name on it.
Good, bad, right or wrong, guns kill.
I know that deep in my heart if you were still here you would answer these questions, and we would’ve worked together to change the narrative of our story.
"A true icon and overall amazing human being."
"She was a sweetheart!!!"
Grief is different for everyone, and experts say mourning someone you didn't personally know − a phenomenon called collective or public grief − is a complicated, yet valid, experience.
"Collective and public grief, as I call it, is always unique in how we attach," David Kessler, grief expert and founder of Grief.com, previously told USA TODAY.
This form of grief can be further compounded when the death of a beloved public figure is read about unexpectedly in the news.
"The suddenness of the loss may be too much to process and feel too unreal for a person to immediately grasp."
"However, it is still hard to prepare for anything that is life-altering, whether a person knew it was coming."
More:The Titanic submersible passengers have died.
It's OK to grieve.
You feel close to them like they're your friend or relative.
Just because collective or public grief doesn't match how one might grieve someone close to them, that doesn't make the experience any less real.
"It's a fascinating thing that people don't realize we really can grieve people we didn't know," Kessler added.
"And it doesn't mean we're going to grieve them like our spouse or mother, father, or sister or child, but we will grieve them."
If you're trying to comfort someone going through loss, don't try to minimize it or put a timetable to the grieving process.
If you're going through loss yourself, talk about it.
The deaths of public figures may also serve as opportunities to widen discussions on grief.
"We have a relationship with death that we don't quite know how to explore as a society," Kessler said.
So we know we're all going to die someday, intellectually, but we don't know, is death the great enemy?
Is it the great comforter, when we're in pain?
Contributing: David Oliver and Pamela Avila
You may have heard that the polyphenol curcumin may have beneficial effects on your health.
To your glee, you may have busted out the taco seasoning or whipped out the cumin to create your own blend.
But wait one second.
Curcumin is not the same thing as the spice cumin.
Curcumin is actually the active ingredient in the spice turmeric.
Yes, it is confusing.
So, can curcumin or turmeric help our health?
To understand curcumin, we first need to understand polyphenols.
Polyphenols are compounds found in many plant foods, and they generally act as antioxidants, which can help protect the plants (and subsequently, those who eat the plants) from cell damage.
It actually gives turmeric that beautiful golden color that everyone loves.
More:Turmeric has many purported health benefits.
Does science back any of them up?
While curcumin is found inside of turmeric, they are not the same thing.
That’s a mouthful!
Curcumin's (and turmeric’s) claim to fame is its effect on inflammation.
It has been studied and shown to help with things like colitis and arthritis.
Although there can be some benefits, there are also some drawbacks.
The Micronutrient Information Center at the Linus Pauling Institute at Oregon State University says that the therapeutic potential for curcumin may be limited by poor bioavailability, or the ability to be absorbed by the body, particularly as an oral supplement.
You may have seen this spice on menus from around the globe.
It’s an especially popular addition to grains like rice or flavorful curries.
Its earthy and slightly sweet flavor adds a unique zest that makes you crave more and more.
Adding it to your cooking results in a beautiful golden color that makes for an eye-popping presentation.
You may have guessed it: saffron.
Given saffron’s range in cuisines from all over the world, many have questions about it.
What is saffron?
Why is it so expensive?
Does it offer nutritional value?
According to the Food Network, saffron is commonly found in Indian, Moroccan and Iranian cuisines, but its influence is found in European dishes as well, like Spanish paella or Italian risotto.
The part of the flower that is used to make the spice is the reddish-brown threads found in the flower.
Nussbaum says it’s expensive because of how it’s harvested.
“It's super, super expensive and that's because it's actually from the stigma of a flower, and it’s really difficult to harvest,” she explains.
“You need people to actually pull it (the saffron threads) off individually,” she adds.
There is also the issue of supply and demand.
Saffron is largely grown in Greece, Iran, Morocco and India, so it’s expensive to import it here to the United States.
Some groups have historically used saffron for its sedative effects, to treat muscle spasms, to aid in digestion and more.
In Western medical practice, it’s unlikely that your healthcare provider will recommend saffron to treat a particular illness or disease but rather to supplement a healthy, well-rounded diet.
However, this doesn’t mean that saffron doesn’t have properties that are beneficial for your health.
Like many spices, it contains vital antioxidants.
“It is known to be an antioxidant, but it also has been studied as a potential antidepressant – which I find so fascinating, that gut-brain connection,” says Nussbaum.
“It’s also supposed to potentially aid in memory,” she adds.
More research is needed to understand the potential therapeutic benefits of saffron – but for now, you have the go-ahead to add it to your favorite recipe.
Turmeric health benefits:Does science back any of them up?
Whenever one experiences growth hormones, peptide hormones, thyroid hormones, stress hormones or sex hormones, the body's chemical messengers play a key role in many essential bodily functions and make a big difference in how we feel both emotionally and physically.
Testosterone, for instance, is a sex hormone that affects muscle mass, bone density, mood, body composition, libido, cognitive function and one's immune system, per research available at the National Library of Medicine.
Testosterone is essential in the development of male growth, but it's also present in the ovaries and adrenal glands of women.
Due to its many important functions in the body, it can be helpful to have one's testosterone levels checked with a blood test if anything feels amiss.
Signs and symptoms that could indicate diminished testosterone levels in men or women include frequent feelings of melancholy, sluggishness or tiredness, muscle weakness, decreasing sexual desire, sexual performance issues, or reduced sexual satisfaction.
In women, low testosterone can also affect menstrual cycles and the frequency of periods.
Additional signs of low testosterone include a loss of body hair since testosterone promotes body hair growth.
Diminished testosterone levels can also affect one's ability to build and store muscles; low testosterone can cause one to gain fat instead and lead to sudden weight gain.
Such symptoms can be as disconcerting as they are common.
Low testosterone levels affect about one in every four men over the age of 30, according to one report.
And though less common in women since a woman's main sex hormones are estrogen and progesterone, women can and often do also experience lower-than-normal levels of testosterone as well.
In case you missed:Men often struggle with penis insecurity.
But no one wants to talk about it.
Testosterone levels can be increased several ways – some natural and some that require medical intervention.
The natural ways of increasing testosterone levels include improved sleep, decreasing one's stress levels, a diet that includes plenty of protein, zinc and vitamin D and getting more exercise.
Indeed, one study showed that increased physical activity was more beneficial than calorie restriction alone for increasing testosterone levels.
Resistance training has also been shown to boost testosterone levels.
Such benefits can be multiplied when they also mean dropping weight for people dealing with obesity.
When it comes to medical interventions, there are a host of testosterone creams, supplements, and even injectables available – but the experts warn to use them with caution.
There are times, however, when testosterone therapy will be recommended by a physician for men or for women, sometimes for different reasons.
"Testosterone can be administered to these women who are diagnosed with this (HSDD) postmenopausal-related decline in sexual interest," she says.
She adds that in such cases, when testosterone therapy is elected for women, clinicians often use only about 1/10 the dose of preparations approved for men since women produce and need significantly less testosterone than men in the first place.
Such risks and side effects include acne or other skin reactions, a worsening of sleep apnea symptoms, enlarged breasts or a stimulating of a noncancerous growth of the prostate, increased risk of blood clot formations or even an increased risk of heart disease, per Mayo Clinic.
Dr. Andrew Greenberg, director of the Obesity and Metabolism Laboratory at the Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, says that for these reasons and others, he recommends caution when considering the use of testosterone therapy.
"One needs to consult a physician who has experience in endocrinology and testosterone therapy if wanting to do this," he suggests.
More on testosterone:What does testosterone do?
Many people don't understand this one thing about it.
More celebrities are reacting to the war between Israel and the Palestinian militant group Hamas, where the death toll on both sides surpassed 4,000 on Monday, with thousands more wounded.
Meanwhile, the Academy Museum Gala postponed its annual fundraiser, and a red carpet for the upcoming Sofia Coppola film "Priscilla" has been canceled.
Last week, over 700 actors, comedians, musicians, and power players of the Hollywood community signed an open letter denouncing Hamas' "barbaric acts of terrorism" in Israel and calling for the return of hostages.
Here's what more celebrities are saying.
"These are indefensible war crimes," he continued.
"We need to put ourselves in the shoes of the people of Gaza, now, before we all walk past the point of no return."
The "Sound of Metal" actor also denounced the actions of Hamas, calling the attack "horrific and wrong."
Pink, who is currently on the North American leg of her Summer Carnival tour, claimed in an X post that she has received "many threats" from people who mistook Poi flags displayed at her live shows for Israeli flags.
The singer clarified that the flags "were used many, many years ago by the Māori people in New Zealand and because they and the Māori people are beautiful to me, we use them."
"I have been using Poi flags since the beginning of this tour," she said.
I believe in peace.
I am deeply saddened by the state of the world.
The war has caused reverberations in Hollywood, too.
On Oct. 12, the Academy Museum of Motion Pictures in Los Angeles announced the red carpet for its annual fundraising gala on Oct. 14 would be canceled "out of respect for the devastating conflict and loss of life happening overseas."
"The Academy Museum condemns all forms of hate and cruelty and stands in support of innocent Israeli and Palestinian lives affected by the ongoing violence," the museum's statement reads.
Meryl Streep, Oprah Winfrey, Michael B. Jordan and Sofia Coppola were set to be honored at the event.
"Out of respect for the events going on in the world, we will be forgoing a red carpet for the 'Priscilla' Los Angeles premiere," the studio said in an email to the press.
One of the world's most enduring and intractable conflicts connects to a century of competing claims to land, borders and rights in a region of deep historical and religious significance.
The United Nations in 1947 tried to divide the-then British Mandate of Palestine into separate Arab and Jewish states.
A year later, when the state of Israel was created, the first Arab-Israeli War broke out.
Ever since Israel's victory and following several other wars, Palestinians have gradually been displaced from territory that they also see as their rightful homeland.
Gal Gadot, Jamie Lee Curtis among700 entertainers denouncing Hamas' terrorism in open letter
Happy National Boss Day — but don't tell Bruce Springsteen.
He hates being called the Boss.
Her boss was also her dad.
Springsteen was called the Boss by bandmates even before he became famous.
The Boss was in charge, on stage and off.
Before and after shows, Springsteen was the main guy.
“My recollection was the Boss was a result of paying (band members and crew) at the end of the week,” said Springsteen to Mark Hagen for Mojo in 1999.
I hate being called 'Boss' (laughs).
I just do.
Always did from the beginning.
I hate bosses.
National Boss Day comes a few weeks after New Jersey residents celebrated Bruce Springsteen Day, which saw the singer turning 74 years old.
Springsteen and the E Street Band are taking a break from their tour as the "Born to Run" singer is being treated for symptoms of peptic ulcer disease.
Earlier this month, the band announced the new dates for this fall's rescheduled U.S. shows, which will take place in March and April as well as August and September 2024.
"I'm on the mend":Bruce Springsteen postpones all 2023 concerts to treat peptic ulcer disease
The Dallas Cowboys are bringing in a country music legend to perform at their Thanksgiving halftime show this year.
Dolly Parton will take the stage for the Cowboys' annual Thanksgiving Day halftime show, according to an announcement from the team.
The announcement, which was a video posted to social media Monday morning, showed a group of cheerleaders adding sequins to a football and helmet before cutting to Parton herself, decked out in Cowboys gear.
Salvation Army is the sponsor of the annual Red Kettle Kickoff halftime show the Cowboys have put on during every Thanksgiving game they've played for the last 27 years.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
NFL halftime shows:Usher is the latest to headline a star-studded list of Super Bowl halftime shows
My goal is to encourage everyone who can to donate and support their neighbors in need.
The Salvation Army's Red Kettle Campaign began in 1891 to raise money to help feed those in need during the holiday season, according to The Salvation Army's website.
It will feature collaborations from numerous rock legends, including Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr of The Beatles, Sting, Stevie Nicks and more.
Parton will also cover several classic rock songs on the record.
The album is slated to release with 30 tracks.
The country music superstar has released four promotional singles ahead of the album's Nov. 17 release: "World on Fire," "Magic Man," "Bygones," "We Are the Champions"/"We Will Rock You," "Let It Be," and "What's Up?"
The Cowboys have hosted a game on Thanksgiving Day every year since 1966, with the only exceptions being 1975 and 1977, when the then-St. Louis Cardinals hosted instead.
The Red Kettle Kickoff Halftime Show has been a tradition at the Cowboys' Thanksgiving games for the last 27 years, and an interesting trend has emerged regarding the halftime performers.
When a country artist is invited to perform at the Thanksgiving halftime show, the Cowboys are 4-10.
When the performer is a pop star, Dallas is 7-2, including last year, when the Jonas Brothers performed.
The Cowboys are 32-22-1 all-time on Thanksgiving Day.
Their opponents this year, the Commanders, are 4-8 all-time in Thanksgiving Day matchups.
NFL Week 6 winners and losers:Lions look like legit contender, Giants trip themselves up
Oasis frontman Liam Gallagher is going on tour to celebrate the 30th anniversary of the British rock band's 1994 debut album, "Definitely Maybe," the lead vocalist announced in a statement released on Instagram Monday.
"I'm bouncing around the house to announce the Definitely Maybe tour," read the statement.
The monthlong tour around the United Kingdom kicks off in Sheffield, England, in June 2024.
The tour will include performances of the tracks "Whatever," "Fade Away," "Listen Up," and "Sad Song."
USA TODAY has reached out to the band's representatives for comment.
Oasis unexpectedly disbanded in 2009, when Gallagher's brother, Noel Gallagher, chief songwriter and lead guitarist, left the group.
Noel Gallagher went on to form his own group, Gallagher's High Flying Birds, while the remaining members of Oasis briefly continued as Beady Eye.
Until now, the band has denied ever reuniting.
However, on Live Nation, where tickets for the tour go on sale Friday, Liam Gallagher is listed as the performer, not Oasis.
This summer, Noel Gallagher was asked at a live Q&A who would be on a hypothetical reunion tour.
Fans who find themselves in the United Kingdom next year can get tickets for the "Definitely Maybe" anniversary tour at 4 a.m.
Tickets are available on Live Nation at livenation.co.uk, which lists Liam Gallagher as the performer, across 12 dates in Sheffield, England; Cardiff, Wales; London; Manchester, England; and Glasgow, Scotland.
Tests apparently ruled out internal injuries.
“So that’s good news.”
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Every bit of integrity the International Olympic Committee had is going to be in shreds by the time Thomas Bach walks out the door.
The IOC’s despot has already debased the Games he so claims to love with his devotion to Vladimir Putin and refusal to do anything while Russia blatantly undercuts the principles of the Olympic movement time and again.
Under the current Olympic charter, which Bach himself helped write, the IOC president can serve a maximum of 12 years.
Bach was first elected, to an eight-year term, in September 2013, then re-elected for four more years in 2021.
Which means his tenure as president should end in September 2025, following the election of a new president.
But lo and behold, some “concerned” IOC members raised the idea Sunday of Bach staying beyond the term limits.
It would require the Olympic charter to be rewritten and for a key anti-corruption measure enacted after the Salt Lake City bid scandal to be removed.
But what’s a little banana republic governance when it’s to Bach’s benefit!
This reasoning, if you can call it that, is nonsensical.
Or Los Angeles in 2028?
Or Brisbane in 2032?
Or … you get the picture.
And if the preparations for Paris are so fraught the IOC can’t possibly spare the mental bandwidth for an election, whose fault is that?
If the city isn’t ready, that’s on Bach, and is further reason to move on from him, not keep him around even longer.
There also hasn’t been a parade of IOC members declaring their wish to be the Olympic governing body’s next president.
And unlike Bach, he’s been steadfast in holding Russia accountable for its many transgressions against the Olympic movement.
He was similarly tough in Tokyo, when fewer than a dozen Russian athletes were cleared to compete.
The only resolve Bach has shown is to sell out the Olympics at every turn.
Imagining and implementing a sophisticated doping program to rig the medal count, as Russia did, goes against everything the Olympics represent.
So, too, its blatant defiance of sanctions that were already laughably light.
But not for Bach!
There’s no sin by Putin and Russia he can’t forgive.
China has a well-documented history of abusing human rights, and its treatment of the Uyghur population in Xinjiang has been characterized as genocide.
The Winter Olympics in Beijing made a mockery of the IOC’s supposed priority of sustainability.
To Bach, however, President Xi Jinping and China were ideal partners!
Being the IOC president is a political job, yes.
But it’s also a sacred trust.
The Olympics are supposed to represent the best of humanity and remind us what we’re capable of when we strive for greatness and refuse to accept the limitations put on us.
The IOC, and its president in particular, have no greater responsibility than to foster and protect that environment.
Maybe Bach believed in that mission once, but his actions since taking office have repeatedly betrayed both the ideals behind the Olympics and the people whose sweat and sacrifice make them so awe-inspiring.
He’s done enough damage, and doesn’t deserve the chance to do more.
Aaron Rodgers, offensive consultant?
While he may still be recovering from a ruptured left Achilles tendon, the New York Jets quarterback has been a steady presence around the team and reportedly even offered suggestions to the team's coaching staff during New York's 20-14 upset victory Sunday against the Philadelphia Eagles.
According to the Athletic, Rodgers wore a headset during the game and was communicating with coaches as backup Zach Wilson led New York's offense.
The Jets still struggled to move the ball, converting only two-of-11 third-down attempts, collecting just 244 total yards of offense (the Eagles gained 348) and recording 17 first downs, compared to Philadelphia's 24.
A lot of people that I have talked to − I won't name names but who have also had it − that everyone is in awe that he is even walking.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
NEVER MISS A SNAP: Sign up for our NFL newsletter for exclusive content
Wilson completed 19-of-33 passes for 186 yards in the victory.
He has shown some marginal improvements this season, by and large avoiding costly mistakes.
Still, for New York to be consistently competitive in Rodgers' absence, it will need Wilson to take strides.
"I think he was mostly in there talking to the coaches," Wilson said of Rodgers after the game.
"Obviously, my headset is just with (offensive coordinator Nathaniel Hackett), but it's always good having him around."
Rodgers, 39, was traded to the Jets in April after he spent 18 seasons with the Green Bay Packers, becoming the longest-tenured player in franchise history.
The college basketball season tips off in just a few weeks.
In anticipation of that, we bring you the preseason USA TODAY Sports coaches poll, presented in conjunction with the National Association of Basketball Coaches.
While preseason rankings often prove to be an imperfect measure of future success, they do offer a look at which programs are viewed as having the most talent.
As such, one might expect to see a lot of familiar schools named in the Top 25.
That is true, but there are also some relative upstart programs that made a big splash a few months ago in March Madness.
Kansas, one of those perennial powers, will open the year at No.
The Jayhawks were voted first by 23 of the 32 panelists.
It will be the first preseason No.
1 ranking for Kansas since 2018, and its fifth since USA TODAY began administering the coaches poll in the 1991-92 season.
Purdue opens at No.
2, its highest ever preseason spot in the coaches poll.
The Boilermakers received five first-place votes, with three more No.
1 nods going to Duke.
The Blue Devils will start at No.
3, followed by No.
4 Michigan State.
TOP 25: Complete preseason USA TODAY Sports men's basketball poll
OUTLOOKS:In-depth previews for every team in the preseason Top 25
The final first-place vote went to defending national champion Connecticut, which will begin at No.
All of last season’s Final Four teams are in the preseason poll, headed by the Huskies.
That group includes Florida Atlantic, on the heels of its surprising run to the last weekend of the season as a No.
9 regional seed.
The Owls were voted No.
9 for their first ever preseason ranking.
13 and 15 respectively.
Kansas heads a list of four representatives of the expanded Big 12 in the preseason rankings.
The list also includes league newcomer Houston at No.
6 as well as No.
17 Baylor and No.
The Big East also claims four spots, with No.
7 Marquette and No.
The SEC has the most team in the Top 25 with five, headed by No.
Southwest Airlines wants to make it easier for you to get status in its Rapid Rewards program.
Beginning Jan. 1, it’s lowering the threshold to qualify for A-List and A-List preferred status.
According to the airline, the new requirements will be 20 qualifying one-way flights for A-List status, down from 25, and 40 qualifying one-way flights for A-List Preferred status, down from 50.
“At a time when other programs, plural, are making it harder to achieve tier status, we’re making it easier.”
Southwest is also lowering the spend-to-earn threshold on its co-branded credit cards.
Other frequent flyer programs have seen a swelling of their elite ranks in recent years, diluting the benefits for some loyal travelers, but Clarkson said he’s not concerned about a similar scenario unfolding at Southwest.
“It will result in a larger program we anticipate, but not to the point where it erodes the benefit of the people who get to take advantage of it.”
Cruising Altitude:Don't bother with an airline loyalty program if you're this traveler
The airline announced other changes to Rapid Rewards benefits as well, including the option to book tickets using a combination of cash and points.
Previously, Southwest tickets had to be purchased using all cash or exclusively points.
Clarkson said A-List Preferred members will also be entitled to up to two free alcoholic drinks per flight.
He added that vouchers for those drinks will be embedded in the passenger’s boarding pass scanner code, rather than travelers needing to present physical certificates onboard.
Customer feedback has been positive about the changes so far, according to Clarkson.
“We have a program we want people to use and get the benefit of.”
JetBlue, Frontier Airlines and Alaska Airlines all moved to capitalize on Delta’s unpopular changes to their loyalty program by enticing flyers with generous matching programs.
You can reach him at zwichter@usatoday.com
Staples is probably not the first place you think of when planning a trip, but the office supply giant is actively trying to change that.
According to a press release, the place you go to get your school supplies wants to become “the first stop of nonstop travel,” in large part by letting you register for TSA PreCheck on site.
“Whether you need a passport expedited, want a hassle-free way to sign up for TSA PreCheck, or simply need to snap a few passport photos, we’re here to support both leisure and business travelers in an increasingly major way.”
Grayson said Staples sales associates at participating stores are credentialed through the Department of Homeland Security and the Transportation Security Administration to process PreCheck applications, including taking your fingerprints.
Cruising Altitude:Don't bother with an airline loyalty program if you're this traveler
TSA PreCheck enrollment is available at many non-airport sites across the country, and you can check for the locations nearest to you by clicking here.
Travelers with PreCheck can take advantage of expedited lines at TSA checkpoints and typically don’t have to remove their shoes while going through security.
You can reach him at zwichter@usatoday.com
In 2022, the average honeymoon cost $5,100, according to a study of over 12,000 couples by wedding website The Knot.
To cover the trip, most couples said they used their own savings and some set up a honeymoon fund as part of their wedding registry.
The average rate for the two Greek hotels is up to $503 and $978 a night, respectively.
But the couple didn't have to pay that in cash.
They were able to use points already accumulated with Ricky’s family’s The Marriott Vacation Clubs timeshare to cover these two resorts.
Learn more: Best travel insurance
Today, over half of timeshare owners are Gen Z and millennials and the average age of a timeshare owner is 39, according to a 2022 report by the American Resort Development Association.
Not all of these owners are inheriting their timeshares either – 53% of millennials and Gen Z account for new sales purchases.
For The Marriott Vacation Clubs, over 66% of first-time buyers are under the age of 42.
Here’s how timeshares evolved and why they are appealing to younger Americans:
More:We’re among the first guests at the Villas at Disneyland Hotel.
See what we found.
Many younger Americans work remotely these days, opening the door to more flexible travel schedules.
Timeshares have also turned more customizable and robust, according to the Resort Development Association.
For those who want to travel each year and can afford it now – the average purchase price for a new buyer is $22,000 – timeshares could save them money in the long run.
“Knowing you can go anywhere in the world with the same top service helps ease the stress of travel.”
Timeshares now often include more than just a week in the same destination.
They offer cruises, guided tours, houseboat rentals, off-property outdoor adventures and more.
You can even get in on specialty packages for events like The NHL Stanley Cup Program, which includes hotel accommodations (with daily breakfast), a rental car and two tickets to one of the final games.
Some timeshares, such as The Marriott Vacation Clubs, can even be exchanged for airline miles or to book rental cars.
For some travelers who are especially brand-loyal, timeshares can ensure you’re enjoying your favorite service and amenities.
“Timeshares can also feel more approachable for younger generations than other potential options such as purchasing a vacation home in one destination or saving for each vacation on a year-by-year basis,” Brian Miller, president of Vacation Ownership, Marriott Vacations Worldwide, told USA TODAY.
Instead of a single fixed week or a floating week, some companies now go by a point-based system.
The points work similarly to airline miles in that they can also be banked or used in advance one year into the future.
If you still don’t have enough points, you can purchase additional points to lock that dream vacation in.
The Marriott Vacation Club's timeshare owners can use their points at any traditional Marriott hotel or property within The Marriott Vacation Club's portfolio, which includes over 90 destinations, plus those more unique experiences mentioned above.
Hilton Grand Vacation Club and Disney Vacation Club also function on a similar points-based system.
There's a common notion that timeshares lose value over time and are very difficult to get out of.
While timeshares do offer the opportunity to travel each year, they won’t appreciate in value – unlike investing in a vacation home.
Plus, there are annual fees, which are usually around $1,000 on average, according to the Resort Development Association.
The Marriott Vacation Club offers various ways for owners to get out of their timeshares for whatever reason – but sometimes those come at a fee.
The company has a resale program, which offers guidance to help them plan their timeshare exit, Miller said.
If an owner has no outstanding fees or balances, there are fee-less options like a deed back and listing program, where the company will act as the broker on the owner’s behalf.
Those broker fees are deducted from closing proceeds, so the owner doesn’t have to pay anything in advance.
That being said, the resale market for timeshares is competitive and a buyer’s market.
Other programs, like the Disney Vacation Club, sometimes ask for a first right of refusal for buybacks.
You’ll also want to make sure you can afford those annual maintenance fees, which can increase over time if the company chooses to do so.
Kathleen Wong is a travel reporter for USA TODAY based in Hawaii.
You can reach her at kwong@usatoday.com
The undertow and the waves.
UPDATE: This story has been updated with news that within hours of publication of USA TODAY's investigation, MSU suspended Coach Mel Tucker without pay.
Two years ago, one of the nation’s star college football coaches and a prominent rape survivor teamed up to fight the culture of sexual violence in sports.
Their partnership should have been a force for good.
Instead, it has devolved into scandal, with the activist accusing the coach of the same misconduct that both of them preached against.
Accusing him is Brenda Tracy, a rape survivor who has made educating athletes about sexual violence her life’s work.
Over eight months, they developed a professional relationship centered on her advocacy work.
Tucker invited Tracy to campus three times – twice to speak to his players and staff and once to be recognized as an honorary captain at the team's spring football game.
But their relationship was upended during a phone call on April 28, 2022, Tracy says in a complaint she filed with the university’s Title IX office in December that remains under investigation.
According to her complaint, Tracy sat frozen for several minutes while Tucker made sexual comments about her and masturbated.
His violation, she said, reopened 25-year-old wounds from her rape by four men – two Oregon State University football players, a junior college player and a high school recruit.
“The idea that someone could know me and say they understand my trauma but then re-inflict that trauma on me is so disgusting to me, it’s hard for me to even wrap my mind around it,” she told USA TODAY.
“It’s like he sought me out just to betray me.”
In his statements to the Title IX investigator, Tucker acknowledged masturbating on the call but said Tracy grossly mischaracterized the episode.
According to him, they had consensual “phone sex.”
Michigan State hired an outside Title IX attorney to investigate the complaint.
She finished her investigation in July.
A formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated the school’s policy banning sexual harassment and exploitation is scheduled for Oct. 5 and 6, during the Spartans’ bye week.
The stakes are high for everyone.
Tracy says Tucker is following through on a threat to ruin her career and reputation by painting her as a woman who mixes professional and personal relationships and files false reports.
She fears he will undo her legacy.
Tucker, who signed one of the most lucrative contracts in college sports history two years ago, could lose out on the roughly $80 million he is owed if Michigan State fires him for cause, which would be a stunning fall from the elite ranks of college coaches.
Reached by USA TODAY on his cellphone Saturday night, Tucker hung up after a reporter mentioned the case.
Hours after USA TODAY published its investigation, the university suspended Tucker without pay, pending a resolution of the Title IX case.
“This step, suspending Mel Tucker without pay, is … necessary and appropriate for today's circumstances,” Interim President Teresa Woodruff said at a Sunday evening press conference.
“These actions are not taken lightly.”
USA TODAY typically does not identify people who allege sexual harassment.
Tracy agreed to be identified and shared more than 1,200 pages of case documents.
Title IX, the federal law banning sex discrimination in education, requires schools to investigate allegations of sexual harassment that took place in the context of a school program or activity.
Such claims are inherently difficult to adjudicate because of many of the factors at issue in this case: a lack of eyewitnesses and recordings, the passage of time and the thorniness of litigating consent.
Adding to the uncertainty, the institution tasked with sorting out the facts is perhaps best known for missing repeated opportunities to stop one of the most prolific sexual abusers in American history.
Gymnastics and campus physician accused of sexually assaulting more than 300 female athletes under the guise of medical treatments.
He has been sentenced to a minimum of 100 years in prison.
Amid its efforts to rebuild trust among students, employees, alumni and the East Lansing community, Michigan State's leaders must now decide whether the face of its prestigious football program is guilty of sexually harassing one of the country’s most influential advocates against gender-based violence.
For some, how the university navigates the crisis will send a clear message about its commitment to progress.
“This goes beyond coach Tucker and Brenda Tracy,” said Jennifer Gomez, a Boston University professor who researches the effects of interpersonal trauma and violence.
“What happens here has the potential to be very healing or very harmful for lots and lots and lots of other people.”
Tracy and Tucker met in August 2021 during her first visit to Michigan State, after a mutual acquaintance introduced them.
Standing before a packed auditorium in the Spartans’ football operations building, Tracy told a gut-wrenching story of turning her pain into purpose two decades after filing a police report saying she had been gang-raped as a 24-year-old mother of two.
At the end, she challenged the “good men” in the room to use their privilege and influence to educate themselves and call out bad behavior.
By then she had delivered versions of the speech more than 100 times to at least 40,000 athletes and coaches.
Michigan State paid her a $10,000 speaking fee.
Tucker was in his second season as head coach.
A former University of Wisconsin-Madison defensive back, he had spent two decades coaching defenses for 10 college and NFL teams before landing the top job at the University of Colorado in late 2018.
Michigan State lured him away a year later by doubling his salary.
Mel Tucker's career at Michigan State: A timeline
Tucker and Tracy “hit it off” immediately, they would both later tell the Title IX investigator.
They bonded over their love of Jordan sneakers, shelves of which lined Tucker’s office walls.
Tucker had been moved by her speech, and she had been a big hit with players, he told the investigator.
They discussed her coming back to campus in the future.
Tracy left East Lansing feeling she had found a champion in Tucker, she told the investigator.
He seemed engaged with her cause, leading his players in signing her pledge to, among other things, obtain “ongoing, affirmative consent” before engaging in sexual acts with another person.
During that time, the two also talked on the phone at least 27 times, Tracy’s phone bills show – an average of once every two weeks for a half hour.
They often spoke at night to accommodate their work schedules, they said.
They chatted about their jobs and eventually more personal matters, such as their families, mental health and daily lives.
In November, Michigan State signed him to an unprecedented 10-year, $95 million deal that came fully guaranteed, even if it fired him for poor performance.
The only way he could lose out on the money, the contract said, was if he materially breached it, was convicted of a crime or engaged in “conduct which, in the University’s reasonable judgment, would tend to bring public disrespect, contempt or ridicule on the University.”
It was around then that Tucker, who had been married for more than two decades, started becoming interested in Tracy romantically, they both told the investigator.
Whether Tracy reciprocated is where their accounts diverge.
Tucker told the investigator that he and Tracy developed a romantic connection and talked openly about it.
They frequently made flirtatious comments about each other’s looks and bodies, Tucker said.
Tracy told him she wanted a “sugar daddy” who would pay her a monthly amount to be his girlfriend, he said, and that she would be “all over” him if he wasn’t married.
Tucker said they had acknowledged their mutual desire for a romance but agreed it would be “too messy” because of his marriage and the physical distance between them.
By contrast, Tracy told the investigator that Tucker’s romantic interest in her was entirely one-sided.
She said she came to feel he was less interested in her cause than in her.
Tucker messaged her photos of herself that he had found on her Instagram page, making comments such as, “This is the one,” or complimenting her eyes, Tracy said.
Once, Tucker called Tracy via FaceTime.
He was in bed, shirtless.
He talked about his unhappy marriage, describing himself as “more or less single.” Then, during a Nov. 9, 2021, call, she said he asked her, “If I wasn’t a football coach and if I wasn’t married, would you date me?”
Tracy said she responded that she would not because they worked together – one of several times she recalled trying to set boundaries.
She said she made clear to Tucker on a Dec. 1 call that they would only be friends, and he seemed to agree.
Then, after the spring game, Tucker called her four times, phone records show.
Tracy said he repeatedly asked her to meet him alone, without her assistant, and even suggested slipping into her hotel through a back door so no one would see him.
She said no.
Twelve days later came the call.
Tracy was in her home office in Oregon.
Tucker, who was in a hotel in Florida, called her at 12:39 a.m. EST, phone records show.
The call lasted 36 minutes.
According to Tucker, he became aroused when Tracy made a comment about needing to hit the gym more to look better without clothes on.
“Unequivocally, there’s no doubt about it,” Tucker told the investigator, case documents show.
“She was the one who said we’ll do it.”
Tracy denies all of that.
The call started off normal, she said.
But when she sent Tucker a photo of them together from the spring game, she said he responded by commenting on her buttocks and calling himself an “ass man.”
She remembered Tucker’s voice getting deeper and weirder as he continued talking about her buttocks.
She asked him what he was doing, and he said he had a “hard dick” and was touching himself.
“You’re touching yourself?” Tracy asked, according to the investigation report.
Tucker responded, “Yes.”
Tracy said she thought to herself, "Oh my god, this is happening, and I can’t stop it."
Eventually she said something along the lines of, “If you do this, I don’t ever want to hear about it, we are only friends, that’s it.”
When he finished, Tracy said, Tucker told her, “Thank you, good night, sweetheart.” She responded, “Yeah,” and he hung up.
Then she sat at her desk for a while, staring at her phone and crying.
Three months passed between the call and the next time Tracy and Tucker spoke.
At first, Tracy tried to pretend to herself that nothing had happened.
Tucker, however, was not responding to her text messages.
And he abruptly canceled her in-person training, planned for July 25, three days before it was supposed to take place.
A team staffer told her they had double-booked, but Tracy believed she knew the real reason.
When Tracy finally got Tucker on the phone about a week later, he was angry, she said, accusing her and her assistant of gossiping about his marital problems.
Tracy recalled that Tucker made comments such as, “I can’t trust you,” “If you say anything about this, I’ll hear about it,” and “I’ll be fine, it’s you that I am worried about.” She viewed it as a threat to destroy her reputation if she spoke out about him.
Tucker at one point told her he had done nothing wrong.
According to Tracy, she started to say, “Well, something…” referring to his masturbation, and Tucker interrupted, saying, “But nothing happened.”
Tucker recalled the Aug. 2 phone call much differently.
He told the investigator that Tracy apologized to him for discussing his marriage with her assistant, and he accepted.
Although they ended the call on good terms and discussed postponing her visit until next year, Tucker said he had lost trust in Tracy.
The training was never rescheduled, and they never spoke again.
Tracy initially stayed quiet about Tucker for the sake of her career, she said.
Ultimately, she decided that if she let it slide, she wouldn’t be the person she claimed to be – the one who encourages people to speak up about sexual misconduct and hold others accountable.
She filed her complaint in December – eight months after the call.
In dry and bureaucratic language, the record of that complaint begins: “The specific allegations of prohibited conduct against Respondent are as follows …” A notification was delivered to Tucker the following day.
Tucker was “absolutely shocked,” he would tell the university’s investigator.
In subsequent correspondence, he and his attorney suggested Tracy’s motive: She held a vendetta against Spartans athletics because of its history of sexual misconduct scandals and falsely accused him for financial gain.
“To say that I have learned from this situation is an understatement,” Tucker wrote in a letter to the investigator on March 22.
“I will never again allow myself to be duped by kindness.”
A former Indiana sex crimes prosecutor who now heads a private practice, she also previously worked in the Title IX offices at Michigan State and the University of Michigan.
Jacqueline Swanson, Tracy’s attorney who is also her friend, turned over a copy of the notes she took from their conversation on a yellow legal pad.
She shared a screenshot of a Dec. 2 text message in which Tracy told her she had just spoken with Tucker, who had agreed they could only be friends.
“I’m glad it didn’t get weird,” Tracy wrote.
Tracy provided phone bills and emails that corroborated her timeline of events and showed Tucker had been calling her from his personal cellphone.
Tracy said no.
In January, they sent a 12-page letter to the school arguing it lacked jurisdiction to investigate Tucker's “purely personal” relationship with Tracy.
“How far does MSU intend to go in policing the private conduct of its employees, and how does it expect its 20,000+ employees to react when they find out that they no longer have private lives outside the reach of their employer?”
Michigan State was not persuaded.
The alleged conduct would be covered by school policy, it concluded, because it took place in the context of Tracy’s work as a vendor for the school and affected their ongoing business relationship.
The case would go forward.
Tucker sat down for his interview on March 22.
He said he wanted to be transparent and set the record straight.
For instance, Tucker claimed he had made the phone sex call from home in East Lansing – not in a Florida hotel.
He had just returned from a trip to Florida, he said, where he had been doing charity work unrelated to his employment with the school.
An expense report Tucker submitted to Michigan State for his hotel and meal costs showed the trip's purpose was “administrative” and did not involve any personal travel.
The costs were paid by the Spartan Fund, the athletic department’s fundraising arm; he had flown to Florida on a donor’s private plane.
The information, Tucker said, made him question how Tracy “goes about her business.”
“I’m perplexed that Mel Tucker would respond to a complaint of sexual harassment by involving me or ESPN.”
Tucker did not identify any witnesses who could support his version of events, including his associate, whom he said he had promised anonymity.
That same associate, Tucker said, told him that Alvarado, Tracy’s assistant, had been gossiping about his marriage – a claim Alvarado denied.
Along the way, she had learned that one potentially rich source of evidence was missing: Both Tracy and Tucker had deleted their text messages with each other.
Tucker would tell her that he deletes his messages regularly because he receives so many; Tracy said she did so in a panic after their last phone call, feeling she needed to cut all ties with him.
At the hearing, planned for October, both sides will have the opportunity to present evidence and make arguments.
Another outside Title IX attorney hired by the school will then decide whether the evidence shows that Tucker likely violated school rules.
Among the witnesses who will be missing from Tracy’s witness list is her assistant and best friend, Alvarado.
She died in a car accident in June.
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
It was a private event thrown by the school to promote its migrant student services program, which provides financial aid and support to farmworkers seeking college degrees.
After the April 28, 2022, tour, disclosed in records obtained by USA TODAY this week, Tucker met with community leaders and alumni.
That night, Tucker would make the now-infamous phone call from his hotel room in nearby Naples, during which he is accused of masturbating and making unwanted sexual comments to Brenda Tracy, a prominent rape survivor and activist he had hired to speak to his team about sexual violence.
Yet, when Tucker met with the university’s outside investigator in March for his interview in the sexual harassment case against him, he insisted the trip was not work-related – a claim the investigator would disprove in her report.
It’s just one example of Tucker failing to keep his story straight at the most consequential moment of his career.
With his job, reputation and the roughly $80 million left on his contract at stake, Tucker repeatedly made false statements to the investigator and misled her about basic facts, such as his location during the phone call and the date it occurred, a USA TODAY review of more than 1,200 pages of case documents found.
Michigan State suspended Tucker without pay on Sept. 10, hours after Tracy went public for the first time with her story in USA TODAY.
On Monday, the school informed Tucker it plans to fire him for cause based on the conduct he had admitted to and the embarrassment he had caused the school.
Investigation:Michigan State football coach Mel Tucker accused of sexually harassing rape survivor
Although Tucker denied sexually harassing Tracy, he acknowledged masturbating on the call, saying he and Tracy had been in a romantic relationship and had consensual “phone sex.” Tracy said Tucker’s romantic interest in her was completely one-sided and that she had tried to set boundaries multiple times during their yearlong business partnership.
Per his contract, Tucker has until Tuesday to make a case for keeping his job.
Regardless, a formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated school policies against sexual harassment and exploitation is expected to proceed on Oct. 5 and 6.
He accused the school of conducting a “sham” hearing and having “ulterior motives.” Yet even in these written statements, the central details of his story changed entirely.
Tucker, who previously hung up on a reporter who called him on his cellphone asking about the case, did not respond to a message seeking comment for this story.
Tracy declined to comment for this story.
“Very often you’re weighing credibility based on little bits and pieces of information.”
“I believe a fact finder could assess these pieces of evidence about credibility and make a determination that Brenda is more credible than Mel,” she said.
“In my experience, a clear sign of a lack of credibility is generally taken very seriously.”
The school had informed him of Tracy’s complaint on Dec. 22, the day after she filed it.
Tucker was the only holdout.
Rather than tell his side of the story right away, Tucker and his attorney spent three months trying to stop the investigation, case documents show.
They wrote legal arguments urging Michigan State to drop the case and twice approached Tracy’s attorney proposing a settlement agreement.
Tracy said no, and the school pressed forward.
Only a handful of text messages remained; he and Tracy both told the investigator they had deleted their texts with each other in the months after the April 2022 phone call.
In his interview, which lasted 3 ½ hours, Tucker questioned whether Tracy had mixed up the date of the call.
He said he recalled being at his home in East Lansing when it occurred, but his own records showed that he had been in Florida on April 28, attending a charity function that was “absolutely not a University-sponsored event.”
His seven-page account told a different story – that he had called her while he was “alone in a hotel room.”
But by then she knew what he told her in the interview was untrue: she had already obtained records proving he had not been home in East Lansing.
An expense report he had submitted to the university for reimbursement of his hotel and meals shows Tucker flew to Naples, Florida, to attend a golf fundraiser hosted by The Greg H. Montgomery Jr. Foundation for Ultimate Growth, which raises awareness for suicide prevention.
It showed he stayed at the Hilton from April 27 to 29, that the trip’s purpose was “administrative” and that it did not involve personal travel.
He had flown there on a donor’s private plane.
The event was titled “Working to make dreams a reality,” according to an agenda obtained from the university by USA TODAY through a public records request.
The agenda features Tucker’s name prominently.
Tucker posted photos from the tour on his Twitter account.
That Tucker was on a university-sponsored work trip during the incident was a contributing factor in the university’s determination that it had jurisdiction to investigate, the investigation report shows.
Tucker’s lists of calls and text messages also were missing an important detail: They did not show any communication with Tracy on April 28.
He acknowledged in the interview, however, that he had not reviewed the lists before submitting them and that they may have been incomplete.
Tucker and Tracy did not speak in the three months after the April 28 call.
Meanwhile, their assistants were planning Tracy’s third visit to campus – an in-person training with coaches and players scheduled for July 25.
Tucker canceled that training three days before, the investigation report shows.
When Tracy spoke to him by phone on Aug. 2 seeking to find out why, she would tell the investigator in her interview that Tucker insinuated he would harm her career if she spoke about his conduct.
He never rescheduled her visit, and they never spoke again.
The cancellation became a key focus of the investigator – one of a series of alleged incidents that taken together would meet the definition of sexual harassment, which can include pressuring someone into engaging in sexual behavior for an employment benefit and threatening that rejecting such behavior will carry a negative consequence.
Tucker tried to distance himself from the cancellation in a public statement on Sept. 11, the day after Michigan State suspended him without pay.
“I never cancelled any presentation,” he wrote.
But that statement contradicts what he told the investigator.
Such timing would not make sense, he added, because most of his new players would not yet be on campus.
Tucker also told the investigator why he canceled the visit, blaming it on a scheduling conflict.
He said he had recently hired a mental conditioning coach, Ben Newman, who needed to implement his new program on short notice.
There was limited time in fall camp, Tucker said, and he didn’t want to “overwhelm” the players.
He said he decided to yield the time to Newman.
He had been meeting with them weekly since June 6, the records showed but held no meetings between July 15 and July 28.
One of Tucker’s assistants, who is a witness in the case, also told the investigator that Tucker asked him via text message to cancel it.
He said he was never instructed to reschedule.
Tucker confronted Tracy about the alleged gossiping during the Aug. 2 phone call, they both told the investigator.
Tracy said he berated and bullied her, repeatedly saying he could not trust her.
She said she told him she did not know what he was talking about.
During the Aug. 2 call, Tracy said she pressed Tucker to identify his source – the associate.
In her report, she wrote that he said he had “given (his) word that (he) wouldn’t divulge their name.”
Tucker never revealed the associate’s name to the investigator, nor did he identify anyone who could support his version of events.
In his Sept. 11 public statement, however, he lamented that the hearing would not afford him the opportunity to “offer any substantive evidence of innocence.”
It was not the only claim he attributed to his anonymous associate.
It turned out to be yet another falsehood.
“Neither the organization nor Tracy is or has been the target of any investigative reporting.”
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
Contributing: USA TODAY reporter Steve Berkowitz.
The bullets came in plywood crates.
Any given box was about the size of a small microwave oven.
The printed label stuck to each one demonstrated a militaristic brevity.
“CARTRIDGES FOR WEAPONS, INERT PROJECTILE,” next to a bright yellow hazmat sticker, “EXPLOSIVES.”
Inside the boxes: drab green steel cans of .50-caliber ammunition.
Each round was giant, more than 5 inches long, built to be fired from a gun so big it is typically bolted to a truck.
The bullets were clipped together in long strands for rapid, machine-gun fire.
By the time Bill Brown got to the boxes, they sat double-stacked eight high atop wooden pallets inside a Missouri warehouse.
The pallets went on, row after row.
Three million bullets in all.
It was enough ammunition to feed a single machine gun – if fired nonstop at its rated speed eight hours a day, seven days a week – for almost six months.
Brown’s job was to get it out of there and toward the Ukrainian front lines.
The faster, the better.
“War is bad,” Brown said.
There would be virtually no public record of this Ukrainian arms shipment.
As a weapons dealer, Brown’s company would deliver the bullets under a system known as a direct commercial sale.
Instead, it was part of a shadowy system of brokers, exporters, arms dealers and country-to-country transfers that has become one part of the race to meet demand on distant battlefields.
President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said the effort was delayed in part by the wait for more arms.
Most of America’s $44 billion in documented support to Ukraine came in the form of old U.S. military stock, donated directly by the federal government.
In general, commercial sales over $14 million, and sales of military-grade weaponry like mortars or missiles, require State Department approval and congressional notification.
But other aid comes via private sales.
More than 14,000 U.S. entities are registered to conduct defense trade activities.
Their deals are monitored by an alphabet soup of agencies including Departments of Homeland Security, Commerce, Defense and the Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
Trade secrecy clauses in federal law mean this flow of gear, weapons and ammunition is almost never revealed to the public.
Brown, who works for a small Nevada-based logistics company called Battle Born Munitions, provided USA TODAY with a rare look behind the curtain of these private sales.
Details about the shipment were verified by his employer and the European government that made the purchase.
State Department officials declined to answer questions about the specific shipment Brown described.
This March sale and the secret number of other shipments like it fuel Ukraine’s fight against a Russian invasion.
Those sales also release an unknown amount of weaponry into the world.
What becomes of that weaponry after it’s sold – and especially after it’s delivered – is difficult to track.
As Brown surveyed the warehouse in Missouri, a crew steered forklifts and skid lifts among the stacks of plain wooden boxes.
From high in the trusses, suspended lamp fixtures bathed the boxes in artificial daylight.
Brown lifted his camera and started snapping photos.
In just a few hours, he and his cargo would be boarding a jumbo jet.
From Ukraine:War crimes in Ukraine may be unprecedented.
So is the country's push for swift justice.
The bullets had once been bound for Saudi Arabia.
Lot number SMQ19K401L026 had rolled off the assembly line in 2019 at Lake City Army Ammunition Plant near Kansas City.
Lake City, owned by the government and run by a contractor, sprawls across nearly 4,000 acres of green Missouri farmland.
Roads curve past World War II-era bunkers known as igloos, spaced out amid the countryside – far enough apart that an explosion in one won’t trigger a chain reaction in the others.
Lake City has been pumping out ammunition almost without pause since 1941.
It is the largest small-arms manufacturing plant in the world.
And in 2019, Saudi Arabia was stocking up on weapons during the Trump administration, fueling the war in Yemen and other conflicts that drew criticism from congressional Democrats.
The plant manufactures .50-caliber ammunition on a rolling basis, for both military and commercial buyers.
That’s a testament to just what a legend the bullet – and the gun that shoots it – has become.
In 2019, the technology was already a century old.
The .50 caliber was the brainchild of American gunsmith John Browning during World War I.
Built to respond to German anti-tank rifles, the M2 was first tested in 1918, and it entered widespread service in 1923.
It earned the nickname “Ma Deuce” and has served in combat ever since, bolted to trucks, ships, planes and handheld stands on the battlefield.
The .50-caliber rounds – named for their diameter, about half an inch – can easily hit targets more than a mile away.
At closer ranges, they will blast through solid concrete or armored vehicles.
The gun can fire at a sustained rate of about 40 shots per minute.
Military setups use strings of “linked” ammunition to feed into machine guns.
Spaced out after every fourth bullet, so-called tracer rounds have small pyrotechnic charges that illuminate the line of fire, aiding in targeting.
The gun’s longevity and versatility made it popular for militaries the world over.
But this particular batch of bullets wouldn’t end up being sold to Saudi Arabia.
The Biden administration put a temporary freeze on sales to the Saudi government in 2021 as it reviewed weapons deals approved under Donald Trump.
Instead, Brown said, the bullets were sold to a U.S. ammunition provider, only to be held up again.
Ultimately, they were mothballed.
Then, in spring 2023, the bullets found a buyer, or actually two: first Battle Born; ultimately, the Netherlands.
The European country, a NATO ally, needed a big supply of ammunition.
It wouldn’t be keeping the bullets but giving them to Ukraine.
Its purchase, essentially a donation, would count toward the country’s required NATO contribution.
Brown had a line on exactly what they needed.
It was sitting in the warehouse in Missouri.
He arrived in March to personally oversee the shipment.
As he prepped for delivery, Brown dropped tiny black tracking devices onto several of the pallets.
Just $55 apiece, the units use GPS and cell signals to keep tabs on the load.
The idea was to ensure it wouldn’t fall into the wrong hands.
But packing up the bullets was just the beginning.
As with anything that’s deadly and made of metal, the shipping costs can be extreme.
Forty-five to 60 days on a ship?
Brown – or Chief Bill, as he prefers – is a no-nonsense 35-year veteran of the U.S. Army and former helicopter pilot.
He retired as a chief warrant officer and lives in Orlando.
Now 59, he still spends a lot of time on the road – 10 international trips this year.
He says his arms logistics work takes him to places most Americans would rather avoid – near the Syrian border or to unstable regions of Iraq.
He’ll travel halfway around the world, he quips, “have some soup, and go back to Warsaw to head home.” The trips aren’t really about the destinations.
They’re about the cargo.
On that spring day in Missouri, forklifts carefully loaded 107 pallets of the ammo onto 18 flatbed semitrailers.
They’d all make the eight-hour drive to O’Hare International Airport.
In Chicago, two Boeing 747-400s operated by National Airlines would be ready for the freight.
Four pallets each were stacked and shrink-wrapped to create “air pallets” or “cookie sheets” weighing 12,800 pounds.
Each plane could carry up to 17 of the pallets that ran the length of each plane secured by white cargo netting.
Flight records Brown provided show the two planes departed about seven hours apart, one in early afternoon, one after dark.
The flight would take nine hours.
Brown wasn’t going to the Netherlands, even though it was the buyer.
The planes were bound for Rzeszów, Poland.
The ancient city sits at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains in southeastern Poland.
It has a gleaming modern airport next to a major east-west freeway.
From there, it’s barely 60 miles to the border with Ukraine.
It was an expensive journey.
The trucking company’s bill for those 18 semis?
Chartering the two 747s?
But this shipment of .50-cal rounds was profitable for Battle Born Munitions, according to Brown.
The company purchased the 3 million rounds from Northrop Grumman at a bargain and resold them for more than double the price.
(In subsequent interviews, representatives at BBM disputed the specific totals Brown mentioned, saying the accurate figures were protected by “various commercial and government non-disclosure agreements.” They did not dispute the other specifics of the deal he provided.)
Retail prices for .50-caliber ammunition run roughly $5 per bullet.
At that rate, the whole shipment would have been worth $15 million.
The pricing might also be elastic.
The Dutch mark up the price of the bullets and count it toward their NATO contribution, pegged to a percentage of gross domestic product, Brown said.
The Netherlands has contributed about $15 billion to NATO this year, or about 1.7% of its GDP and just under the NATO mandate of 2%.
Representatives of the Dutch military confirmed the shipment to USA TODAY but declined to comment further about the pricing or details.
The war in Ukraine has only increased the demand for private deals.
The State Department signed off on more than $154 billion in commercial arms deals directly to foreign countries in 2022, a 48% increase from the previous year.
Direct commercial sales represent a modest portion of the contribution to Ukraine compared with the $44 billion donated by the U.S., but they still amounted to more than $600 million in sales from U.S. companies to the Ukrainian government last year alone.
That doesn’t include sales to other countries that also support Ukraine – sales like the one Brown described.
Jim Bartlett, an attorney with expertise in the specialized international arms transactions, said private U.S. businesses are playing a small but important role in the conflict.
“American companies are happy to export defense articles to foreign buyers approved by the U.S. State Department,” Bartlett said.
Those sales also come with risks.
Direct sales face fewer regulatory controls, oversight and enforcement, said Robert Nichols, an international military sales expert and attorney at the law firm Nichols Liu.
“You can imagine the range of characters involved in supplying a war effort,” Nichols said.
So far, the Department of Justice has indicted just a handful of arms brokers over deals related to the war in Ukraine.
They allegedly lied to Commerce Department agents and told them the parts were bound for Turkey.
Both pleaded not guilty to the charges this summer.
A State Department spokesman declined to provide details of enforcement actions but said, “The United States takes seriously our responsibility to protect American military and dual-use technologies and prevent their diversion, including through strong enforcement actions.”
NATO said it oversees allied arms deliveries, and that those arms generally reach Ukraine.
NATO itself technically only provides non-non-lethal aid, like fuel, medical supplies and generators.
Brown, of Battle Born, says he fields calls weekly from “clowns” without the proper licensing, whom he reports to the State Department for potential violations.
Some raise red flags when they approach him about transactions that include payment via diamonds or gold.
He prefers traditional wire transfers with approved sales partners since he knows government officials are watching.
He validates the contracts and checks certificates for the final users.
That’s part of why he traveled with the ammunition.
He would be meeting a Dutch military official for the official handoff.
“My job is to keep us all out of jail,” Brown said.
The two 747s touched down in Poland, one before the sun, the other in late morning.
Brown exchanged paperwork with a young Dutch military staffer who signed for the delivery, he said.
They traded military patches as souvenirs.
They snapped a photo together.
The bullets bought by the Netherlands would never touch Dutch soil.
U.S. aid:Billions from the US flows to Ukraine.
Here's where it comes from, and how it adds up
Despite playing a small role proportionately in the war, $600 million in direct commercial sales can buy a lot of small weaponry.
Put another way: It’s hard to sneak away an F-16 or a missile launcher the size of a tractor-trailer.
But a bunch of guns or a pallet of ammo?
Much easier to resell.
After Russia invaded Ukraine in 2014, the Small Arms Survey, a Swiss arms research project, estimated that within a year, battlefield seizures and other forms of diversion led to 300,000 small arms and light weapons going missing, including 100,000 in Crimea alone.
When small arms go missing, they can go missing into another country, maybe one led by a despot or even a terrorist organization.
The U.S. government says diversion of American donations has been widely absent so far in Ukraine.
That could be a combination of intensive “end-use-monitoring” programs and the reality of the battlefield, where supplies are rapidly put to use.
But even if not now, unused ammo could be resold someday.
“These are commodities with very long shelf lives.”
Florida-based Global Ordnance, another State Department-licensed exporter, is a competitor in the direct weapons sales business.
General counsel Bryan Van Brunt said the company has extensive protocols in place to track shipments and make sure the end-users are federally approved, though he declined to provide specifics about those systems.
Brown, with Battle Born Munitions, says the company employs a mix of simple and sophisticated tracking technology to ensure his shipments are tracked to end users.
The black GPS devices he dropped onto his cargo tracked the ammo all the way across the globe.
But that system only works as long as Brown is actually tracking.
“Technically, my role ends when I deliver it to NATO,” he said.
Sometime after the 747s touched down in Poland, along with signing the paperwork and snapping a selfie with the Dutch official, Brown found the tiny black GPS trackers and lifted them off the pallets.
Ukrainian trucks would arrive at the airport to pick up the ammunition.
They would point toward the border, and onward to Lviv, and some distant battlefield.
Brown would point in the opposite direction.
Just like one of his quips: Fly in, have soup, get home.
He headed toward Warsaw, with the GPS trackers in his bag.
Contact him at npenz@usatoday.com or @npenzenstadler, or on Signal at (720) 507-5273.
The geography professor didn’t hide his clown fetish or the fact that he sometimes indulged his urges by recruiting students as subjects.
He posted regularly about it on social media.
He submitted his resignation the same day their story was published.
His interactions with students and open discussion of his fetish happened in both mainstream and tailored digital spaces.
He popped into Facebook groups geared toward new students and niche forums on websites like Reddit.
He posted videos on YouTube.
Over the years, two students reported him to campus police; others complained online.
He left Kent State University after pleading no contest to something different: a theft charge that involved entering his peers’ offices without permission and taking a USB drive.
Nicholls State, for example, told USA TODAY Network reporters it does not routinely check social media for new hires.
The money was appealing but the interactions soured.
“I thought maybe they could prevent anything bad from happening since other girls would go with him.”
She said there was never any followup from campus police – or anyone else.
The two who expressed public concerns on social media told USA TODAY they never heard from their campus officials either.
She said she would pass along that reporters were trying to reach him.
He said his contract was not renewed because he was the target of a “grade inflation task force.”
She has seen the pattern often in her work maintaining a database of publicly documented sexual misconduct by faculty and staff.
As for grad students?
“I don’t on purpose,” she said, “because that’s information that almost never comes out.”
He was working toward his doctorate and researched fading businesses.
His work about shopping malls in the Rust Belt won several awards.
Like many graduate students, he also taught classes.
“I will literally pay you!”
What’s more, she figured out that he was a graduate student, a fact she said he didn’t disclose in his posts.
It arrived at midnight and contained no message, although writing on his shirt read: “I'm not a failure.”
“It’s definitely burned into my mind.”
He would send “get to know you” messages, the police report said, and then ask the student if she was “interested in having her face painted for one of his class projects.”
“She does not have any concerns for her safety, but just wanted this documented,” the police report read.
In July 2017, another student had retweeted a message from Kent State’s Twitter account that asked for Kent State love stories.
She said she tweeted to draw officials’ attention to it and moved on but now wishes she had reported it officially.
College campuses are supposed to offer students special protections from sexual harassment even when it falls short of criminal behavior.
Title IX, often associated with equity in women’s sports, also addresses “sex-based harassment, which encompasses sexual assault and other forms of sexual violence” at schools that receive federal funding.
Colleges infrequently and unevenly enforce the rule, however.
A 2022 USA TODAY investigation found just one of every 12,400 students was suspended in connection with sexual misconduct.
The student who shared her story online said the only response she received was from a graduate student in the geography department, who contacted her on Oct. 1, 2018.
In an email, he wrote that he had seen her post and suspected he knew which faculty member had asked her about face painting.
“I brought it to the attention of some of our faculty because I was pretty sure I knew who it was, but they were certain it wasn’t that individual and that you probably just meant geology,” he wrote.
He went on to reference another student being “approached in (at least by just looking at your tweet) a much more aggressive way.” The grad student asked the undergraduate for more information, but, she told USA TODAY, she didn’t respond.
She said she started drafting a reply, but a year had passed.
She wanted to move on.
Kent State would not say whether any actions were taken after the students’ reports, but Eric Mansfield, a spokesman for the university, said the police department confirmed that the students who filed police reports were provided with “university resources, which would include other non-criminal avenues to pursue (Counseling Services, Title IX, Center for Sexual and Relationship Violence Services, etc.)
Mansfield also said that the university monitors social media but that colleges “can’t always see or track every mention on social media.”
A blotter item in the local newspaper shows police obtained an arrest warrant in connection with a third-degree felony burglary charge.
“Also, we do not comment on personnel matters.”
In more recent years, Buckley has become critical of the law and how schools interpret it.
He told the Columbus Dispatch in 2010 that “the law needs to be revamped.”
Survivors of sexual violence and students accuse universities of using the law to avoid negative media coverage.
Students with a history of bad behavior may jump from one school to another without the public ever knowing about their histories.
One case involved Brandon Austin, who was accused of sexual assault at Providence College in 2013 while on the school’s basketball team.
But Providence College initially said Austin was suspended for violating the school’s code of student conduct and declined to share further details with the Providence Journal, citing federal privacy laws.
Austin denied wrongdoing and was not charged with a crime.
Austin was able to transfer to the University of Oregon, where he was again accused of sexual assault, along with other players.
Police investigated the claims, and the local district attorney declined to press charges.
And it doesn’t apply when a student is “seeking or intending to enroll” at another college.
He blamed the overuse of the law on fear of being sued.
While most U.S. employers conduct background screening, according to trade group data, those inquiries typically focus on criminal history.
Social media receives far less attention even though that is where people are most likely to share their unguarded thoughts.
Undertaking a full review of a person’s social media presence is more difficult than just checking an applicant’s Facebook page.
Does an applicant have an account on X, formerly Twitter?
How about an account with Discord, an online platform frequented by gamers, where leaked Pentagon documents were recently shared?
Or what about a Telegram account, a messaging platform popular among white nationalists?
Further complicating things, it’s common on sites like Reddit for users to adopt usernames and describe experiences with little to no ties to reality.
A little digging, however, can turn up a lot of dirt.
His time as a student and instructor at Kent State is absent.
That is the same handle used on Reddit by someone with a special interest in face paint.
Other posts mention a “clown fetish.” In a forum titled “Creepy,” he wrote, “I convince pretty girls to let me paint their faces,” along with a photo with multiple women in white face paint.
That and other similar posts remained live for years until they were taken down after the Nicholls students published their story in late March.
USA TODAY Network reporters captured screenshots before they disappeared.
With dates in 2019, the posts feature a young woman wearing a Kent State T-shirt.
The material would have been available to administrators at Northern Illinois before the start of the fall 2019 semester.
Joe King, a spokesman for Northern Illinois, said departments hiring new graduate students are “not required to check social media or investigate a disciplinary history.” He added some departments may reach out to the graduate students’ former advisers.
But there are signs the behavior continued.
She said she declined to do it but was aware that other Northern Illinois students had participated.
She asked, had anyone complained?
Many students would find a reason to complain, as Nicholls State student journalist Sally-Anne Torres learned firsthand.
It started in January when one of her fellow reporters picked up an odd rumor: a professor was offering extra credit for students willing to paint their faces like clowns.
Initially, Torres dismissed it because it seemed too unusual and there weren’t a lot of leads to follow.
He blamed his departure on giving too many A’s.
That seemed suspicious to Torres.
“It wasn’t just this innocent thing that a lot of these girls thought it was,” Torres said.
Some, she said, were followed on Twitter by him while others opted into an extra credit assignment he offered.
The women told Torres he sometimes giggled and laughed as they painted their faces in his office.
It seemed unusual at the time, Price said, because his friend wasn’t in the class.
It became more concerning to him on reading the student newspaper’s report.
“I feel frankly disgusted and disappointed that Nicholls couldn’t do a proper background check on this professor, because this is unacceptable,” Price said.
Ramos learned that the person behind the account was likely a professor at the university.
She posted about the behavior in January 2022, but nothing came of it.
On March 27, the same day the student newspaper published its piece, Ramos posted screenshots of her discoveries on Twitter with the message, “Found a Nicholls state university professor on Reddit.”
“I wish the university had acted sooner because all this information was public on the internet,” she told USA TODAY.
No one from the university, she said, has ever reached out.
He can be reached at CCampo@gannett.com.
An Oct. 11 Facebook post (direct link, archive link) shows a photo of Qatar's head of state along with a warning he supposedly made about his country’s energy exports.
The post was shared more than 60 times in five days.
Fact check roundup: Israel-Hamas war sparks many misleading claims online.
Here's what's true and false.
A disinformation expert in Qatar says the emir has not made such a threat, and there are no credible reports of one.
The claim is “100% false,” a Qatar-based expert on Middle Eastern studies and disinformation campaigns told USA TODAY.
Qatar was the world’s third-largest liquefied natural gas exporter during the first half of 2023, behind the U.S. and Australia, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration.
Fact check: False claim that Qatar rejected German plane for LGBTQ symbol
So a legitimate threat that one of its leaders would shut off its natural gas valve certainly would have made global headlines.
But no credible news outlets have reported it.
In fact, on the same day the post was made, France said it would buy up to 3.5 million tons of liquefied natural gas from Qatar each year through 2050.
A day later, the emir visited Germany – which last year said it would import up to 2 million tons each year – amid criticism of Qatar’s ties to the Palestinian militant group Hamas, Politico reported.
Hamas’ attack on southern Israeli towns near the Gaza Strip on Oct. 7 led to the start of its latest war with Israel.
The conflict has left more than 4,000 dead on both sides, including 30 Americans, as of Oct. 16.
Qatar is seen as being a major sponsor of Hamas, Politico reported, but Qatari officials deny that, saying aid for Gaza is intended to improve life for Palestinians.
The claim originated in an Oct. 11 post on X from an account purporting to cover Qatari affairs, but it attributed the threat to the state of Qatar, not the emir.
The account has since been suspended.
It is not an official channel, and Jones said another version of the account was suspended previously.
USA TODAY reached out to both the Qatar embassy in Washington and the emir but did not immediately receive responses from either.
Qatar vowed in 2017 to not cut the gas supply to the United Arab Emirates even as that nation and others in the region severed diplomatic ties with Qatar and accused it of harboring terrorists, charges it has repeatedly denied.
During that diplomatic crisis, which lasted until 2021 and included a blockade, a number of accounts also appeared on the platform and spread misinformation about Qatar, Jones said.
USA TODAY reached out to the social media user who shared the post but did not immediately receive a response.
Thank you for supporting our journalism.
You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or e-newspaper here.
Our fact-check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook.
An Oct. 10 Facebook post (direct link, archive link) claims an Israeli government official made a stark comment amid the Israel-Hamas war.
Our soldiers will not be held accountable for anything.
It was shared more than 40 times in four days.
Other versions of the claim accumulated thousands of additional shares across Facebook and X, formerly known as Twitter.
Fact check roundup: Israel-Hamas war sparks many misleading claims online.
Here's what's true and false.
There is no evidence Gallant said this.
Versions of the claim reference Gallant's message to Israeli troops along the Gaza border, but media accounts of those remarks include no mention of abolishing the rules of war.
Some versions of the claim include a lengthier quotation attributed to Gallant.
It says Israel is “moving to a full offense” and “Hamas wanted a change in Gaza, it will change 180 degrees from what it thought.”
Those comments roughly match Gallant’s message to troops along the Gaza border on Oct. 10, as reported by the Times of Israel.
There is no reference to Israel abandoning the rules of war in the remarks.
Though some versions of the claim attributed the supposed quote to Russian state-owned news agency Sputnik, there is no such quotation in any of the outlet’s articles on Gallant.
Fact check: Historic Gaza church open for services, undamaged by Israeli airstrikes
Both Israel and Hamas have been criticized for possible violations of the rules of war, including killing civilians and taking them as hostages, Reuters reported.
Israel has also been criticized for preventing food, water, medicine and fuel from entering Gaza following Hamas’ Oct. 7 attack.
A United Nations commission said it has been “collecting and preserving evidence of war crimes committed by all sides,” the Associated Press reported.
President Joe Biden has also urged Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to observe the rules of war in retaliating against Hamas, according to outlets including CNN, the Hill and PBS.
USA TODAY has debunked an array of false claims about the Israel-Hamas war, including that a video showed Russian President Vladimir Putin warning the U.S. to not interfere in the conflict, that the Department of Defense evacuated the U.S. embassy in Beirut and told Americans to leave Lebanon immediately and that a video shows Israel fabricating a child’s injuries.
USA TODAY reached out to several users who shared the post for comment but did not immediately receive a response.
Lead Stories also debunked the claim.
Thank you for supporting our journalism.
You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or e-newspaper here.
Our fact-check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook.
🎤 Former Arkansas Gov.
Asa Hutchinson, former South Carolina Gov.
Nikki Haley, North Dakota Gov.
Instead, voters made their priorities – and worries – clear, pressing 2024 White House hopefuls on their vision for the nation, USA TODAY’s Phillip M. Bailey reports:
⏰ Climate change, social security and concerns for the future: Those who showed up to speak with the candidates face-to-face wanted answers on how they would tackle America's long-term problems.
🐘 Compassionate conservatism: The candidates repeatedly emphasized how the voters who aren't paying attention yet want a solutions-oriented leader seeking common ground in 2024, not a bombastic style.
🤝 Pence praised after the Capitol attack: Voters told Pence that they wanted to specifically thank him for refusing to cave amid pressure from former President Donald Trump and threats from supporters who stormed the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021.
🎁 Voters are skeptical about moving on from Trump: Many voters who attended the forums this past week, said they fear former President Donald Trump has the primary wrapped up.
Read more here: Republican candidates flock to N.H. town halls, as voters search for Trump alternative
🗺️ Want to keep up with the Israel-Hamas war?
USA TODAY has launched a special edition newsletter to stay informed on the conflict, from the latest developments to contextual deep-dives on the repercussions of the war.
Sign up here to get the headlines delivered straight to your inbox.
An Oct. 7 video (direct link, archive link) on X, formerly Twitter, shows a tall building collapsing to the ground following multiple explosions.
"Moment Israel launched Operation Iron Swords," reads the video's caption.
"Israel destroyed third Gaza tower eliminated (sic) Palestinian Terrorists."
Fact check roundup: Israel-Hamas war sparks many misleading claims online.
Here's what's true and false.
It shows an Israeli airstrike that destroyed a building in Gaza in May 2021.
Hamas, a Palestinian militant group, launched a deadly surprise attack against Israel on the morning of Oct. 7.
Israel responded with what is being called Operation "Swords of Iron," with devastating airstrikes against Gaza, which is home to about 2.3 million people.
At least 4,000 people have died on both sides as of Oct. 16, with thousands more wounded.
The X video, though, doesn't show a recent Israeli airstrike.
Other videos posted online around that time show the same building being destroyed.
A video from CNN shows the building crumbling to the ground and includes a caption that reads, "This is the third high-rise building to be destroyed by the (Israel Defense Forces) since the escalation of the violence began on May 10, 2021."
The fighting broke out when Hamas militants in Gaza fired long-range rockets toward Jerusalem on May 10, 2021, the Associated Press reported.
The conflict followed days of clashes between Palestinian protesters and Israeli police at the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound.
A cease-fire agreement eventually brought the 11-day war to an end, but not before more than 200 people were killed in the fighting.
The social media user who shared the post could not be reached for comment.
Thank you for supporting our journalism.
You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or e-newspaper here.
Our fact-check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook.
“The judge can compel Google to open the floodgates so more startups and third-party competitors can put greater competitive pressure on Google, which will create higher quality online services,” said Luther Lowe, senior vice president of public policy at Yelp.
The online business review site has been one of Google's harshest critics while spending more than a decade railing against a strategy that favors its own services in search results.
Google's search engine earned its huge market share by almost instantaneously presenting people with helpful information culled from the billions of websites that have been indexed since former Stanford University graduate students Larry Page and Sergey Brin developed the technology during the late 1990s.
These agreements don’t preclude users from switching to a different search engine in their settings, but it’s a tedious process that few people bother to navigate.
This reality is why Google is willing to pay so much for the privileged position, according to the Justice Department.
Google's payments for preeminent search placement — including an estimated $15 billion to $20 billion per year to Apple alone — are at the head of the Justice Department's case, making it probable the judge would prohibit them if he rules against Google.
Should that happen, experts believe the most likely remedy in the U.S. would be a requirement for smartphones and web browsers to display a palette of different search engines during the setup process.
That's something already being done in Europe, where all indications, so far, are that most people are still opting for Google.
That could be because they believe Google truly is the best search engine — as Google argues in their defense — or they just trust the brand more than rival options such as Microsoft's Bing or the privacy-focused DuckDuckGo.
Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella asserted Google has an almost hypnotic hold on users while testifying earlier this month during the trial.
He then added that the only way to break the habit is by changing the default choice.
As long as a ruling doesn't exclude Google's rivals from paying to be the automatic search engine on smartphones and web browsers, Microsoft could buy the default position for Bing — an opportunity Nadella indicated he would seize.
In his testimony during the trial, Apple executive Eddy Cue said the company has embraced Google as the preferred search engine on the iPhone and other products because it provides the best experience for its customers.
That stance has raised speculation that if Apple is blocked from using Google as the default search engine on the iPhone, it might flex its muscle as the world's richest company to develop its own search technology.
However, a blanket ban on default search agreements that have been highly profitable for Apple and other companies such as wireless provider Verizon could trigger unintended consequences, such as raising prices on other popular products.
"If Google is no longer paying big bucks to Apple and other companies, they might raise the prices for their devices," said David Olson, an associate professor for the Boston College Law School who is following the antitrust trial.
“I don't think they will be big, but we could see some price increases because Google has essentially been subsidizing the cost of devices like the iPhone.”
Another offshoot of a ban on default search agreements is that Google still could have a dominant advantage in search if people continue to proactively choose it and the company would have billions of dollars more to spend in other areas that it once devoted to deals that it really didn't need at all.
A decision like that would open a crack in the digital wall that Apple has built around the iPhone to give its own software and certain pet products such as Siri exclusive access to the device's more than 1 billion users, setting the stage for another potential legal battle.
I received an email from a reader asking if hitting the “unsubscribe” button in her inbox is smart.
Like many things in tech, it depends.
In some cases, reacting to spammers might make your email a hot commodity, leading to more unwanted emails or even a spot on a “for sale” list.
Here’s the lowdown on how to stop getting emails you don’t want – without opening yourself up to more junk.
It’s easy to subscribe and easy to cancel!
It could go one of two ways
With reputable companies, clicking unsubscribe should do the trick.
If you’re receiving newsletters or promotional emails from brands you know, they generally follow email marketing regulations.
For unsolicited spam from unknown senders?
Clicking unsubscribe may indeed make things worse.
You inadvertently confirm that your email address is active … possibly leading to even more spam.
‘How do I know what to pick, Kim?’
Stick to familiar ground: If the email is from a trusted source (think brands you’ve shopped with or newsletters you’ve signed up for), go ahead and hit that unsubscribe button.
Dodge the unknown: If it’s a random email about a long-lost prince or a miracle cure, steer clear of the unsubscribe link.
Mark the email as spam in your email client.
◾ Select the messages you want to report as junk.
◾ From the top toolbar, select Report > Report Junk.
◾ On your computer, open Gmail.
◾ Select one or more emails.
◾ Click Report spam.
Use spam filters
For Outlook on Windows 10:
◾ At the top of the page, select Settings.
◾ Select Mail > Junk email.
◾ If you want to block an email address, enter the email address under Blocked senders and select Add.
To block all emails from a domain, enter the domain name under Blocked Domains and select Add.
To set up a filter using a spam email that you’ve received:
◾ Check the checkbox next to the email you want.
◾ Click Filter messages like these.
◾ Enter your filter criteria.
◾ Click Create filter.
Consider third-party tools
Sometimes, you need to bring in the big guns, especially if it’s an inbox you’ve had for years and years … and have shared with everyone under the sun.
This service is free to use.
◾ Clean Email: This organizer sorts emails and aids in unsubscribing.
Plans start at $9.99 per month.
And don’t forget to use the built-in features your provider includes to keep your real email address private.
Apple’s Hide My Email works great, and Gmail lets you create unlimited aliases.
 Here’s how to use both.
Balancing caution and convenience are the keys to banishing email clutter.
You’re already on your way to a cleaner inbox!
Keep your tech-know going
Search for it wherever you get your podcasts.
For your convenience, hit the link below for a recent episode.
PODCAST PICK: NFL goes AI, e-bike for preschoolers & get $15 from Amazon
Plus, always forget your laptop charger?
Here's how to make your laptop battery last longer.
Now's the time to stop leaving voicemails – we've got the lowdown on new phone etiquette rules.
Kim takes calls and dispenses advice on today's digital lifestyle, from smartphones and tablets to online privacy and data hacks.
For her daily tips, free newsletters and more, visit her website.
A family's outing to a wildlife center in Glen Rose, Texas came to a screeching halt last week when a giraffe slipped and fell onto their car's windshield, smashing it in the process.
Kari Hill was visiting the Fossil Rim Wildlife Center on Thursday with her teenage sons and infant granddaughter when the accident happened, FOX4NEWS reported.
Hill told the local news outlet that as they were touring the center, they stopped at the giraffe enclosure where a giraffe came and stuck his head in the sunroof as they fed him.
"We were laughing and loving it, until all of a sudden the giraffe appeared to lose his footing and fell onto the windshield of the car, and in the sunroof," Hill told Fox News.
"Glass shot everywhere, all over us."
The visitor said that the entire family was covered in glass when the giraffe fell, and she feared that things were about to turn worse when the giraffe thankfully regained his footing and took off.
Hill quickly alerted the park's emergency hotline about the incident and pulled off to ensure that the children got the glass off them.
"What turned into a great family day, just cost me a huge car repair, and PTSD for us," Hill told Fox News.
However, she was grateful that things did not turn tragic.
Here's what it means.
Watch:Mama bear, cub raid Krispy Kreme delivery van in Alaska, scarf dozens of doughnuts
Fossil Rim Wildlife Center is non-profit that specializes in captive breeding programs for indigenous and exotic endangered and threatened species.
However, visitors can only feed giraffes by hand.
For other animals, the center recommends simply tossing the pellets onto the ground.
The Center did not respond to USA TODAY's request for a comment and update on the giraffe or the visitors.
However, they told Fox News that the giraffe was not injured in the accident.
Glen Rose is approximately 85 miles southwest of Dallas.
Reach her at sshafiq@gannett.com and follow her on X, the platform formerly known as Twitter @saman_shafiq7.
However, fortunately for Ezekiel, his loving dad, Michael, understood his impatience.
So, when the opportunity arose to give his son a taster of what's to come, he took it.
Chancing on an empty private lot, he drove in and invited Ezekiel to take the wheel for his first driving lesson.
And his son's reaction was a joy to behold.
Watch the video below to see a heartwarming father-son moment behind the wheel
Humankind is your go-to spot for good news!
Click here to submit your uplifting, cute, or inspiring video moments for us to feature.
Also, click here to subscribe to our newsletter, bringing our top stories of the week straight to your inbox.
He dropped some fashion pointers.
The teen was struggling to secure his tie, so Bryant stepped in to help.
Family members stood around smiling and laughing as he hyped the teenager up and made sure his tie was tidy and in place.
“You’re killing the game, young man,” Bryant said to the high school senior in a video shared online.
He reminded me of myself when I was coming up.
Bryant, a father of three sons and five girls, said he was passing along knowledge he had learned as a youngster himself.
An avid churchgoer since his youth, he often dressed up in nice suits and attended with his mother, father and godparents.
So Bryant learned to tie a tie at the early age of 10.
Bryant’s story made it to the local news Monday and was covered by FOX 32 Chicago.
His older sister called him to tell him about it.
“It made me feel good.”
'Life-changing':California dad who biked 16 miles roundtrip to work surprised with car
“We live here in Chicago where racial tension is so high, especially in our neighborhood, which is known to be super racist,” she said.
“It was just great to see two people reacting to each other regardless of color and that's the part that just really makes me happy.”
Bryant’s an awesome person for what he did, he said.
“It shows a lot about him,” Luke said.
“It shows that he will go out his way to do something for someone else.”
Bryant said he was taught to love everybody and sees everyone as equal.
In addition to the suit the teen wore for homecoming, Luke also put on a flashy watch and Burberry cologne, which Bryant loved.
When he saw the teen in his homecoming gear, Bryant had nothing but good things to say.
“You got it,” he said.
Lake Erie is now a world record holder!
The lake broke a world record over the weekend for the most waterspouts in a 24-hour period.
According to the research center, one observer saw 72 waterspouts.
Users on X, formerly Twitter, shared photos and videos of the record-breaking waterspouts spotted over Lake Erie on Oct. 7.
Under busy Florida street:a 19th-century boat discovered where once was water
Yes, cruise prices are up:Here's why cheap sailings may be harder to find
A waterspout is a whirling column of air and water mist, according to the National Ocean Service.
The National Weather Service issues a tornado warning if a waterspout moves on shore, as they could cause significant damage and injuries.
Fair weather waterspouts typically dissipate rapidly once they reach land, rarely moving far inland.
The National Weather Service office in Buffalo, New York issued a special marine warning Oct. 7, warning of favorable conditions for waterspouts to form and later posted that waterspouts had been observed.
Italy ranks second, at 10.2%.
As of Monday, the research center reported have been 1,615 waterspouts observed around the world this year.
Great news, America.
Criminal defendant and leading GOP presidential primary candidate Donald Trump has something new to whine about – a partial gag order placed on him by the federal judge in his election interference case.
She added: “His political campaign does not give him carte blanche to vilify public servants for simply doing their job.”
I made that all up, but would you be surprised if Trump wrote something similar?
And if you wouldn't be surprised, doesn't that suggest we're facing a serious problem?
Immediately after the ruling, Trump posted on Truth Social: "A TERRIBLE THING HAPPENED TO DEMOCRACY TODAY – GAG ORDER!"
There's little doubt the angry rants will get worse.
Prior to the gag order, Trump had labeled special counsel Jack Smith “a crackhead” and called him “psycho.”
In August, Trump posted what prosecutors viewed as a threat against witnesses, writing: “IF YOU GO AFTER ME, I’M COMING AFTER YOU!”
Prosecutors, in their filing requesting a gag order, wrote that “no other criminal defendant would be permitted to issue public statements insinuating that a known witness in his case should be executed; this defendant should not be, either.”
Judge muzzles Trump:McCarthy booted from House speaker, Trump gagged.
Trump will squeal desperately and claim his free-speech rights are being trampled, but even a low-functioning mollusk would know that’s nonsense.
Trump was president, true.
He isn’t anymore.
Trump is running for president, true.
But that doesn’t give him the freedom to say whatever the hell he wants about people involved in the multiple criminal cases in which he faces 91 state and federal felony charges.
I’m not above the law, you’re not above the law and Trump, sad as it may be for him to learn, is not above the law.
But at least now he has some new material to work with.
Let’s see how long it takes the whiner in chief to violate the judge’s gag order.
I’m guessing it comes in 3, 2, 1 …
A Florida judge who was a prosecutor in the Casey Anthony trial and a former state attorney has been accused of child abuse, according to Governor Ron DeSantis.
Judge Jeffrey Ashton of the Ninth Judicial Circuit Court, which includes Orlando, is facing allegations of "lewd and lascivious molestation on a child under 16" and failure to report child abuse, according to an executive order by Gov.
DeSantis issued Oct. 11.
State Attorney Andrew Bain notified DeSantis of the allegations, according to the executive order, which reassigned the investigation and potential prosecution to the Tenth Circuit State Attorney to avoid a conflict of interest.
WFTV reported that the Winter Park Police Department confirmed that they are investigating the allegations, but no charges have been brought against Ashton.
A representative from Bain's office declined to elaborate on the allegations and how Bain became aware of them, saying that criminal cases originate with law enforcement.
Bain's office directed all questions to the Tenth Judicial Circuit.
The Tenth Judicial Circuit and the Tenth Circuit State Attorney did not immediately respond to request for comment.
Ashton's office directed questions to a private attorney, who also was not available for comment Monday morning.
Where is Casey Anthony now?
Ashton is a former state attorney.
He was elected in 2012, but he lost his seat in 2016, as reported by the Orlando Sentinel.
He came into office after making a name for himself as a lead prosecutor on the Casey Anthony murder trial.
While in office as state attorney, he was embroiled in controversy for frequenting Ashley Madison, a website primarily used by married people looking to have a discreet affair, as reported by the Orlando Sentinel.
He was elected to the judicial bench in 2018, serving on domestic violence cases from 2019-2020 before his current assignment on civil cases.
Hate crime investigation:Stabbing death of 6-year-old Muslim boy in Illinois to be investigated as hate crime
The violence in the Middle East has come to the American Midwest in the most gruesome fashion.
It reminds me so much of my two boys when they were his age.
I fear that this is not going to be the only incident of the Israel-Hamas war having violent reverberations in the United States.
The principal of my son’s high school, a large and diverse institution on the north side of Chicago, sent out a message to all families saying she was concerned about violence in the school as a result of the war that began Oct. 7.
At Columbia University in New York, a 24-year-old Israeli student was beaten while hanging flyers condemning the Hamas attack.
Who is going to hold America together?
Because it sure feels like we are coming apart.
For years now we have been dangerously divided over controversial issues such as abortion and LGBTQ+ rights.
Now the conflict in the Middle East is creating new tensions in the United States.
Calling all athletic coaches, hospital nurses, elementary school teachers, high school principals, volunteer managers, small business owners and theater directors.
America is relying on you.
If you have a diverse school or team or staff, they very likely disagree on some fundamental things, such as the conflict in the Middle East.
Without minimizing the importance of their varying loyalties, your role as a leader is to focus their attention on working together on the task at hand, whether that is preparing food at a restaurant or fighting fires together in your community or playing hockey together on a team.
If you need some inspiration on the path of holding America together: Watch "Remember The Titans" starring Denzel Washington.
The movie, released in 2000, takes place in 1971, after T.C.
Williams High School in Alexandria, Virginia, was fully integrated.
The prior year, a Black teenager was killed by a white store clerk over the alleged theft of razor blades, touching off days of race riots.
Tensions were high, and racial injustice ran deep.
Then Black and white high school football players boarded buses to preseason training camp, led by newly appointed Black head coach Herman Boone.
Boone enjoyed telling people that he was not Martin Luther King Jr., Jesus Christ or the Easter Bunny – he was just a football coach.
His job was not to affect the broader racial tensions in the society; it was simply to coach a winning football team.
But to have a winning football team, he needed to make sure that the racial tensions in the society didn’t affect his players.
He paired Black and white athletes together as roommates and required them to learn some facts about one another.
Mostly, he relied on the game of football to teach his players that they needed to work together.
The white offensive linemen better block for the Black quarterback, or he’s not going to have time to throw a pass.
The white receiver better catch the pass from that Black quarterback, or the team is not going to score touchdowns.
The movie is cheesy in parts, but it carries a powerful message: Our society’s strength is in the institutions that bring people of diverse identities and divergent ideologies together to cooperate on concrete activities with common aims.
And it is in the leaders who focus people on the areas of cooperation, even amid our wider conflicts.
So who is going to hold America together?
The answer is: you.
You don’t just have an inspiring Denzel Washington movie on your side; there is academic research supporting this approach.
In the social psychology study called the "Robbers Cave Experiment," researchers found that the best way to dissipate conflict between rival groups was to give them concrete activities on which to cooperate.
They also found that the longer diverse people cooperated, the more their identities shifted: from adversaries to friends.
And that new identities for some can have wider implications for all.
In "Remember The Titans," as the integrated football team wins games, the broader Alexandria community finds its own racial tensions easing.
Black and white families start sitting together in the stands, forming friendships, building a collective identity as Alexandria – not just Black Alexandria and white Alexandria.
It is a picture of America at its best.
We can appreciate this, because we know how ugly the alternative is.
In the most powerful scene in the film, coach Boone takes his team on a grueling early morning run.
They arrive at the destination just as the sun is coming up and are shocked to be looking at gravestones.
It is Gettysburg, the battlefield turned cemetery where tens of thousands of Americans died in one of the most famous battles of the Civil War.
Of course, it was on that same site that President Abraham Lincoln gave the Gettysburg Address, which ended with the famous lines: “This nation, under God, will have a new birth of freedom – and that government of the people, by the people, for the people shall not perish from the earth.”
The American people hail from every race, religion and nation on this earth.
To achieve the goal that President Lincoln placed before us, we need to follow the path of coach Boone and realize that we need to cooperate across our differences, not let them divide us.
A black ski mask conceals the man’s face.
The anonymous YouTube channel host almost always sports a black baseball cap embellished with the channel’s logo above his mask.
The channel had nearly 9,000 subscribers and a catalog of 180 videos that offered advice, stories and tips on the process of crossing the Arizona-Mexico border.
Videos walked viewers through how much they would have to pay in smuggling fees and advice on how to cross without a guide or “coyote.”
Former All-Pro wide receiver Antonio Brown has been arrested in Broward County, Florida for allegedly failing to pay child support.
Per records from the Broward County Sheriff's Department, the former Pittsburgh Steeler was arrested near midnight Sunday on an out-of-county warrant.
Already, he has been released on a $15,000 bond.
A warrant had been put out for Brown's arrest for failure to make child support payments back in August, CBS reported.
Jackson also stated that she wants to see Brown arrested for what he's done to her and their daughter.
"Right now, he’s making a mockery out of the judge, out of everything, because he feels like he’s untouchable," Jackson told TMZ.
Jackson's attorney, Pascal Michel, stated that his client also wants Brown to be more involved in the girl's life.
According to Jackson, the teen has drawn interest from over 80 colleges and universities for her excellence in track and field.
Brown also has five other children with his ex-fiancé.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Since his final NFL game on January 2, 2022, Antonio Brown has found himself in hot water with a series of controversial statements, actions, and lawsuits against him.
May 2022: Video shows Brown naked in a hotel pool in the United Arab Emirates with a visibly uncomfortable woman as she tried to get away from him.
October 2022: Brown is accused of selling counterfeit watch.
Brown was found liable in October 2023 and ordered to pay the plaintiff nearly $170,000.
December 2022: Prosecutors in Tampa decide not to pursue misdemeanor battery charges against Brown after the accuser "recanted her previous allegations regarding Mr. Brown’s intent to strike her or cause her bodily harm."
NFL Week 7:Picks and Predictions
Republican presidential hopefuls came to New Hampshire last week and answered questions directly from voters in a series of town hall forums.
Some of their responses checked out, but other claims were false or misleading.
Topics ranged from energy and the environment to taxes and the COVID-19 pandemic.
Here's where the candidates were on – and off – the mark:
You know what happens there?
Like many communities around the country, Philadelphia has a needle exchange program that provides clean needles for drug users to slow the spread of disease.
"Clean needles are an evidence-based intervention proven to save lives, included in the White House’s recommendations for addressing the overdose epidemic," Sarah Peterson, a spokesperson for the Philadelphia Mayor's Office, told USA TODAY in an email.
More:A new 'fentanyl fighter' hits a market crowded with overdose reversal drugs
The city’s website notes the benefits of such programs in preventing the spread of infections including hepatitis C and HIV.
But the website makes no mention of offering crack pipes – because there's no such program.
Peterson said the city distributes safe smoking kits, but those do not include pipes.
It echoes a similar claim that USA TODAY debunked in 2022, which asserted that President Joe Biden’s administration was spending $30 million on crack pipes as part of its program to reduce health risks tied to drug use.
The program allowed for grantees to purchase safe smoking kits, but crack pipes were not among the approved materials.
There's less clarity about exactly how much more likely other negative outcomes are as a result, though research shows the lack of a father figure increases the chances of other negative life outcomes.
More:'The streak is now broken': US poverty rate over time shows spike in 2022 levels
Other studies we found used slightly different metrics, confirming a correlation but with different figures.
"We cut taxes more than any other administration in history."
This claim by former Vice President Mike Pence is false.
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was signed into law by then-President Donald Trump in December 2017.
An analysis by the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Budget determined "it would definitely not be the largest in history," but would instead be the eighth-largest as a percent of gross domestic product since 1918 and the fourth-largest in inflation-adjusted dollars.
More:US government shutdowns used to be rare.
That’s increasingly no longer the case.
The Washington Post found Trump's tax cut amounted to nearly 0.9% of GDP, which means Trump's tax cut was smaller than tax cuts passed under several previous administrations.
For instance, the Economic Recovery Act of 1981 passed under President Ronald Reagan was 2.89% of GDP.
By the same measurement, Trump's tax cut was also smaller than two tax cuts passed under his predecessor, President Barack Obama.
"The virus came from a Chinese lab."
Some polls show many Americans believe COVID-19 leaked from a lab, but Pence's assertion is still far from settled.
The White House said in February there was not a consensus across the government on the origins of the virus, as USA TODAY reported at the time.
That announcement followed reports that the Energy Department had concluded the pandemic most likely was caused by an unintentional lab leak in China.
However, the department's conclusion was made with “low confidence,” meaning the level of certainty was not high, according to the Wall Street Journal and the New York Times.
More:Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine jointly awarded to scientists for COVID-19 work
Biden had previously asked intelligence agencies to investigate the origins of the virus, but they were not able to reach a consensus, according to The Washington Post, which noted that most of the agencies favored, with "low confidence," the "natural spillover" theory.
NPR reported in February that scientists who have studied the origins of the pandemic are far less divided, saying there is "very convincing" data and "overwhelming evidence" to indicate an animal origin.
I did that in South Carolina, I did it at the U.N.
Former South Carolina Gov.
Nikki Haley’s response to a question about political spending fails to note that she has specifically fought against donor transparency for her own political nonprofit.
Haley was asked about how to counteract the influence of big money donors in politics, and she said donors to political action committees and candidates must be disclosed, and that identifying large financial backers can help voters recognize potential influences.
More:Biden raises $71 million in 3rd quarter, far outpacing Trump and the Republican field
However, Haley founded a political nonprofit after leaving the Trump administration called Stand for America.
As a 501(c)(4) organization, it has the option to keep donors’ names private.
It did so, but Politico obtained an unredacted tax filing for the nonprofit from 2019 that identified dozens of donors who had not given to Haley’s PAC of the same name, where their donations would have been public.
Haley called the release a violation of tax law and threatened to sue the New York attorney general’s office because the released version of the filing had a marking indicating the office had been in possession of that copy.
USA TODAY could not find any media reports saying the lawsuit had been filed.
Open Secrets reported that Haley’s nonprofit raised more than $25 million in the four-plus years between its founding and when she joined the presidential race.
The nonprofit’s funds cannot be used for a campaign, but it is a way of staying connected to donors and funding policy promotion efforts between campaigns.
The claim is statistically correct, and the rate improved during the Haley administration, according to media reports.
South Carolina’s recidivism rate – defined as the percentage of prisoners released who return to state custody within three years – is a nation-leading 19%, according to a study by the Virginia Department of Corrections.
Other studies with different definitions also place recidivism around 20%.
More:'Persistent overcrowding': Fulton County Jail issues spark debate, search for answers
While governor, Haley introduced programs to prepare inmates for life after incarceration.
Those changes included job training, help with housing and other support services, steps that continued after she left office.
This is after leases have been made.
This is not an accurate description of what Biden did.
Former Arkansas Gov.
Asa Hutchinson appears to be conflating a pair of actions taken by the Department of Interior on Sept. 6.
The agency proposed a rule that would reduce the acreage available for drilling on Alaska’s North Slope while also canceling leases in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
The changes on the slope would not cancel any existing leases but would close off 10.6 million acres of the National Petroleum Reserve-Alaska from being used for drilling for oil.
The slope produced nearly 500,000 barrels of oil daily in 2022, about a quarter of its peak in 2008.
More:Alaska oil drilling: Willow project critics go viral with petition pressuring Biden
No private companies held the leases canceled in the Arctic refuge, an area of environmentally-sensitive federal land in Alaska, according to the Associated Press.
Nine leases were awarded at a 2021 auction, but an energy company and a real estate company both canceled their leases in 2022, according to media reports.
The remaining leases were all held by the Alaska Industrial Development and Export Authority, a corporation owned by the state government.
Alaska officials expressed interest in partnering with oil companies to develop and drill the land when it won the auctions, but that hasn't happened yet.
If Hutchinson meant to say opening up Arctic leases, their impact on gasoline prices is purely hypothetical.
The Energy Information Administration said in a 2018 report that it could take 10 years after leases are issued before oil from the refuge would enter the market because more studies must be performed, and infrastructure must be built.
This claim is largely accurate.
Thirteen states received waivers during the Trump administration to institute work requirements for at least some people in their Medicaid programs, although Arkansas was the only one to drop people from the program for non-compliance, according to a Kaiser Family Foundation analysis.
The others either paused implementation or held off on enforcing the requirements because of threats of litigation or the COVID-19 pandemic.
More:Helpers few and far between for rural Americans kicked off Medicaid after pandemic
But the Biden administration revoked all waivers in 2021, pointing in part to a federal report that found work requirements in Arkansas – even before the pandemic – did not increase employment and caused about 18,000 Arkansans to lose coverage.
However, Georgia won a court fight last year to implement a work requirement as part of a Medicaid expansion effort, applying the requirement only to people who become eligible for Medicaid under expanded criteria.
That program began on July 1 but was not a new waiver under Biden.
"The United States has taken more CO2 out of the air than any other country in the world."
This claim by North Dakota Gov.
Doug Burgum is true in terms of absolute numbers, but there's more to the story.
The U.S. reduced its carbon dioxide emissions by about 760 million metric tons per year from 2000-14, according to a 2018 report from the bipartisan Environmental and Energy Study Institute – the most recent version available.
The drop was about four times as large as the one in the United Kingdom, which ranked second with an annual cut of 170 million metric tons.
More:Visualizing climate change's wrath: Global warming's dire impact on Earth explored
But because the U.S. is also one of the world’s top carbon dioxide producers, that represents a relatively small percentage drop of 8%.
The report says most countries had cuts of at least 10%.
Denmark trimmed its emissions by 30%.
His figure is right, but he left out some important context by taking credit for it.
More:Do I really need that?
How American consumers are tightening purse strings amid inflation
The state constitution explicitly requires lawmakers and the governor to approve a balanced budget every two years.
Thank you for supporting our journalism.
You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or e-newspaper here.
Our fact-check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook.
A Georgia man got the shock of his life when received a $1.4 million speeding ticket.
Fortunately for him, the figure was just a placeholder.
Though Cato was expecting to get a so-called "super speeder" ticket, never in his wildest dreams did he think that it would be for over $1 million.
When he called the court thinking the figure was a typo, he was told that he should either pay the fine or appear in court in December.
Semi-truck driver killed:Train derailment closes down I-25 in Colorado
Savannah city government spokesman Joshua Peacock told USA TODAY on Monday that Cato's fine is just a placeholder.
"A speeding ticket can only be set by a judge in a court appearance and cannot exceed $1,000 plus state mandated cost," he said.
While Cato still has to appear in court and is considered a "super speeder," he will not have to pay $1.4 million in fine.
Under Savannah law, "super speeders" are anyone caught driving more than 35 mph above the speed limit.
Super speeders have to appear in court, where a judge will determine the actual fine.
Peacock explained that because super speeders are required to go to court, the e-citation software automatically puts in a $999,999 base amount plus state-mandated costs.
That ended up coming to $1.4 million for Cato.
Watch:Motorcyclist pushes Mass.
The court is currently adjusting the placeholder language in order to avoid any future confusion, Peacock said.
"The programmers who designed the software used the largest number possible because super speeder tickets are a mandatory court appearance and do not have a fine amount attached to them when issued by police."
Contributing: Associated Press
Reach her at sshafiq@gannett.com and follow her on X, the platform formerly known as Twitter @saman_shafiq7.
1 position in the department to No.
The Marlins were swept in their NL wild-card series by Philadelphia.
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
Sherman said the club had picked up her option for the 2024 season earlier this year.
We recognize that mistakes may happen – or that new information can emerge after a story is published – and we pledge to address all concerns quickly, fairly and transparently.
If a correction or clarification is warranted, we will highlight that in the original file and explain to readers why the change was made.
Any correction or clarification would also be published on our corrections log.
To report corrections & clarifications, contact:
Please indicate whether you're responding to content online or in the newspaper.
The following corrections & clarifications have been published on stories produced by USA TODAY's newsroom:
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated who is affected by this rule.
The story has been updated to reflect the proposed rule affects satellite and cable providers.
Money: A previous version of this story misstated the number of people 62 and older who have student debt loans.
Sports: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed the locations for Big Ten games.
"5 Things" podcast: On the Oct. 5 show in our segment about school psychologists, we misstated the ratio of counselors to students at a school in Hershey, Pennsylvania.
At 1 to 1000, it is half of the recommended ratio.
Money: An earlier version of this story mischaracterized the competitiveness of Capital One's savings-account interest rates.
The reference has been removed.
Jarrett Payton covers the Chicago Bears.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the amount of Fox Corp.'s settlement with Dominion Voting Systems in a defamation lawsuit.
Money: The UAW strike affects 38 locations across 20 states.
An earlier alert undercounted the number of states affected.
See the list.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly identified an organization.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified the Higher Education Advisory Group.
Sports: A headline on the story incorrectly described Christian Coleman's winning time in the men's 100 meters.
He won with a time of 9.83 seconds, tied for the world's fastest time this season.
News: This article was updated to remove incorrect details about math courses and departments at the University of California, Santa Cruz.
News: A previous version of this video misstated the Longwood Garden's distance from the prison.
His personal security guard ran onto the field to restrain the person.
A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the name of the home team.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified Chester County Prison.
It's the University of Pennsylvania.
News: A previous version of this video misstated how many co-defendants had been booked.
Money: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed among states with no Social Security tax Minnesota, which expanded in May 2023 a state tax exemption for benefits without eliminating the tax.
News: An earlier version of this story contained inaccurate or incomplete facts about the history of language.
Social media: A previous version of this post graphic contained a name misspelling of Scooter Braun.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the extent of the standing water around Dodger Stadium.
Sports: The USA TODAY Sports’ MLB power rankings in the Aug. 15 edition misstated the leader of the American League Central Division.
The Minnesota Twins lead the division.
News: A previous version of this video misidentified USA TODAY’s National Political correspondent, David Jackson.
Entertainment: The location of the bookstore in an earlier version of this story was incorrect.
Wild Geese Bookshop is located in Franklin, Indiana.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the next opponent for the U.S. women should they advance from their Round of 16 game vs. Sweden.
The Americans would then play the winner of Japan vs. Norway in the quarterfinals.
Money: Due to a typo, an earlier version of this story misstated total U.S. sales of the Kia Stinger.
The automaker has sold more than 65,000 Stinger sedans in the U.S. since the model's launch.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees between Madrid, Spain, and a mountainous area in Spain.
It also misstated a temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees in reference to average temperatures in Tunisia.
News: An earlier version incorrectly identified Victoria McQueen's title at her high school.
She is student body president.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified the Norwegian Gem.
It is a Jewel-class cruise ship.
News: A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the origins of Blue Moon.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the Iowa State teams being investigated by the Iowa Racing and Gaming Commission.
The school does not have a baseball program.
News: This article has been updated to include additional nonpartisan sources of data and research.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated 10-year-old J'Adore's diagnosis date.
News: In a 1A story on July 5 about primary care doctors, the relationship between physicians and health professionals such as nurse practitioners and physician assistants was unclear.
Paraprofessionals generally work under the supervision of a licensed physician.
Entertainment: A photo included in an earlier version of this report was misidentified as The Beatles.
The new record featuring John Lennon’s vocals will be a song.
Graphics: A previous version of this story misstated the number of competing teams in the Tour de France.
News: This story has been updated to clarify how many people died on the Titanic.
Money: This story has been updated to clarify details about local liquor laws.
News: A June 19 article on Page 2A misstated the year the 13th Amendment was passed.
Life: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated when the rescue was made.
Travel: A previous version of this story incorrectly described the Airbus A321 with new livery.
The aircraft is part of JetBlue’s existing fleet.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the number of states under red flag warnings.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly named ISR courses.
The courses are called Infant Swimming Resource courses.
News: This story has been updated to correct how far away the body was found from where the missing doctor was last seen.
News: An earlier version of this story did not make clear which versions of the AP African American Studies course framework excluded the word "queer."
It has been updated to clarify that versions in May 2022 and February 2023 did not include the word.
Travel: An earlier version of the story incorrectly listed how police resolved the case.
News: A previous version of this article incorrectly referred to the tornado data provided by the Storm Prediction Center of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Sports: A story on the documentary movie “It Ain’t Over” in the May 12 edition misstated the number of league MVP titles won by Yogi Berra.
The Yankees legend won three.
The information has been updated.
Those portions have been removed.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the Australian Open women's singles champion.
News: In some editions, the March 30 1A story about attackers targeting schools misstated the partners in the mass killing database.
They are USA TODAY, The Associated Press and Northeastern University.
News: This story originally included an inaccurate detail related to one woman's application for a domestic violence restraining order.
The information on Alison Kessler has been updated.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the comparative price between electric vehicles and gas-powered vehicles.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the year of Paul Walker's death.
News: A previous version of this article misstated Terry Wilson's employment status.
He remains a Fresno State employee but was granted leave from the position to serve as a staff-wide union representative.
News: An earlier version of this podcast incorrectly stated that USA TODAY ran the Dilbert comic strip.
It was the USA TODAY Network, not USA TODAY.
News: USA TODAY did not publish the Dilbert comic strip.
A previous version of this article was incorrect.
Facebook: A previous version of this post contained photos from other events earlier this month in Florida.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated salary figures of bartenders and pharmacists.
News: A story on Page 1A Feb. 16 about corporate diversity gave the incorrect date of Southern Co.’s annual meeting.
It takes place later this year.
News: A previous version of this graphic misstated the title of a movie.
News: A previous version of this article misstated the number of Maryland’s Eastern Shore counties.
Social media: An earlier version of this video had an incorrect description.
News: An earlier version misstated the requirements in the Biden administration’s proposed Title IX rule for determining the outcome of sexual assault cases.
The proposed regulation would require schools to use the “preponderance of evidence” standard most of the time.
News: An earlier version of this video misstated the status of a House Ethics Committee investigation.
Social media: A previous post misidentified the award Beyoncé won.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the home state of Sen. Chris Coons.
He is from Delaware.
Social media: A previous version of this post included an incorrect year of death.
News: An earlier version misstated the name of Hillsdale College's spokesperson, Emily Stack Davis.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated the new price of the Tesla Model Y.
It is $52,990.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this gallery included a photo incorrectly identifying Paige Butcher.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified who created Seven Principles of Leave No Trace.
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2016
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2017
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2018
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2019
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2020
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2021
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2022
The USA TODAY Opinion section publishes analysis, argument and essays on a wide variety of subjects.
We're looking for timeliness (pegged to news), persuasion pitched to the other side, new information, novel arguments, revelatory insights, passion without partisanship, first-person experience, original reporting that reveals fresh angles and makes news, expert knowledge, and/or a topic that will drive conversation on social media and in the real world.
We accept only pieces that are submitted exclusively to USA TODAY.
We do not accept material that has been published on blogs, social media or anywhere else.
Columns typically run 550 to 750 words.
They should be pasted directly into an email and sent to theforum@usatoday.com.
Pieces should include links (URLs, not headlines or footnotes) to back up quotes and factual material.
People featured in columns must be identified by their real, full names.
We do not publish open letters, class projects or material that has been submitted to multiple outlets.
Rebuttals to editorials and columns published in USA TODAY should be submitted as letters to the editor, not as full-length op-eds.
Due to the volume of submissions, we can’t respond to all columns sent to us.
If our Opinion team is interested in yours, you will hear from us within three business days.
Submissions may be edited for accuracy, clarity, style, standards and length.
Please include with your submission a short biography, two sentences at most, to run at the end of your column, as well as a current photograph, to which you own publishing rights.
If you or a business, trade group or other institution with which you are associated stands to gain financially or in any other way from your column, you should disclose that information in detail.
In most cases, it should also be included in the body of the piece or in the author's biographical information.
Columns are accepted for online publication; print publication is not guaranteed.
All columns published by USA TODAY are available for use online and in print by the more than 250 properties in the USA TODAY Network.
They include Austin; Bergen County, New Jersey; Burlington, Vermont; Cincinnati; Columbus, Ohio; Des Moines; Detroit; El Paso, Texas; Indianapolis; Louisville, Kentucky; Memphis, Tennessee; Milwaukee; Nashville, Tennessee; Phoenix, Reno, Nevada; Palm Beach, Florida; and Wilmington, Delaware.
Authors may post their columns elsewhere 48 hours after they are published at USA TODAY.
By submitting a column to USA TODAY and agreeing to its publication, authors are granting exclusive rights to the piece to the USA TODAY Network for 48 hours and non-exclusive rights thereafter.
To get a sense of our range, preferences and requirements, check out our op-ed section, follow us on Twitter and Facebook, or sign up for our daily Opinion newsletter.
If you're interested in joining conversations about topics in USA TODAY, email letters@usatoday.com, comment on Facebook or use #tellusatoday on Twitter.
Letters are edited for accuracy, clarity and length and to conform to our editorial style and standards.
Submissions of 200 words or fewer have the best chance of being published.
Letters must include a name, address and phone number.
Corrections to published letters or columns follow USA TODAY guidelines.
She had fun learning the chants that fans perform at football games.
“I knew that I was in a safe space.”
This has in the last two years become an important consideration for college-bound students from all backgrounds and beliefs.
The digital tables also list, for every four-year institution in the country, such things as racial and gender diversity among students and faculty, the number of student veterans enrolled, the incidence of on-campus race-motivated hate crimes, free-speech rankings and if the university or college serves many students from rural places.
Students have long picked schools based on their academic reputations and social life.
But with campuses in the crosshairs of the culture wars, many students are now also taking stock of attacks on diversity, course content and speech and speakers from both ends of the political spectrum.
They’re monitoring hate crimes, anti-LGBTQ+ legislation, state abortion laws and whether students like them ‒ Black, rural, military veterans, LGBTQ+ or from other backgrounds ‒ are represented and supported on campus.
When they look at colleges in various states now, she said, “There are students who are asking, ‘Am I really wanted here?’”
For some students on both sides of the political divide, the answer is no.
In the chaotic new world of American colleges and universities, many say they feel unwelcome at certain schools, while others are prepared to shut down speakers and report faculty with whose opinions they disagree.
It’s too early to know how much this trend will affect where and whether prospective students end up going to college since publicly available enrollment data lags real time.
But there are early clues that it’s having a significant impact.
One in 4 prospective students has already ruled out a college or university for consideration because of the political climate in its state, according to a survey by the higher education consulting firm Art & Science Group.
Among students who describe themselves as liberal, the most common reason to rule out colleges and universities in a particular state, that survey found, is because it’s “too Republican” or has what they consider lax gun regulations, anti-LGBTQ+ legislation, restrictive abortion laws and a lack of concern about racism.
Students who describe themselves as conservative are rejecting states they believe to be “too Democrat” and that have liberal abortion and gay rights laws.
Of these, 8 in 10 say they would prefer to go to a state with greater access to reproductive health services.
“We have many young women who will not look at certain states,” said Levine.
One of her own clients backed out of going to a university in St. Louis after Missouri banned almost all abortions following the Supreme Court’s Dobbs decision, she said.
Institutions in Alabama, Florida, Louisiana and Texas are the most likely to be knocked off the lists of liberal students, according to the Art & Science Group survey.
They’re generally most likely to steer clear of the South and Midwest, while conservative students avoid California and New York.
One in 8 high school students in Florida say they won’t go to a public university in their own state because of its education policies, a separate poll, by the college ranking and information website Intelligent.com, found.
“You are attacking kids who are already vulnerable,” said Javier Gomez, an LGBTQ+ student in his first year at Miami Dade College.
It’s not yet evident whether the new laws are affecting where LGBTQ+ young people are choosing to go to college, said Casey Pick, director of law and policy at The Trevor Project, which supports LGBTQ+ young people in crisis.
But LGBTQ+ adults are moving away from states passing anti-LGBTQ+ laws, she said.
And “if adult employees are taking this into account when they decide where they want to live, you can bet that college students are making the same decisions.”
“The real attack here is on the feeling of belonging,” said Jeremy Young, who directs the Freedom to Learn program at PEN America, which tracks laws that restrict college and university diversity efforts and teaching about race.
“What it really does is hoist a flag to say to the most marginalized students, ‘We don’t want you here.’”
More than 40% of university and college administrators say the Supreme Court ruling curbing the use of affirmative action in admissions will affect diversity on their campuses, a Princeton Review poll found as the school year was beginning.
College students of all races and political persuasions report feeling uncomfortable on campuses that have become political battlegrounds.
It found that those who answer in these ways are more likely to frequently experience stress and more likely to drop out.
Nearly two-thirds say that faculty and administrators don’t understand the challenges they face, and 70% say the same thing about their non-veteran classmates.
Colleges should be “safe and affirming spaces,” said Pick, of the Trevor Project ‒ not places of isolation and alienation.
Of those, 72% say they worry their opinions would be considered unacceptable by classmates and 45%, by their professors.
Conservative students are less likely than their liberal classmates to believe that all points of view are welcome and less willing to share theirs.
“Is that really an intellectually diverse environment?” asked Sean Stevens, director of polling and analytics at the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression, or FIRE, which has launched a campus free-speech ranking based on students’ perceptions of comfort expressing ideas, tolerance for speakers and other measures.
“Anecdotally and from personal experience, there’s certainly a pocket of students who are weighing these factors in terms of where to go to college,” Stevens said.
Eighty-one percent of liberal students and 53% of conservative ones say they support reporting faculty who make comments that they find offensive, the same survey found.
It used sample comments such as, “There is no evidence of anti-Black bias in police shootings,” “Requiring vaccination for COVID is an assault on individual freedom” and “Biological sex is a scientific fact.”
A professor at Texas A&M University became the subject of an investigation when a student accused her of criticizing the state’s lieutenant governor during a lecture, though she was ultimately exonerated.
An anthropology lecturer at the University of Chicago who taught an undergraduate course called “The Problem of Whiteness” said she was deluged with hateful messages when a conservative student posted her photo and email address on social media.
More than half of all freshmen say that colleges have the right to ban extreme speakers, according to an annual survey by an institute at the University of California, Los Angeles; the College Pulse poll says that sentiment is held by twice the proportion of liberal students as conservative ones.
A group of Stanford students in March disrupted an on-campus speech by a federal judge whose judicial record they said was anti-LGBTQ+.
When he asked for an administrator to intervene, an associate dean for diversity, equity and inclusion confronted him and asked: “Is it worth the pain that this causes and the division that this causes?” The associate dean was put on leave and later resigned.
“Today it is a sad fact that the greatest threat to free speech comes from within the academy,” pronounced the right-leaning American Council of Trustees and Alumni, which is pushing colleges to sign on to its Campus Freedom Initiative that encourages teaching students about free expression during freshman orientation and disciplining people who disrupt speakers or events, among other measures.
“I have to imagine that universities that have a bad track record on freedom of expression or academic freedom, that it will affect their reputations,” said Steven Maguire, the organization’s campus freedom fellow.
Some colleges are now actively recruiting students on the basis of these kinds of concerns.
Colorado College in September created a program to ease the process for students who want to transfer away from institutions in states that have banned diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives; Hampshire College in Massachusetts has offered admission to any student from New College in Florida, subject of what critics have described as a conservative takeover.
Thirty-five have so far accepted the invitation.
Though many conservative critics of colleges and universities say faculty are indoctrinating students with liberal opinions, incoming freshmen tend to hold left-leaning views before they ever set foot in a classroom, according to that UCLA survey.
Fewer than 1 in 5 consider themselves conservative.
Three-quarters say abortion should be legal and favor stricter gun control laws, 68% say wealthy people should pay more taxes than they do now and 86% that climate change should be a federal priority and that there should be a clear path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants.
Prospective students say they are watching as new laws are passed and controversies erupt on campuses and actively looking into not just the quality of food and available majors at the colleges they might attend, but state politics.
Florida’s anti-LGBTQ+ laws prompted Javier Gomez to leave his native state and move to New York to go to fashion school.
“People ask me, ‘Why the hell are you back in Florida?’” said Gomez.
It’s overwhelming at times.
It can be very mentally depleting.
Sign up for our higher education newsletter.
Thousands of Israelis and Palestinians have been killed and Palestinians have been ordered to evacuate from the northern Gaza Strip ahead of Israel's impending ground invasion, leading to a humanitarian crisis that has brought protests from the United Nations and around the world.
The U.N. said about 1 million Gaza residents have been displaced in just a week, about half of them finding refuge in U.N. schools and other facilities where water supplies are diminishing.
The war has claimed more than 4,000 lives since Hamas launched an unprecedented surprise attack Oct. 7.
Meanwhile, the World Health Organization pleaded with Israel on Sunday to immediately reverse evacuation orders for hospitals in northern Gaza, saying the deadlines are impossible to meet and risk additional loss of life.
"Evacuation orders by Israel to hospitals are practically impossible to implement and are a death sentence for the sick and injured."
Here are several organizations that are providing aid to people caught in the conflict.
How to cope:The videos out of Israel, Gaza are graphic, but some can't look away
"Our members are speaking loudly and clearly about the values that unite our community: Opposition to this horrific violence, and a commitment to Israeli/Palestinian partnership on the path to ending it, and achieving peace and equality," the agency said in a statement.
The organization is asking for donations to improve access to essential services like water and to support livelihood projects.
Doctors Without Borders is a nongovernmental organization that describes itself as an "independent, impartial and neutral" charity that provides humanitarian aid to people affected by conflict, disease outbreaks and natural and human-made disasters.
The agency is seeking donations to continue to provide medical care in the area.
The agency has reported overcrowding in hospitals, a lack of medical supplies, and dangerous working conditions as it tries to support the thousands injured by the fighting.
UNRWA has designated shelters to host the estimated 127,000 people displaced in Gaza.
The agency is seeking donations to support its work.
The Jewish Agency for Israel North American Council, an American charity organization, is accepting donations to help victims of terrorism.
Save the Children issued an emergency alert in response to the conflict, noting that escalating violence has left 1.2 million children in need of humanitarian aid.
The agency is accepting donations.
National and international organizations that aid victims in the conflict include the Palestine Children's Relief Fund (PCRF), which works to provide lifesaving medical relief and humanitarian aid.
Founded by former President Jimmy Carter and his wife, Rosalynn Carter, in partnership with Emory University, The Carter Center is a humanitarian aid organization that has been promoting peace and a viable two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict for decades.
After Israel declared war, The Carter Center released a statement condemning the targeting of Israeli and Palestinian civilians and called for international action to end the violence.
A shaken mother on Tuesday called for the release of her daughter after Hamas released a video showing the French-Israeli hostage having her armed bandaged – the first sign of life from any of the hostages seized by Hamas in the first tumultuous hours of the war.
The video was the first depicting any of the roughly 200 hostages Israel says were taken during the attack.
Israeli and French officials condemned the release of the video.
John Kirby, the spokesperson for the White House National Security Council, expressed outrage Tuesday and called for immediate release of all hostages.
"It’s despicable, deplorable that they would take these hostages and then advertise how well they’re treating them when they’re the ones who hurt them in the first place," Kirby said on NBC’s “Today” show.
Trucks have been waiting for days to deliver the aid.
Hamas leaders were shocked at the lack of resistance from the Israeli Army when the militants crashed through the border, a member of the group's leadership team in Beirut told the Washington Post.
But the Israeli army "collapsed in front of us," he said, causing the number of hostages and Israeli casualties to soar.
Israeli officials have confirmed at least 199 hostages were taken, with a death toll of more than 1,400 Israelis.
A United Nations agency on Tuesday called for an independent investigation of "appalling reports" that Israeli bombings killed civilians who were evacuating northern Gaza ahead of what is expected to be a massive ground invasion by Israeli troops.
Israel had ordered more than 1 million residents of northern Gaza to evacuate.
"Every effort must be made to ensure the strict compliance by all parties to the laws of war in the conduct of hostilities and the treatment of civilians," she said, adding that humanitarian assistance must be allowed to reach Gaza "to prevent further, unnecessary loss of life."
Emotions have been running high far beyond the Middle East in the 10 days the war has raged.
Many people have expressed their fears and frustrations on social media in an effort to empathize and seek personal connections to tragedies in lieu of or in addition to private conversations.
Maybe to alleviate guilt, to feel like they're doing something, to "perform" uneducated solidarity.
"If you’re feeling too overwhelmed with your own emotions, that’s OK. Just let your partner or loved ones know you need some time or space before you are up for having deep conversations."
Read more here.
− David Oliver
The Royal Caribbean International cruise ship Rhapsody of the Seas helped evacuate U.S. nationals from Israel on Monday after canceling its itineraries due to the war.
Jason Liberty, CEO of the line’s parent company Royal Caribbean Group, said in an email to employees that was shared with USA TODAY that the evacuation was conducted in partnership with the U.S. State Department.
The U.S. ambassador to Cypress, Julie Fisher, was among those greeting the ship at the passenger terminal.
"Assisting Americans overseas is our highest priority & we were honored to welcome to #Limassol those who arrived from Israel," the U.S. embassy in Cyprus tweeted.
'I won't condemn Hamas':Some Palestinians are finding it hard to denounce attacks on Israel
The State Department designated Hamas a terrorist group in 1997, and several other nations also consider Hamas a terrorist organization.
In 2006, Hamas won parliamentary elections, and in 2007 the group violently seized control of Gaza from the Palestinian Authority, which was controlled by the rival Fatah movement that still governs the West Bank.
There have been no elections since.
The group calls for establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel and believes in the use of violence to carry out the destruction of Israel.
Hamas receives financial, material and logistical support from Iran.
So far, however, the U.S. and other nations have said there is no evidence that Iran was directly involved in Hamas’ attack.
Contributing: The Associated Press
WASHINGTON — The speaker of the House is second in line to the presidency, and the United States has gone two weeks without the crucial leader in the lower chamber.
That could end on Tuesday as House lawmakers hold a vote at noon for a new speaker.
While Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-N.C., has served as speaker pro tempore, it's not a role that has the same powers as the official leader.
But Jordan's chances of earning 217 votes – the magic number needed to become speaker – are unclear.
Democrats aren't expected to lend their GOP colleagues any support, so Republicans will have to figure out a way to coalesce around their next speaker.
Follow along here for live updates as House Republicans attempt to settle their differences and select a new speaker for the American people.
“Whether as Judiciary chair, conservative leader or representative for his constituents in west central Ohio, whether on the wrestling mat or in the committee room, Jim Jordan is strategic, scrappy, tough and principled,” she said.
– Rachel Looker
There are currently 433 members in the House and if all members vote, Jordan would need 217 votes to be elected speaker.
But Jordan only needs a majority of voting lawmakers, meaning that if some lawmakers are absent or only vote "present" that could change the math.
– Ken Tran
Jim Jordan entered the House chamber and huddled into a corner of the floor with Rep. Mike Simpson, R-Idaho.
Simpson is one of the handful of House Republicans who have either said they will not support Jordan or who have expressed hesitancy over voting for the Ohio Republican.
– Ken Tran
Acting speaker Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-N.C., has gaveled the House into session ahead of the speaker election, which is expected to take place after nominating speeches and a roll call vote to determine attendance.
– Ken Tran
If Jim Jordan is elected speaker of the House, he and President Joe Biden aren't expected to work closely together.
As chair of the House Judiciary Committee, Jordan is spearheading House Republicans’ impeachment inquiry into Biden.
He also voted against certifying Biden’s victory in the 2020 election.
Biden hasn't gone out of his way to address the Republican infighting in the House.
White House press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre said earlier this month that the White House views the process of choosing the speaker as an internal issue, but she said the president "hopes that the House will quickly elect a speaker, because the urgent challenges facing our nation will not wait."
But what lawmakers say or promise before a House vote isn't binding − they could flip their vote for or against Jordan during the formal proceedings this afternoon.
– Ken Tran
It takes a majority of the votes from House lawmakers present and voting for a specific candidate.
Once the vote for speaker begins, members will be called on one by one to name their choices.
The House, which has 433 members and two vacancies at this time, will vote until someone wins, though they could pause and come back another day.
It’s not clear how many rounds of voting Jordan may need to become speaker, but his allies have predicted that the public vote will pressure the holdouts to support Jordan.
– Associated Press
Lawmakers aren't expected to begin proceedings until noon in Washington, but you can follow along here.
The Senate is not waiting for the House to elect a speaker to move on an aid package for Israel, Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., reiterated on the Senate floor Tuesday morning.
Schumer, returning to D.C. this week after leading a bipartisan delegation to Tel Aviv over the weekend, said Tuesday the Senate will work quickly to pass an aid package for Israel as soon as possible that includes military support, humanitarians aid, intelligence support and diplomatic help.
“With the House in disarray, the Senate will not wait to vote on an Israeli aid package,” Schumer said.
Schumer said he hopes if the Senate can pass an aid package quickly with strong bipartisan support, it will inspire the House to follow suit.
- Rachel Looker
Democrats will likely cast their votes for House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries, D-N.Y., though they can technically vote for any candidate they want, even if they're not a member of the House.
It's a repeat of January, when Democrats held together and supported Jeffries through 15 rounds of voting.
It's simple: the House is frozen without a leader.
Lawmakers in the lower chamber can't take up critical legislation without a speaker.
That includes spending measures to keep the government open and avoid a shutdown, funding for aid to Israel as their war with Hamas rages on and more.
While there is currently a speaker pro tempore, Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-N.C., his authority is limited compared to a formal speaker.
The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee sent a memo to House Democrats Tuesday outlining a messaging strategy under a potential Speaker Jordan to use against Republicans ahead of next year’s elections.
Republicans who vote for Jordan as speaker are “simply following Trump’s marching orders,” according to the memo, and are “incapable of governing themselves.”
“The DCCC is committed to ensuring that every battleground member of the Republican conference who stands and votes for a Speaker Jordan will be making a career ending move,” the memo states.
- Rachel Looker
Rep. Chip Roy, R-Texas, a member of the ultraconservative Freedom Caucus and a Jordan supporter, estimated there would be eight to 10 votes against Jordan in the first ballot in an interview Tuesday morning on “The Glenn Beck Program.”
Roy said he expects multiple rounds of voting akin to what the House saw in January, as McCarthy and his allies worked to convince holdouts to ultimately support the California Republican.
Among those possible defections is Rep. Don Bacon, R-Neb., a moderate House Republican who represents a district President Joe Biden won in 2020.
Bacon has expressed apprehension about supporting Jordan given the support he has from conservative hardliners.
I’m a five-time commander and deployed to Middle-East four times.
– Ken Tran
The House is scheduled to vote on the election of a speaker at 12 p.m.
Former President Donald Trump has already weighed in on the Speaker vote, taking to social media to again push Jordan’s candidacy.
“Jim Jordan will be a GREAT Speaker of the House,” Trump posted Tuesday morning on Truth Social.
“As everyone knows, I have long ago given him my Complete and Total Endorsement!”
Expect Trump to take credit if Jordan prevails.
As of Tuesday morning, the nation doesn't have a new speaker of the House.
Earlier this month, a sliver of House Republicans, led by conservative hardliner Rep. Matt Gaetz, R-Fla., voted to remove former House Speaker Kevin McCarthy from his post over what they alleged were broken promises.
In his pursuit of the gavel, McCarthy changed House rules to allow just one lawmaker to initiate the move to remove him, a key concession to hard-right Republicans.
As a shutdown looked all but certain, McCarthy ultimately put forth a bipartisan stopgap bill on the House floor to fund the government just hours before a shutdown would have started.
− Ken Tran
There is no speaker of the House, but there is a speaker pro tempore.
McCarthy had provided a succession list to the House Clerk earlier this year in case his seat became vacant.
Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-N.C., was chosen to be acting House speaker from that list.
According to House rules, the person chosen from the list “shall act as Speaker pro tempore until the election of a Speaker or a Speaker pro tempore.” McHenry is the interim, or temporary, speaker.
But Charles Stewart III, a professor of political science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, previously told USA TODAY that without a speaker, there is no one with the political authority to speak on behalf of the majority and to engage in difficult negotiations on difficult issues.
Jordan entered the House in 2007 as a conservative bomb-thrower who was a thorn in the sides of GOP leadership.
As chair of the House Judiciary Committee, Jordan is also one of few GOP lawmakers spearheading House Republicans’ impeachment inquiry into President Joe Biden.
Jordan is a staunch ally of former President Donald Trump and voted against certifying Biden’s victory in the 2020 election.
− Ken Tran
Rep. Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., was removed from the position of House Speaker at the start of the month, when eight Republicans joined House Democrats to vote to oust him.
The California Republican managed to secure the gavel only after making several concessions to a holdout faction in his party, including a rule allowing any one member to call for the vote to remove McCarthy.
Rep. Matt Gaetz, R-Fla., took advantage of that rule immediately after House Democrats helped McCarthy pass a last minute resolution to stave off a government shutdown at the end of September.
LSU will start the upcoming women’s basketball season where it ended the last one.
The defending NCAA champion Tigers were voted No.
1 in the preseason USA TODAY Sports Coaches Poll.
Picked first on 29 of 32 ballots, LSU will start the campaign as the preseason No.
1 for the first time in program history after winning the school's first national championship.
The remaining three first-place nods went to perennial power Connecticut.
2 overall as they begin their quest for the program’s 12th NCAA title.
Next comes Caitlin Clark-led Iowa at No.
3, also with its highest starting point in program history.
South Carolina, which began each of the last three seasons at the top, will start this time at No.
Virginia Tech rounds out the top five, also with its highest preseason position.
TOP 25:Complete USA TODAY Sports women's basketball poll
OUTLOOKS:Previewing each team ranked in the preseason Top 25
Though all 32 Division I conferences are represented on the voting panel, the preseason Top 25 is the exclusive realm of the six power leagues.
The Big Ten and Pac-12 come next with five apiece.
The SEC has four overall, followed by the Big 12 with three and the Big East with two.
Readers with quick math skills will notice that adds up to 26.
That is because Miami (Fla.) and Michigan are in a tie for 25th.
Curiously, the poll also features a tie at No.
23 between Creighton and Oklahoma.
Eventually, he was put on a bus and deported to the West Bank, the landlocked area that forms the main bulk of the Palestinian territories.
Timeline of conflict:Why the 2023 Israeli-Palestinian fighting is among the most brutal in years
As Israel's military operation to root out Hamas and its members who massacred civilians on the country's southern border on Oct. 7 gathers momentum, its forces are gradually reducing whole neighborhoods in Gaza to rubble.
Water, food, power and medicines are running out.
Morgues are overflowing.
Palestinians, international aid organizations and reports from hospitals in Gaza say that more than 47 families consisting of 500 civilians in Gaza have been wiped out by Israel's bombing campaign.
I control everything that comes in and out of your house.
Occasionally, I come and beat you up.
With the Hamas attacks, "that's what's happening."
Israel contends it controls access to Gaza for security reasons.
That's where 130 Palestinian workers from Gaza, deported from Israel alongside him, were being temporarily sheltered in a large hall.
USA TODAY could not independently verify their accounts, but all had similar stories of detention and displacement.
The Israel Prison Service did not return a request for comment.
The full names of the men at the school spoken to for this story are being withheld, at their request, for their own safety.
Other names of Palestinians are being withheld to limit possible damage to their professional reputations.
Hamas attacks Israel:How police and military are still trying to find the gunmen
He has eight children and helps care for several more from a son who died a few years ago after a battle with cancer.
Hundreds of thousands of people are fleeing to the south of Gaza, close to Egypt, with whatever they can carry and by whatever means of transportation they can find.
With fuel scarce, some are using horses and carts.
The Palestinian health ministry says more than 2,700 Palestinians have been killed since the fighting erupted, and fatalities are occurring at a rate of every five minutes amid Israeli airstrikes.
As many as 50,000 pregnant women are not able to access basic health services, according to the U.N.
So far, Israel has not allowed aid in.
It says it wants Hamas to release captives first.
The bruises are the result, they said, of zip ties placed on them by Israeli police.
For years Israel has adopted a controversial policy of "administrative detention," which allows the authorities to detain Palestinians of all ages without trial and under allegations it keeps secret.
Israel says the tactic is necessary to contain dangerous militants whom the government believes could be terrorists.
They showed photos on their phones, taken by eyewitnesses, of what appeared to be them kneeling while blindfolded in front of police and other Israeli security services.
They said that the younger men among them were beaten, though they also said that some Israeli soldiers sought to intervene to stop it.
"There is no safe place in Gaza," he said.
Earlier that Saturday, word arrived that the entire family of another Palestinian worker staying at the school had been killed in an Israeli bombardment.
He got so emotional and enraged he was taken to a medical clinic to be given sedatives.
The school where the workers were staying serves 800 children from kindergarten up to high school.
Its director said some parents were concerned that the men's presence could cause it to be raided by Israel's military or attacked by vigilante Jewish settlers in the West Bank seeking to exact some kind of revenge for the 1,400 Israelis killed when Hamas crossed the border from Gaza to Israel to attack and kidnap civilians and soldiers.
The Israeli settlers live in West Bank communities that are illegal under international law.
These settlements are built on Palestinian lands in a Palestinian-governed area that Israeli's military has occupied since it won a war in 1967 with Arab countries.
"Nowadays nobody can tell what these settlers will do," the director said, referring to the communities that have been expanded under Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's government and are opposed by some Israelis.
"They seem free to do, and kill, whoever they like."
Since the outbreak of the war between Israel and Hamas more than a week ago, at least 56 Palestinians have been killed and more than 1,100 have been wounded in the West Bank in attacks on them by settlers and in confrontations with Israel's military, according to the Palestinian Ministry of Health.
Some of those killed, according to Palestinian activists, included minors shot in the head, chest and abdomen.
On Friday alone, traditionally a day of protest, at least 14 Palestinians were killed in the West Bank in clashes between Israeli forces and Palestinians near roads leading to checkpoints.
Some were killed by settlers.
Many also don't view Hamas as terrorist organization, as the U.S. and European Union designate it.
They see the group as acting in self-defense to Israeli military actions.
Hamas is the de facto ruler of Gaza.
This refusal to condemn Hamas − a group that believes Israel should not exist − has angered the Israeli public and large swaths of international opinion as accounts and gory details have emerged of executions and kidnappings committed by Hamas against Israeli civilians.
Among the kidnapped are elderly women and small children.
Israel estimates that about 200 people, some of them police and soldiers, are being held hostage by Hamas.
Fourteen Americans remain unaccounted for, though it is unclear how many may be held hostage.
An American advocated for Palestinians:Then Hamas came
Human rights groups say they are tracking evidence of war crimes committed by both sides, with Israel's indiscriminate military campaign and "complete siege of Gaza" − its withholding of water, food, electricity and fuel − amounting to a "collective punishment" on Palestinian civilians, according to the United Nations.
Both Israel and Hamas insist they are operating within the confines of international law.
And when a nation protects its home, it fights.
The official news agency of the Palestinian Authority, which exercises civilian control over the West Bank, published comments Sunday by President Mahmoud Abbas that criticized Hamas for its actions.
It later removed a reference to Hamas without providing an explanation.
On Monday, the news agency published comments from Abbas in which he rejected the killing of civilians on both sides and called for the release of civilians, prisoners and detainees on both sides.
He did not mention Hamas.
She's studying for a master's degree in international law and wants to specialize in defending the human rights of Palestinians.
She was born in Chicago and holds dual citizenship.
She said there are a multitude of reasons why Palestinians like her are finding it hard to criticize Hamas.
Among them: Palestinians feel they have lived for decades in a world where attacks on them by Israelis have not been given similar public censure; millions of Palestinians lack basic rights as a result of Israel's military occupation, which imposes onerous restrictions on their movement, controls their water resources, and subjects them to forced evictions, police harassment, arbitrary detention and numerous other everyday indignities; Israeli transgressions of international law with its settlements and military actions are shrugged off; and Israel has slowly taken more Palestinian land while ministers in Netanyahu's government have openly called for ethic cleansing against Palestinian civilians.
"It hurts me that America is supporting Israel so much," she said.
They've killed thousands in Gaza over several wars.
What happened was a consequence of their own actions.
But she didn't think these images and videos represented the "real Hamas," just the actions of lone bad actors.
She said pregnant women and babies in Gaza were routinely killed by Israeli bombs.
"We don't want them dead," she said of Israelis.
"We want them out of our lands."
A few tables away, a Palestinian man who lives in the U.S. and works for a well-known U.S. technology firm said he, too, thought it was not appropriate to condemn Hamas for its assault on Israelis.
"Being a Palestinian, you are continuously under systematic violence on a daily basis," he said.
Yet literally two hills away from where were are sitting is an illegally occupied settlement.
They call them 'settlements.'
But that's actually too benign a word.
It's actually a colony.
He said Americans and others who don't know the region very well need to understand that "there's a context (to the Hamas raid in Israel on Oct. 7) that's a lot larger than a single event."
Israel pulled out of its settlements in Gaza in 2005 and has since fought multiple wars there with Hamas.
They chatted excitedly as they sat around small fires and snacked on seeds and nuts.
They also scanned the horizon for signs of Hamas rockets launched from Gaza toward Tel Aviv, whose lights lay shimmering about 25 miles away.
None flew by over the course of an hour.
Less than a mile away, a green laser sight emanating from an adjacent Israeli settlement scanned this same hillside, its beam occasionally coming to stop in the bushes 100 yards or so down from the viewing point.
One man who was watching remarked that he thought it was an Israeli sniper looking for Palestinian intruders.
He said it has "turned blame to Hamas (over the attacks in Israel) into more anger toward Israel."
Authorities believe the attack was in response to the Israel-Hamas war.
Attorney General Merrick Garland warned the incident would raise fears among Muslim, Arab and Palestinian communities about hate-fueled violence.
A number of European countries have heightened protection for Jewish communities because of a rise in antisemitic incidents after Hamas’ attacks.
On Saturday, when they weren't trying to check on their families, they spent most of their time staring at snippets of video on their phones that showed the impact of Israel's bombing campaign.
Floppy children being rushed, half-dead, to hospitals.
They collected names of Palestinians, fellow workers in Israel, whom they had not seen since their arrest.
They were getting worried about what happened to them.
One man named Mahmoud was trying to solve what seemed like yet another insurmountable problem.
A relative and the man's friend, he said, neighbors back in Gaza, were hiding in a room in southern Israel, where they worked in a kitchen.
They had been there since the first day of the Hamas assault and now feared that if they ventured outside, Israel's military would mistake them for militants.
They shared their Israeli work permits to prove their identities.
They might try to sneak out.
They did not want their location or identity to be made public.
He estimated they had enough food and water for another three days.
Britney Spears is opening up in a new interview, her first in years, about her anticipated tell-all and becoming her own woman after being freed from her 13-year conservatorship.
The pop star's anticipated new memoir, "The Woman in Me," is set to debut on Oct. 24, and excerpts from the book were released on Tuesday via People.
In a shocking revelation, Spears, 41, claimed in her memoir that she became pregnant during her relationship with Justin Timberlake and had an abortion.
Spears and Timberlake dated from 1999 until 2002 in their early adult years.
In an accompanying new interview done via email with People, Spears discussed how she is handling her "new freedom" in the wake of the nearly 14-year-long conservatorship under her father, Jamie Spears, 71, which a Los Angeles County judge terminated in November 2021.
But in releasing her memoir, she tells people she is "finally free" to tell her story.
"Over the past 15 years or even at the start of my career, I sat back while people spoke about me and told my story for me," she said.
Spears has accused her father and others of exploitation and abuse under the conservatorship, detailing in the memoir how she was made to feel like "a sort of child-robot" and a "shadow" of herself.
"The conservatorship stripped me of my womanhood, made me into a child," the "Womanizer" singer writes in the excerpt of the memoir shared with People.
"At a sleepover, we played Truth or Dare, and someone dared Justin to kiss me," Spears writes.
"A Janet Jackson song was playing in the background as he leaned in and kissed me."
Spears also details how her first movie role in the 2002 year drama-comedy film "Crossroads" caused her to inadvertently fall into method acting.
Getting too deep into a character made her "glad" she didn't get the role of Allie Hamilton in "The Notebook" opposite Gosling, which ended up going to Rachel McAdams.
"That was pretty much the beginning and end of my acting career, and I was relieved," she continued.
"'The Notebook' casting came down to me and Rachel McAdams, and even though it would have been fun to reconnect with Ryan Gosling after our time on the Mickey Mouse Club, I'm glad I didn't do it."
Spears also talked about growing up in Louisiana, her work ethic as a child star, getting a record deal at Jive Records at 15, and her infamous 2001 VMA performance of "I'm a Slave 4 U."
"Finally, I got to the part where I handed it back, thank God."
The excerpts also include her thoughts on becoming a tabloid fixture in the early 2000s, the harm it caused, the termination of her conservatorship, and how she hopes telling her story inspires others.
"Shaving my head and acting out were my ways of pushing back," Spears writes.
"It took a long time and a lot of work for me to feel ready to tell my story," she said.
"I hope it inspires people on some level and can touch hearts."
"The Woman in Me" will be released on Oct. 24 by Gallery Books, a Simon & Schuster imprint.
Spears previously co-authored the 2000 autobiography "Britney Spears' Heart to Heart," and the 2001 young adult novel "A Mother's Gift" with her mother, Lynne Spears, both of which appeared on the USA TODAY Best-Selling books list.
Contributing: Morgan Hines, USA TODAY
Today, he's a gay, tattooed, non-denominational rabbi living in New York.
Most of the people he went to Jewish boys school with are right-wing.
This week, those same peers bullied him in group chats.
They called him a Hebrew word meaning a traitor to the other side.
His situation resembles many across the U.S. and rest of the world as people grapple with differing opinions among friends, family and colleagues; A college group text devolving because no one can agree.
Millennials walking on eggshells for fear of upsetting their Gen Z partners.
There's no one way to approach sensitive issues of this nature.
"If you’re feeling too overwhelmed with your own emotions, that’s OK. Just let your partner or loved ones know you need some time or space before you are up for having deep conversations."
Emotions have been running high since Hamas attacked Israel on Oct. 7; 4,200 have died on both sides, according to the United Nations.
Many have expressed their fears and frustrations on social media in an effort to empathize and seek personal connections to tragedies in lieu of or in addition to private conversations.
Maybe to alleviate guilt, to feel like they're doing something, to "perform" uneducated solidarity.
These posts often go awry when people play the comparison game.
"The problem is not the desire to find a personal connection," says Benjamin Goldman, licensed mental health counselor.
Anyone can throw statistics at a situation to try and justify their points.
But many aren't really looking for meaningful conversation
Aziz Abu-Sarah's octogenarian parents live in Jerusalem.
He visited them there three weeks ago.
Now, he's afraid for their safety.
A Palestinian peacemaker, his Israeli and Palestinian friends have been asking him how to broker dialogue.
"My advice was this: refrain (from) political discussions," he says.
You always do, you will eventually, but now, maybe is not the time to start going into what happened 100 years ago and 50 years ago.
Are you looking to vent?
For a dialogue?
To change their mind?
Because "if you're looking for a conversation that takes place in a shared experience in pain, and then you go to someone with a conflicting experience from you to have that conversation, you will be hurt," Goldman says.
"And they will also probably be hurt."
It may also be worth some introspection.
"Additionally, we are influenced by the media's synthesis of information and the mediums we trust to deliver it to our screens and inboxes."
Focus less on politics and more on the personal if you're aiming for a productive conversation.
Abu-Sarah adds: "Being vulnerable for each other and being willing to listen, instead of being quick to fight and argue – this is true in all situations."
He suggests focusing less on your position at the start of a dialogue and more on your story: "Before we start taking positions: 'Here why I stand (for Israel's) right to defend itself; here's why I stand for Palestinians' right to end occupation.'
Before you say, your position, tell your story.
Consider, too, "is there any common ground from which you can start?"
That it's not OK to kidnap women and children?
That it's terrible for people not to have access to basic utilities?
You are also allowed to hit pause if you're not ready to talk just yet.
"I've been muting a lot of my Instagram stories – even of people that I agree with – because I go to Instagram to unwind, and the constant barrage of videos on the Israeli-Gaza conflict make me anxious instead."
Watch out:Israel, Gaza and when your social media posts hurt more than help
Some relationships may not survive disagreements of this nature.
And that is OK, too.
They'll sit as open wounds.
"Some of the damage that has been done to me, and some of the relationships that I have around this, I think are irreparable," he says.
And sometimes we out of fear lash out.
Remember, as Abu-Sarah says: "Behind every angry statement, behind every talking point we throw at each other, there's a hurt person."
In case you missed:The videos out of Israel, Gaza are graphic, but some can't look away: How to cope
NFL power rankings entering Week 7 of the 2023 season (previous rank in parentheses):
49ers (1): Way too premature to suggest they got exposed against the league's No.
Lions (3): They're indeed in rare air – one more win would make them 6-1 for the first time in the Super Bowl era (since 1966).
And while it can be dangerous to look too far ahead, even for a team on a four-game heater, there don't appear to be many losses on the other side of Detroit's Week 9 bye.
And if their RB room gets healthy, and WR Jameson Williams continues morphing into the weapon he was intended to be?
Chiefs (4): Including postseason, QB Patrick Mahomes has now started 100 NFL games … and won 80 of them.
Fifteen percent of his career victories, or 12, have come against Denver – a team that will be back in Kansas City's crosshairs in Week 8.
But Philly couldn't hang in the Jets' mosh pit, and next must try and keep pace with Miami's track team.
Maybe breaking out the Kelly Green for "Sunday Night Football" will have the desired effect, though.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
New England should pose little problem in Week 7, but then Buffalo will be under the prime-time microscope for three in a row.
Dolphins (6): How good – really – is this offense?
The numbers, individually and collectively, have it tracking to be among the best in league history.
In fact, Miami's O is averaging better than 100 yards more than the second-ranked Eagles.
But dates with the Philly and K.C.
Jaguars (7): A club that just spent two weeks in London now hits the road for two more games outside Duval County.
Ravens (10): A team that's only had two home games will play four of its next five in Baltimore.
On average, the Browns are surrendering 200.4 yards a week, more than 60 fewer than Baltimore's second-ranked defense.
Bengals (22): They leveled back to .500 entering a much-needed bye week.
The rookie's 50 catches for 598 yards are both records in the Super Bowl era for a player through six career games.
It's his touchdown production that's down by nearly half.
(And, yes, it was to Tom Brady, who was rarely embarrassed by the Jets.)
Texans (18): They have two players with at least three TD catches … same as the entirety of Houston's 2022 season.
No team has fewer giveaways than their three.
Buccaneers (14): If you don't want QB Baker Mayfield to shoulder an inordinate amount of the offensive load, you can't wallow at the bottom of the league with 3.0 yards per carry.
Chargers (20): You can argue they stole defeat from the jaws of victory yet again.
Better regroup quickly for a short week that will end in Kansas City against the rested Chiefs … in a game the Bolts really need.
Raiders (23): A win at Chicago on Sunday puts Las Vegas above .500 … which wouldn’t be bad at all for a team tied for the AFC lead with 12 turnovers.
Packers (24): Assuming they're revitalized coming out of their bye, could be time to go on a run given they're not scheduled to see an opponent currently sporting a winning record until Week 10.
Vikings (25): Another week and another key injury (LB Marcus Davenport, ankle) for a struggling team apparently determined not to have a fire sale.
Commanders (27): With four of their next six against NFC East opponents, including both games against the Giants, Washington could well be entering a stretch that determines its season … and quite possibly HC Ron Rivera's viability beyond 2023.
Falcons (16): Is there any head coach more fun to watch – meaning, literally taking in his facial expressions – than Arthur Smith?
It's come earlier this year.
Giants (29): ESPN Stats & Info sums up their start pretty well, noting the G-Men are the fourth team since 1950 which failed to score an offensive touchdown before halftime in each of their first six games.
In fact, New York's offense hasn't scored a TD since Week 3.
Broncos (28): They'll only leave Denver one time from now until December.
That may not necessarily be a plus given how this 1-5 outfit is trending … though if Sean Payton continues offloading players, at least the home fans will have some new guys to boo.
Bears (26): Two steps forward, one step back for QB Justin Fields, whose dislocated thumb threatens to send this squad back into hibernation.
Cardinals (30): That's three straight losses by an average of 16.7 points per.
It took a month, but it appears the Cards are who we thought they were.
Patriots (31): Among their many, many failings?
No team has fewer takeaways (3).
And no team has a higher percentage of drives (81.7%) that end without points.
Follow USA TODAY Sports' Nate Davis on X, formerly Twitter @ByNateDavis.
WASHINGTON − A bipartisan group of five U.S. senators in Tel Aviv were eating lunch in a hotel Sunday when sirens went off warning of incoming rockets.
The congressional delegation, led by Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., rushed to a shelter until the area was safe.
It was an experience, Schumer said, that Israelis now have every day as war rages on between Israel and Hamas.
"It shows you what Israelis have to go through," Schumer wrote in a post on X, formerly Twitter.
"We must provide Israel with the support required to defend itself."
Hamas launched a surprise attack on Israel earlier this month that has led to a conflict with a death toll surpassing 4,000 people.
Israeli defense forces responded, triggering a war between the country and Hamas, a terrorist group that controls the Gaza Strip.
Schumer led the bipartisan delegation to Israel over the weekend with Democratic Sens.
Bill Cassidy of Louisiana and Mitt Romney of Utah.
After a week-long recess last week, the Senate was back in session Monday, with the war in Israel the center of attention.
But with the House unable to elect a speaker, Schumer is in the driver's seat steering the upper chamber to pass an aid package for Israel with enough bipartisan support that it will inspire the House to follow suit.
The House cannot consider aid to Israel, or other crucial legislation, until lawmakers pick a speaker.
The Israel-Hamas war explained:Understanding the conflict in Gaza amid rush to evacuate
Schumer sent a clear message from Tel Aviv over the weekend: Despite the dysfunction and missing leadership in the House, the Senate would not wait on the lower chamber to pass an aid package to support Israel.
We believe if the Senate acts in a strong, bipartisan way, it may indeed improve the chances that the House − even with its current dysfunction − will act," he said, adding that waiting on the House to elect a speaker and pass support for Israel would be "foolish."
Schumer said he personally would lead the effort to ensure Israel has the support it needs and anticipated moving a package in the next few weeks that would include military, intelligence, diplomatic and humanitarian assistance.
He also called on lawmakers to work together and with the Biden administration to put together a plan.
The bipartisan delegation met with Israeli leaders including President Isaac Herzog and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, as well as family members of victims of the attacks or of those taken hostage by Hamas.
Sen. Mark Kelly, D-Ariz., part of the delegation, said the meetings he had with families of the American hostages were some of the toughest meetings he's had as a senator.
He revealed that the photos and videos of the brutal attacks against Israelis were like nothing he had seen in his life, including in the 25 years he spent in the Navy flying in combat over Iraq and Kuwait.
"I will speak to members of Congress one by one if that's what it takes to get Israel the munitions that you need to defend yourselves," he said in Tel Aviv.
Schumer, the highest ranking Jewish elected official in the United States, said he felt he had an obligation to visit Israel in the midst of the war.
The purpose of trip was threefold, according to the majority leader.
First, leaders wanted to send a clear message to the Israeli people that the United States stands with Israel.
They also wanted to meet with Israeli leaders to discuss the country's military, intelligence and humanitarian needs to best inform a future aid package.
Lastly, leaders said they were seeking to show that Israel's support in the United States is bipartisan.
We will not just talk.
We will act.
"Our support remains unwavering and unconditional," she said.
Sen. Mitt Romney, R-Utah, condemned those who feel the U.S. should not get involved in the conflict.
Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., agreed with the need to support Israel in a speech on the Senate floor Monday.
"The United States must continue to provide maximum supports to Israel's counterterrorist operation as long as it takes," the minority leader said.
The delegation's visit to Israel comes as the Senate Foreign Relations Committee is scheduled to hold a nomination hearing for Jacob Lew to be U.S.
Ambassador to Israel.
The United States currently does not have a designated ambassador.
But Lew, who served as Treasury Department secretary under former President Barack Obama's administration, doesn't face a path to ambassadorship without some hurdles.
Several Republican senators, including Sen. Tom Cotton, R-Ark., have said they won't support Lew for the role.
"Jack Lew is an Iran sympathizer who has no business being our ambassador," Cotton said on "Fox News Sunday."
Cotton, a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, claimed Lew helped Iran avoid American sanctions and lied to Congress about it.
I would say it's the exact opposite.
Schumer urged his colleagues in the committee to approve Lew as quickly as possible "without any partisan delays" to bring the nominee to the Senate floor for a full vote.
But what's next for lawmakers as the House remains without a speaker?
Schumer explained on the Senate floor Monday afternoon that the upper chamber will meet for an all-senators classified meeting Wednesday to hear from top Biden administration officials, including Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin, Secretary of State Anthony Blinken, Chair of the Joint Chiefs Gen. C.Q.
"It is essential that we hear what is going on with our top leaders," Schumer said.
Millie Bobby Brown had an unexpected feminist awakening.
The "Stranger Things" star, 19, revealed in her Glamour UK "Women of the Year" cover story published Monday that she discovered she was a feminist after a psychic told her she was.
After the session, Brown recalled searching, "How do I know if I'm a feminist?"
"Ultimately (feminism is) about opportunity," she discovered in her quest for more knowledge on the topic.
Her upcoming film "Damsel" takes it to the next level: "The theme is feminism," she told the outlet.
Although the British actress didn't realize at an early age that she was a feminist, she had already been doing the work as UNICEF's youngest Goodwill Ambassador at age 14, promoting the need for menstrual products around the world.
"I think I was so afraid to be a strong woman in a relationship," she said.
He embraced that and encouraged that.
"It was like, 'Wow, I really love this person because he allows me to love myself.'"
The "Stranger Things" star wore a beautiful ring on her engagement finger as she cuddled into her boyfriend.
"I've loved you three summers now, honey, I want 'em all," she captioned the post, referencing lyrics from Taylor Swift's 2019 hit "Lover."
Drake calls out 'weirdos'discussing Millie Bobby Brown friendship in 'For All the Dogs'
This year, for the first time, the family members will at least know who committed the vicious killing 37 years ago.
Cold case:Victim of 'Happy Face' serial killer who left smiley faces on letters ID'd after 29 years
Betty went to the duplex, used a credit card to open the locked door, and then discovered her daughter’s body.
Judd, with the family’s permission, disclosed that Teresa had been repeatedly stabbed and nearly decapitated.
“I hope it gives everybody comfort to know that we now know who did this,” said Pam Shade, Teresa’s sister.
They (law enforcement) don't give up.
Cold case:5 years after pregnant Chicago woman vanished, her family is still searching
As technology advanced, the agency entered DNA taken from that blood into the FBI’s national database in the early 2000s but found no matches, meaning the killer’s DNA had not been entered.
Judd said Douglas had never been arrested.
“My prayer is that he had been in mental prison,” Judd said.
Using publicly available DNA that people submit through such programs as 23andMe, the company helped create a family tree for the murderer, said David Nutting, a company representative who attended the news conference.
He said there are an estimated 330,000 unsolved murders in the United States.
Judd said that detectives originally investigating the case saw no wounds on Douglas and had no reason to suspect him of the killing.
'Listen, be responsible'Polk League of Women Voters gives away gun locks to save lives
Shade is also a registered nurse and said many family members have gone into medical fields through Teresa’s influence and example.
“The first thing that I would like to say is Teresa was a wonderful person, the most loving person,” Shade said.
She went to respiratory school.
She got her RN and was so proud.
I've never seen anyone more proud.
Shade said that a brother had died in a diving accident only a year and a half before Teresa’s murder.
The manner of Teresa’s death, and the delay of about 10 hours before her body was found, prevented her from having her organs harvested for donation.
“But she was the kind of person that if you asked her about something, she would engage in dialogue,” Lynne said.
“So hopefully that encouraged some people to consider that pathway.”
Gary White can be reached at gary.white@theledger.com or 863-802-7518.
Follow on X @garywhite13.
Dolly Parton has always been a backwoods Barbie.
Growing up in a one-room cabin with 11 siblings, the Tennessee native learned at an early age that she could stand out through her music and the way she dressed.
“I was a colorful kid in a lot of ways,” Parton says.
Purchases you make through our links may earn us and our publishing partners a commission.
Now, she’s tracing her fashion evolution in a new memoir “Behind the Seams: My Life in Rhinestones,” published Tuesday (Penguin Random House).
The book begins with her iconic coat of many colors, which her mother stitched together from old fabric scraps.
She then recalls her move to Nashville, where she was told she’d never be taken seriously if she didn’t tone down her “trashy” style.
But the singer didn’t back down.
In fact, “I just kept getting bigger and bigger and worse and worse with my look,” she jokes.
Parton, 77, tells USA TODAY about plastic surgery, her classic song "Jolene" at 50, and why it's "scary" being so beloved.
Question: In the book, you revisit some of your most memorable album covers, including "Here You Come Again" (1977).
How did you land on that outfit?
We just stayed with the blue jeans and red shirt because that color combo really popped!
Before you released the title track, there was some concern it would be "too pop" for your country fans.
It’s a good song; that was my first main-selling record.
That was really my big start toward a bigger career.
Speaking of incredible album covers, there's also "Backwoods Barbie" (2008).
How do you feel now that Barbie is all the rage?
Are people just finally catching up to Dolly?
Well, Barbie was around long before I was (famous)!
But with “Backwoods Barbie,” I thought, “Well, I am just a Backwoods Barbie: too much makeup, too much hair.” I was really happy when the “Barbie” movie did so good!
I’ve always loved pink and the Barbie Doll, and that was a great little movie.
So yeah, I’m still the Backwoods Barbie.
What are some of your new dreams today?
I’m working on my life story as a musical on Broadway.
I've written or chosen all the music that will go into it, and I’ve co-written the script too.
So all my spare time, I’m spending on that.
That’s been a dream of mine for years and years – at least 20 years I’ve been trying to put that together.
I was just about to have it ready when COVID hit and Broadway shut down.
Then I thought, “Well, maybe I’ll do it as a biopic,” and wrote up a script for that.
That’s my aim!
I think I’ve always been (confident).
That started out as a joke: I was referring to plastic surgery, and how I’ve done those nips and tucks.
I always think of myself as a workhorse that looks like a show horse, and I’ve got to keep that show horse up.
So I do whatever it takes.
The same with clothes: I really do think that fashion is not just what’s fashionable.
True fashion is what you’re most comfortable in.
If you’re going to be motivated and motivating, you need to feel comfortable in what you wear.
If you think you look good, you’re going to do better.
You’re going to be more apt to step forward and be assertive.
This week marks 50 years since "Jolene" was first released.
Did you ever hear from the flirty bank teller who inspired it?
No, actually, it wasn't as severe as I made the song.
I was just a little jealous that she was prettier than me, so you always feel a little threatened when that happens.
But it was not a big deal ‒ it was just good for a song, let's put it that way.
And I was only joking about seeing her.
You write in your book that "you sometimes see yourself in strange places."
Aside from a Tennessee license plate, where's the weirdest place you've seen your likeness?
In a drag show!
I’m big with the drag queens.
I’ve also seen myself on those Duncan Hines cake boxes in the supermarket.
I’ve signed so many of those boxes – I’ve now signed more cake mixes than I have photos through the years.
Well, I don't know a single person who has a bad thing to say about Dolly Parton.
How do you feel about your status as an icon?
It’s a little scary sometimes; I hope I can live up to all of that!
But I think a lot of it is that I’ve been around for so long.
I’m like a favorite aunt, or a favorite godmother, or a favorite sister.
I’ve been around so long that people just think of me as part of the family!
I’ve just been a fixture in their lives.
I like that I’m part of that – I just hope I never let anybody down.
I ain’t as important as some of you make me sound!
A financial analyst who was fired by Citibank for allegedly lying about meal expenses lost a wrongful dismissal lawsuit filed in a London court against the large bank.
The financial analyst claimed he was going through personal issues and was on strong medications when he sent the emails.
"It is significant that the claimant did not make a full and frank disclosure at the first opportunity and that he did not answer questions directly."
More:Fired Northwestern football coach Pat Fitzgerald to sue school for $130M for wrongful termination
“I have accepted that the expense report may have been submitted in error,” the judge said.
“However, I am satisfied that a dismissal in relation to the misrepresentation allegation alone would fall within the band of a reasonable response by a reasonable employer.”
In a statement to USA TODAY a Citibank spokesperson said the company was "pleased with the decision."
There are moments in a league's history when they are clearly on the wrong side of it.
When they make a decision that isn't just foolish but morally wrong.
This is where the NHL is right now.
The NHL recently sent a memo to its teams clarifying what players are allowed to do during theme celebrations this season.
One of the actions it took was ban the use of rainbow-colored stick tape for Pride Nights.
Pride Nights, unbelievably, have become a controversial issue in the league.
The guidance doesn't solely apply to Pride.
Players can participate in themed celebrations off the ice if they choose.
To be clear, NHL teams will still have Pride Nights, but this represents a chipping away at the advance the NHL has made in recent years in backing the LGBTQ community and players.
So why did the NHL do this?
The league, I believe, is trying to satisfy a strong anti-LGBTQ element that exists in professional hockey (and across some other sports) and also among the fans who watch the sport.
They could have easily just done nothing.
That's what makes this action so reprehensible.
The fact the NHL won't even allow this small move says a great deal about what the NHL thinks about LGBTQ players.
You don't need to take my word for it about the wrongness of this decision.
Listen to the players, former executives and others who say the same.
Fans look to teams and the league to show they are welcome, and this directive closes a door that's been open for the last decade.
Burke, on X, formerly known as Twitter, made one of the more important points about why the NHL did this.
It was to appeal to the few people who don't want the league to be inclusive.
And while the NHL union, as far as I can tell, has remained silent, the Professional Women's Hockey League Players Association, headed by Burke, has not:
Neither did the Alphabet Sports Collective, which pushes for a safe and inclusive environment in hockey for all people:
"It is now clear that the NHL is stepping back from its longstanding commitment to inclusion, and continuing to unravel all of its one-time industry-leading work on 2SLGBTQ+ belonging," the organization said.
Then, there were the actual makers of the tape:
I know what some of you are going to say.
Let the players do what they want.
Don't force "their" lifestyle on everyone.
This is America.
But the NHL knows better.
The league knows it's not about any of that.
The league is doing this out of fear with a select few, as Burke said, making these decisions to appeal to anti-LGBTQ forces, and those people making the decisions aren't standing in front of the cameras and answering questions on why.
They won't because they're cowards.
This story is about inclusion, of course, but in some ways it's about something simpler: decency.
The NHL had a moment to be decent.
It could have fought the uglier base instincts that rule us all.
And this is why the NHL is on the wrong side of history.
Five of those years were spent proving Pepper X was a different plant with a different fruit and documenting its average heat over different plants and generations.
Then the cramps came.
Those cramps are horrible.
The greenish-yellow Pepper X has an earthy flavor unlike the spicy-sweet taste found in the bright red Carolina Reaper.
You get it in your arms.
You get it in your chest.
The burning sensation produced by capsaicin also releases endorphins and dopamine into the body, AP reported.
He has shared his inventions with medical professionals in the hopes of helping people who suffer from chronic pain or discomfort.
“No, it’s not the pinnacle,” AP reported.
Contrary to popular belief, the seeds of a pepper don’t make it hot.
Capsaicin is held in the placenta, or the tissue that holds the seeds.
Contributing: Jeffrey Collins, Associated Press
DENVER — It’s difficult to overstate how good the 2024 Chevrolet Corvette E-Ray is, or what an important step it constitutes for America’s great sports car.
Now, maybe the world’s great sports car.
Performance, design, technology, value: It’s hard to think of an area where the E-Ray isn't at least among the leaders.
All-wheel drive and hybrid-powered, the E-Ray is the biggest leap of imagination and engineering in the Corvette’s 70-year history.
Take your pick.
You’ll never get a consensus, but that’s the point: Each car is as good as it gets.
The fun is in the debate, specifications, lap times and unforgettable road trips.
Chevy engineers had been kicking around proposals for mid- and rear-engine models for decades.
That was a question of when, not if.
Locating the engine's weight over the rear wheels improves traction.
Powering the front axle with a small, efficient electric motor provides instant torque and precise control.
It’s also unrelated to the inexpensive Chevy Bolt.
The E-Ray was part of the plan for the eighth generation C8 model from the start.
That’s why its lithium-ion battery fits tidily in the center tunnel, and why the front electric motor and reworked steering and suspension don’t reduce space in the car’s front trunk.
Corvette Stingray coupe - $66,300
Stingray convertible - $73,300
Corvette E-Ray coupe - $102,900
E-Ray convertible - $109,900
Corvette Z06 - coupe $112,495
Z06 - convertible - $117,700
Prices exclude $1,695 destination charge
The E-Ray is 3 inches wider than a Stingray, with staggered 20- and 21-inch wheels.
Chevy explains the distinction between the two models thus:
The track-ready Z06 covers a standing quarter-mile in 10.6 seconds and hits 130 mph, while the E-Ray slouches through it in 10.5 and 129 mph.
Of such distinctions are buying decisions made, particularly when you’re dealing with some of the most passionate and informed car buyers on Earth.
And remember, this is the company that developed Lunar Rovers for the Apollo program.
“Electrification increases the driver’s feeling of control and composure in all conditions.”
The E-Ray’s sensors also interpret steering angle and pedal inputs to determine the driver’s intent and keep the car on course and at speed.
The electric all-wheel drive system dispenses torque for secure traction accelerating out of curves.
The 6.2L V8 engine produces 495 hp that go to the rear wheels, via the same eight-speed dual-clutch automatic transmission that powers all current Corvettes.
An electric motor located under the front trunk delivers another 160 hp.
There’s no physical connection between the two drivetrains, which must operate in harmony at all speeds, road surfaces and conditions.
The Acura NSX, which ended production last year, was the only other supercar with independently powered front and rear ends.
Its front wheels are driven by two separate electric motors.
A turbocharged V6 and electric motor power the rear.
The NSX developed 600 hp and accelerated to 60 mph in 2.9 seconds.
Prices started at $169,500.
Car recalls:Ford and Mercedes-Benz among nearly 250,000 vehicles recalled: Check car recalls here
I found the E-Ray remarkably easy to drive over two days that included highways, twisting mountain roads north of Denver and a tight slalom course at Pikes Peak International Raceway, 90 miles south of the city.
The power comes on with smooth precision, the steering is responsive and neutral, the ride surprisingly comfortable over bumps.
Speaking of running without gasoline, the electric front axle provides a "stealth mode," with speeds up to 45 mph when leaving home or driving through the neighborhood.
The electric motor also extends the V8’s four-cylinder operating mode on the highway, reducing fuel consumption and emissions.
The interior is luxuriously trimmed in leather, suede and carbon fiber.
The touch screen includes performance displays.
Other key features include:
Base price: $102,900 (all prices exclude $1,595 destination charge)
All-wheel drive hybrid two-seat sports coupe or convertible
On sale late 2023
Specifications as tested:
Model tested: Corvette E-Ray coupe
Price as tested: $102,900
Power: Electric motor powering front axle, 6.2L V8 powering rear axle
Output: 655 hp, 470 pound-feet of torque from V8, 125 from front-axle motor
Transmission: Eight-speed dual clutch automatic driving the rear wheels, front single-speed direct drive
0-60 time: 2.5 seconds
Wheelbase: 107.2 inches
Length: 184.6 inches
Width: 79.7 inches
Height: 48.6 inches
Cargo volume: 12.5 cubic feet combined front and rear
Dry weight: 3,774 pounds
Assembled in Bowling Green, Kentucky
Become a subscriber.
Interest in bodybuilding has skyrocketed since the pandemic began.
Searches for "bodybuilding" or "weightlifting" apps have grown by over 190% year over year, according to Google Trends data.
Among the most popular bodybuilding gym exercises that people seek out are squats, dumbbells and deadlifts.
But one analysis shows that by far the most popular weightlifting exercise – among both men and women – is the bench press.
The bench press is such a sought-after piece of gym equipment because the workout produces the kind of results bodybuilders are after, it's a straightforward exercise that's easy to do and because it offers a host of other health benefits beyond muscle growth alone.
Like many forms of resistance training, the bench press requires the use of some basic gym equipment.
These include a workout bench to lay back on, a long barbell that sits atop a secure rack frame on both sides of the bench, and weight plates of varying poundage that are added to each side of the barbell in equal amounts and then secured with clips at each end.
Once the right equipment is in place, getting the most out of the exercise requires good form.
Done properly, the exercise works several muscle groups, but its primary target is the pectoralis major, often called pecs.
"This is the large, fan-shaped muscle on top of our ribs and over our chest," says Adams.
She explains that the job of these chest muscles is to help move one's shoulders and control movement of both arms across the front of the body.
The bench press works other muscles, too.
"The triceps get some good stress as well as the exercise extends the elbow," Adams explains.
The exercise is also unique because it can be adjusted to target each muscle group more extensively.
Lifting from an inclined workout bench will target one's upper chest muscles, while decline bench-pressing movements will target one's lower chest muscles, explains Dr. Matthew Best, director of research in the sports medicine division at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine.
At either setting, however, "it's important to avoid trying to lift too much weight or performing the exercise too rapidly, which can predispose to injury," he adds.
More on squats:Squat challenges are all over social media.
What muscles does the exercise work?
Beyond increased upper-body strength in each of these muscle groups, bench pressing has other health benefits as well.
These include improved stamina and endurance, increased mobility and some research shows that the exercise can also increase bone density.
Performing the exercise also partly satisfies the physical activity recommendations set forth by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
For optimal health and strength, the agency recommends 75 to 150 minutes of moderate to vigorous aerobic activity each week in addition to muscle strengthening activities at least twice a week.
Maintaining such levels of physical activity, the CDC notes, can improve one's brain health, help manage weight, reduce the risk of disease and improve one's ability to do everyday activities.
"Many people are initially interested in weightlifting to increase muscle size, but quickly learn our muscles are involved in all kinds of hormonal interactions like lowering inflammation, stopping stress response and growing brain cells," explains Adams.
"Building both muscular endurance and muscular strength throughout the body pays off for your health."
In case you want to try:What do deadlifts work?
Understanding this popular weight-training exercise.
Wurlitzer is one of the oldest and most respected names in the music industry.
The Rudolph Wurlitzer Co. began in Cincinnati in 1856 and went on to worldwide recognition for its pianos, theater organs and jukeboxes.
For more than 130 years, Wurlitzer was, as the company slogan said, “The Name That Means Music to Millions.”
As with many Cincinnati institutions, Wurlitzer had German roots.
WASHINGTON - President Joe Biden plans to travel to Israel on Wednesday in a dramatic display of support for the U.S. ally as his administration seeks to prevent the Israel-Hamas war from expanding into a larger Middle East conflict.
Secretary of State Antony Blinken, who is currently in Tel Aviv, announced Biden's visit following an overnight meeting with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
"He's coming here at a critical moment for Israel, for the region and for the world," Blinken said.
The trip will come a week and a half after Hamas' surprise attack on Israel killed at least 1,300 Israelis, prompting airstrikes on Gaza in retaliation.
The death toll on both sides of the war has surpassed 4,000 − about 2,800 in Gaza − and more than 10,000 are wounded.
Blinken said at least 30 Americans were killed in Israel.
Blinken said Biden "will again make clear, as he's done unequivocally," that Israel "has the right and indeed the duty to defend its people" following the Hamas attack.
Biden will travel to Tel Aviv, where he will hold a bilateral meeting with Netanyahu and meet with other Israeli officials.
Blinken said Biden will hear from Israeli leaders about what it needs from the U.S. to defend itself.
The White House is seeking approval from Congress to provide military aid to Israel.
Israel has advised Palestinians in northern Gaza to head south ahead of a ground offensive, prompting concerns that other Middle East adversaries could join the conflict.
Biden has publicly warned other parties hostile to Israel – terrorist groups and other nations - not to use the Israel-Hamas War as a moment to interfere and expand the conflict.
Biden singled out Iran by name last week, saying he “made it clear to the Iranians: Be careful.”
But Iranian leaders warned Monday that an expanded Israel-Hamas War is increasingly becoming unavoidable, a sign that the primary backer of the Palestinian militant group Hamas is preparing for a larger conflict.
Iran is allies with Hamas but the Biden administration has so far said it found no evidence that Iran either knew about the attack on Israel or helped Hamas carry it out.
Biden canceled a previously scheduled trip Monday to Pueblo, Colorado, where he planned to tout his administration's efforts to expand wind turbines, as the administration scrambled to arrange the Israel visit.
John Kirby, a White House spokesman for national security issues, said Biden will "affirm our solidarity with Israel, and he will look forward to getting an update from Israeli officials about their strategy and the pace of their military operations."
Biden will also talk to Israel about the hostages who are being held by Hamas and will discuss coordinating efforts to get Americans back home, Kirby said.
Asked whether it's safe for Biden to travel to the region, Kirby said, “We wouldn't make a trip, obviously, if we did not believe that proper security measures would be in place.”
Biden will reiterate his concern that Hamas does not represent the vast majority of the Palestinian people, and he will discuss the humanitarian needs of all civilians in Gaza, Kirby said.
Reach Joey Garrison on X, formerly known as Twitter, @joeygarrison and Collins @mcollinsNEWS.
Editor's note: Part one of a five-part USA TODAY series revealing why America hasn't solved its long struggle with Type 2 diabetes.
For chef Robin Ray, newly married with young stepchildren, the turning point came when a stabbing chest pain sent her rushing to the emergency room.
“I didn’t think you’d make it,” the doctor said.
The moments were turning points for all three to get serious about addressing their diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes, in which the body can’t properly regulate blood sugar, has become so common it’s almost considered inconsequential.
More than 1 in 10 Americans have the disease (though many don't know) and another nearly 4 in 10 are at risk for it.
In total, half of all adults and a quarter of teenagers have diabetes or pre-diabetes.
Its financial costs are astronomical.
The country spends more than $300 billion a year to address diabetes, accounting for $1 out of every $4 spent on health care.
And its personal tolls are even worse: heart attacks, amputations, blindness, kidney disease, double the risk of premature death.
It also causes what’s known as “diabetes distress,” the daily burdens and emotional toll of living with and managing a chronic ailment that can lead to regular dips in energy, foggy thinking and depression, and a sense of isolation.
The most frustrating aspect of Type 2 diabetes, experts say, is that it has long been largely preventable and controllable.
“We have made tremendous gains in understanding diabetes,” said Dr. Donald Berwick, a pediatrician and former administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Roughly 40% of people who died early in the coronavirus pandemic had Type 2 diabetes, a rate four times higher than people without the disease.
Even when elevated blood sugar levels are below the threshold for type 2 diabetes, the risk for heart disease jumps 30% to 50% compared with people with normal blood sugar levels.
(Type 1 diabetes, which accounts for 5% to 10% of diabetes, is caused by the immune system and is unrelated to diet or lifestyle.)
America’s failure to address Type 2 diabetes highlights larger problems with our food and medical systems, Berwick and other experts said.
A soda costs less than a bottle of water, a double cheeseburger and fries less than a carton of blueberries.
Patients wait months for medical appointments only to see the back of a white coat for the short time they’re allotted.
Treating disease costs society far more than preventing it but typically provides more profit for insurance companies, hospitals and the pharmaceutical industry.
The USA TODAY Health team spoke with scores of health care providers, researchers, community leaders and patients for this five-part series to understand why Type 2 diabetes continues to worsen in America despite known solutions.
The answer isn't simple.
It involves systemic problems facing everyone in society, not just those with diabetes: a food system designed to sell products; a medical system in which cutting off a leg is less expensive than saving it; the high cost of healthy living and the fact that breaking habits takes a lot more than just personal willpower.
This first story looks at what it takes for people to cope with or overcome the disease.
Then, we explore one community in a David vs. Goliath battle against a food system that fails to prioritize people's health.
More in series:Diabetes runs deep in rural Mississippi.
Locals have taken to growing their own solutions.
We next travel to Colorado, which has the lowest level of diabetes in the nation.
Yet even in this state, where hiking trails and gorgeous views abound, economic and other disparities make it easier for some people to avoid diabetes than others.
More in series:A diabetes disparity: Why Colorado's healthy lifestyle brand isn't shared by all
It's tough to manage a chronic illness in the face of high medical costs, scattered care and caregiver frustration and burnout, so we highlight that next.
More in series:The steep cost of Type 2: When diabetes dragged her down, she chose to fight
Finally, we explore solutions, addressing why it will take a combination of education, medication, medical devices and improved food access to solve this national problem.
More in series:Solutions exist to end the Type 2 diabetes dilemma but too few get the help they need
But it will take "sensible action" from across many sectors, including health care, science, nutrition, business, public health and politics to change the financial and other incentives that drive so many Americans toward sickness instead of health.
"If we do it incrementally or don't do it at all, we're all going to be toast in 50 years from diet-related illnesses and a depleted environment."
There’s no question personal responsibility plays a role in fighting diabetes.
They’ve reduced their dependence on daily medication and hope to have saved themselves the horrors of more amputations, blindness and dialysis.
They’ve extended their lives and improved the quality of that time.
But like many medical problems, the challenges of diabetes go well beyond individual responsibility and blame.
Agarwal recently led a series of studies in the journal The Lancet that looked at diabetes rates around the world.
Poverty, the studies showed, was a major driver of diabetes, along with racism and unequal access to healthy food and high-quality medical care.
Personal stories illustrate how these structural issues play out in the lives of so many Americans.
 “I’m healthy because of privilege – not diet, not exercise, not determination,” he said.
“It’s going to be all right after a while, as long as I keep this spirit,” he said.
Ray’s love for food began when she was 8 years old, watching Julia Child on TV.
During family gatherings, she would run around taking everyone’s dinner order.
Then she’d scurry back to the kitchen with a notepad full of scribbles.
Throughout her life, she made fried chicken, pork chops, baked mac and cheese, collard greens, and even a whole roasted chicken filled with wild rice and two sticks of butter – everything that made her soul sing.
In her world, food was home.
Food was family.
Food was love.
But that was some pretty tough love.
In 2002, Ray was diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes.
Her father, grandmother, aunts and uncles all had diabetes.
She knew what it meant.
“For you to tell me I can’t have ice blue raspberry Kool-Aid was like you shut down my world,” Ray said.
She didn't dwell on the diagnosis and continued with life.
Her culinary career took her to Italy, where she learned and fell even more in love with food.
She returned to St. Louis, got married and became a mom to her husband’s two children ‒ “beautiful bonus babies,” as she described them.
Through the years, she continued to express love through cooking and eating.
In 2015, a stabbing chest pain sent her to the emergency room.
Doctors assured Ray she hadn’t had a heart attack, but they warned that her life was on the line.
At 5-foot-2, she weighed 334 pounds and had an A1C, a measure of average blood sugar of 11%, well above the 6.5% cutoff to be considered diabetic.
Her diabetes – and her diet – were out of control.
She and her primary care doctor decided she would pursue weight loss surgery.
But she also decided to use her culinary prowess to transform her diet.
She reconfigured favorite foods, substituting healthier ingredients: Collard greens cooked in smoked fats or ham hocks turned into a kale, turnip and rutabaga recipe flavored with natural chicken broth fat, oils and seasonings.
She fostered her feelings into new recipes and brought them to North Sarah Food Hub, which partnered with Barnes-Jewish Hospital to make packaged, pre-made meals for St. Louis residents with diabetes and limited access to fresh food.
“I became excited about food again, and food became a joy.”
It isn’t always easy, of course.
Ray admits to an occasional cookie craving.
But now she takes the time to think about how her body processes that cookie and whether it’s worthwhile.
She hopes her cooking can help other people make the same transformation she did.
Her staff at North Sarah helps her create new recipes for others.
She wants to provide nourishment that allows people to avoid illness and medicine.
The lifetime risk of developing Type 2 diabetes if a parent has it is 40%.
If both parents have it, the risk jumps to 70%.
He knew he was at risk, but he pushed his luck, he said, by eating poorly during the pandemic and falling out of his exercise routine.
With the luxury of working from home, walking to the kitchen and bathroom was often the extent of his daily activity.
On Feb. 14, 2022 – Valentine’s Day – he went to an urgent care clinic, concerned his breathing trouble meant he had bronchitis.
His blood pressure measured 210 over 110, well above normal levels that top out at 120 over 80.
A chest X-ray showed fluid filling his lungs, leading to congestive heart failure.
The clinic sent him straight to a local emergency room, where he was diagnosed with a blockage of the left descending artery – a clogged artery made worse by diabetes.
If he had waited any longer, he would have had a massive heart attack, his doctor later told him.
After his release from the hospital, he went to the drugstore to fill his new prescriptions.
The pharmacist told him she couldn’t fill one because it would cost $1,000.
He’d have to wait until his insurance approved it.
“Please fill it,” he said.
She stressed the cost.
“Fill it,” he pleaded, putting the charge on his credit card.
Medication helped him lose 70 pounds in three months.
When his local drugstore ran out of the weight-loss drug, he easily drove to another pharmacy and then another to find what he needed.
His 100 hours of high-quality cardiac rehabilitation were fully covered by insurance.
He could devote all his energy to getting well because he didn’t have to focus on how to afford his care.
When they finally show up in the emergency room, “because they will,” they will cost the system far more, he said.
On the day Haynes stepped on a rusty nail in 2019, he walked all day as the nail pierced the sole of his sneaker and then his foot.
By the time he took off his shoe that night, his foot was infected.
He landed in the hospital for two months as doctors and nurses tried, mostly unsuccessfully, to get the infection and Haynes’ blood sugar under control.
By the time he was released, he knew enough about Type 2 diabetes to realize his daily blood sugar levels – typically in the mid-400s – were four times above what he had been told to shoot for.
But nothing he did or ate seemed to make a difference.
He had long since traded ribs for salads, beer for water.
His wife, Angela, barely noticed when James started wearing multiple pairs of socks, pouring powder on his feet and buying bigger shoes.
His feet tingled a lot, he said, but he was coping with it.
James ended up in the emergency room again, dehydrated and in need of antibiotics.
The doctor amputated the baby toe on his right foot, leaving a large open wound.
“I didn't like that we're not going to try to save anything, we're just going to start cutting.”
James was fading.
Antibiotics left him looking sickly, his voice so weak Angela could barely hear him.
“I felt like I was watching my husband slowly dying,” she said.
She thought it would take months to get James in to see the heart disease specialist, but the office called and asked if they could come the next day.
“We started looking forward to these visits because there was always hope,” Angela Haynes said, though she felt guilty they were taking up so much of the important doctor’s time.
Haynes had blockages in blood vessels on both legs.
Once he got the blood flowing again, Haynes began to feel better.
His flesh returned to its normal color.
The wound started healing at last.
Walking became easier.
Then disaster struck again.
On July 2, 2022, Haynes caught COVID-19.
"Everything went downhill after that," he said.
During his 13-day illness, the bacteria in his foot raged out of control.
Every week, a surgeon would come to the door of his hospital room and before even stepping all the way in ask Haynes whether he had decided to get his leg amputated.
I was born with this.
He was worried about how he’d get around, how he’d be able to work to support his family if he had only one leg.
No one took the time to explain why they thought the leg needed to come off or how he’d cope without it, Haynes said.
In late November, he was finally sent home in a wheelchair.
Back at the hospital, Haynes was told his foot was broken, essentially beyond repair.
He agreed to a below-the-knee amputation.
Released right before Christmas, he spent the next three weeks in bed wondering how he’d manage the rest of his life.
Finally, it looked as if his luck might be turning around.
With the leg gone, his diabetes improved.
His blood sugar dropped into the 120s or one-teens.
His blurry vision cleared up.
During his long hospital stay, he befriended nurses and learned about a program for people who needed prostheses.
The man who ran it called early in the year and said he had received a donated leg.
If it fit Haynes, he could have it while waiting for insurance to pay for a personalized one.
Miraculously, it did.
Haynes spent the next six months teaching himself to walk again.
The donor leg was heavy and uncomfortable.
He wasn't mobile enough to hold down a job.
One late spring night, picking up dinner at a nearby restaurant, he headed to the bathroom for a pit stop.
A sink had been leaking all day and Haynes slipped in the puddle, falling backward.
He's still recovering from the resulting wrist surgery.
He and Angela are living – barely – off her part-time salary as a secretary and a church organist.
Haynes has tried "at least three or four times" to receive government assistance, but they keep losing his paperwork, or not believing he's disabled, though he once checked himself out of the hospital and arrived at an appointment in his wheelchair to prove he didn't have a leg.
Still, he clings to his faith and the positive attitude he has long used to cheer up himself and others.
These are his secret weapons against diabetes and everything else life throws his way.
"I try to put a smile on other people's faces," he said.
"It keeps my day going."
This story is part of a reporting fellowship sponsored by the Association of Health Care Journalists and supported by the Commonwealth Fund.
Our goal remains the same: Provide book lovers with the best, most accurate snapshot of what people are reading by showing which titles are selling.
It is a master list, unbound by genre and format, of what’s selling broadly across the U.S.
Her novel "It Starts With Us" claimed the No.
1 spot in its first week, her highest debut ever, selling more than 800,000 copies on its first day of sales.
It was her fourth book to hit No.
1 in 2022.
The USA TODAY list is a ranking of the top-selling titles each week from a broad range of businesses including major chains, independent bookstores and online retailers.
It reflects combined sales of titles in print and electronic format, if available.
Our data team weighs and compiles those numbers to generate the week's 150 top-selling titles.
The rankings reflect sales from the previous Monday through Sunday.
The full list will publish online at 6 a.m. Wednesdays, with the top 50 titles publishing in print Thursdays.
The list, which began in 1993, went on hiatus in December.
It is the longest-running USA TODAY data journalism project.
In our continued commitment to bring readers more books coverage, USA TODAY is also excited to announce a new content partnership with The Novel Neighbor, an independently owned and operated bookstore in St. Louis.
They are expert booksellers and passionate readers who are deeply connected to what their community is reading.
With the partnership will come regular profiles of independent bookstores across the country, highlighting the important role of these businesses in their local communities.
Novel Neighbor will also be sharing expert book recommendations and fun takes on book trends.
We can't wait to see what you've been reading!
Israel bombed areas of southern Gaza where it had told Palestinians to flee to ahead of an expected ground invasion, killing dozens of people on Tuesday in retaliatory attacks it says are targeted at Hamas militants that rule the besieged territory, according to the Associated Press.
With no water, fuel or food being delivered to Gaza since Hamas’ brutal attack on Israel last week, mediators struggled to break a deadlock over delivering supplies to increasingly desperate civilians, aid groups and hospitals.
Who can pass through is controlled by Hamas and Egypt, however since Israel started attacking Gaza with airstrikes in response to Hamas's attack, operations have been hampered.
Last week Israel ordered an evacuation of northern Gaza, an edict that fueled chaos across the Israeli-occupied territory of about 2.3 million Palestinians.
Unable to view our graphics?
Click here to see them.
Israel’s military told some 1 million Palestinians on Friday to evacuate northern Gaza and head to the southern part of the besieged territory, an unprecedented order applying to almost half the population ahead of an expected ground invasion against the ruling Hamas militant group.
A closed military zone has been created by the Israel Defense Forces surrounding the Gaza Strip.
Hamas continues to try to infiltrate the area, though in smaller forces.
The border breaches from the initial attack are being rebuilt.
There are around 300,000 Israeli soldiers are gathering near the Gaza Strip.
The Gerald R. Ford Carrier Strike Group, a force of six warships headed by the U.S. Navy’s largest and most advanced nuclear aircraft carrier, arrived in the eastern Mediterranean Sea on Tuesday as part of the U.S. response to the attack by Hamas on Israel.
See more with this visual story: How U.S. Navy ships in the Mediterranean are positioned to support Israel
Israel’s defense minister says electricity, food, water and fuel to Gaza will be halted as part of a “complete siege” of the nation.
Israel launched strikes inside Gaza on Monday morning.
Several mosques and a marketplace are hit and an unknown number of people are injured.
The Israeli military says it's conducting one of the largest airstrikes ever against Hamas in Gaza and says more than 1,200 targets were hit.
A Hamas spokesperson said Monday the group will kill one civilian hostage each time Israel targets civilians in Gaza without warning.
2:19 a.m. On social media site X, formerly Twitter, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu says Israel has destroyed the sites used to launch the rocket attacks.
See more with this visual story: Gaza, the 140-square-mile strip at the core of the conflict
The mortars damaged the roof and shrapnel hit the hall's entrance, the ministry said.
The crossing has been closed amid the fighting.
A Hamas official said Saturday that the hostages could be freed in exchange for Palestinian terrorists serving prison sentences in Israel.
More than 1,900 people have died, including at least 14 Americans, and fighting continues after the Palestinian militant groups Hamas and Islamic Jihad launched thousands of rockets from Gaza against Israeli cities and sent an estimated 1,000 gunmen across Israel's border to attack and kidnap civilians on Oct. 7.
See more with this visual story: Maps and graphics show how Hamas militants' deadly raid unfolded
The coordinated assault, the deadliest attack on Israel in decades, caught the nation and the world by surprise.
Israeli Defense Forces responded with airstrikes and rocket attacks against cities inside the Gaza Strip.
Hamas seized dozens of people as hostages from various locations during its attack and has detained them in Gaza.
The exact number isn’t known, but the hostages, from Israel and other countries, include “civilians, children and grandmothers,” an IDF spokesperson told CNN.
6:30 a.m.: Hamas launches Operation Al-Aqsa Flood against Israel, firing thousands of rockets from inside the Gaza Strip into Israeli cities, including Tel Aviv and Jerusalem.
See more with this visual story: How Hamas overwhelmed Iron Dome
See more with this visual story: Did Hamas defeat Israel's Iron Dome?
Thousands of rockets were fired within minutes
7 a.m.: Hamas militants kill at least 260 people at an open-air music festival in a field about 3 miles from the Gaza border.
An unknown number of hostages are seized.
7:40 a.m.: Israeli Defense Forces say Hamas fighters have crossed into southern Israel from Gaza.
8:15 a.m.: Air-raid sirens sound in Jerusalem.
8:25 a.m.: Israeli officials announce Hamas is taking hostages in southern Israel.
10:30 a.m.: Israel begins airstrikes inside Gaza.
11:35 a.m.: Netanyahu addresses Israel, says nation is at war.
1:45 p.m. Israel says it has hit 21 Hamas military buildings.
6:08 p.m.: President Joe Biden speaks with Netanyahu, assures him of U.S. support.
10:16 p.m.: Netanyahu makes another address, vows vengeance against Hamas.
Timeline of the conflict: Why the 2023 Israeli-Palestinian fighting is among the most brutal in years
SOURCE: Associated Press
Keep up with developments from Gaza:Sign up for USA TODAY's Israel-Hamas War newsletter.
Today, he's a gay, tattooed, non-denominational rabbi living in New York.
Most of the people he went to Jewish boys school with are right-wing.
This week, those same peers bullied him in group chats.
They called him a Hebrew word meaning a traitor to the other side.
His situation resembles many across the U.S. and rest of the world as people grapple with differing opinions among friends, family and colleagues; A college group text devolving because no one can agree.
Millennials walking on eggshells for fear of upsetting their Gen Z partners.
There's no one way to approach sensitive issues of this nature.
"If you’re feeling too overwhelmed with your own emotions, that’s OK. Just let your partner or loved ones know you need some time or space before you are up for having deep conversations."
Emotions have been running high since Hamas attacked Israel on Oct. 7; 4,200 have died on both sides, according to the United Nations.
Many have expressed their fears and frustrations on social media in an effort to empathize and seek personal connections to tragedies in lieu of or in addition to private conversations.
Maybe to alleviate guilt, to feel like they're doing something, to "perform" uneducated solidarity.
These posts often go awry when people play the comparison game.
"The problem is not the desire to find a personal connection," says Benjamin Goldman, licensed mental health counselor.
Anyone can throw statistics at a situation to try and justify their points.
But many aren't really looking for meaningful conversation
Aziz Abu-Sarah's octogenarian parents live in Jerusalem.
He visited them there three weeks ago.
Now, he's afraid for their safety.
A Palestinian peacemaker, his Israeli and Palestinian friends have been asking him how to broker dialogue.
"My advice was this: refrain (from) political discussions," he says.
You always do, you will eventually, but now, maybe is not the time to start going into what happened 100 years ago and 50 years ago.
Are you looking to vent?
For a dialogue?
To change their mind?
Because "if you're looking for a conversation that takes place in a shared experience in pain, and then you go to someone with a conflicting experience from you to have that conversation, you will be hurt," Goldman says.
"And they will also probably be hurt."
It may also be worth some introspection.
"Additionally, we are influenced by the media's synthesis of information and the mediums we trust to deliver it to our screens and inboxes."
Focus less on politics and more on the personal if you're aiming for a productive conversation.
Abu-Sarah adds: "Being vulnerable for each other and being willing to listen, instead of being quick to fight and argue – this is true in all situations."
He suggests focusing less on your position at the start of a dialogue and more on your story: "Before we start taking positions: 'Here why I stand (for Israel's) right to defend itself; here's why I stand for Palestinians' right to end occupation.'
Before you say, your position, tell your story.
Consider, too, "is there any common ground from which you can start?"
That it's not OK to kidnap women and children?
That it's terrible for people not to have access to basic utilities?
You are also allowed to hit pause if you're not ready to talk just yet.
"I've been muting a lot of my Instagram stories – even of people that I agree with – because I go to Instagram to unwind, and the constant barrage of videos on the Israeli-Gaza conflict make me anxious instead."
Watch out:Israel, Gaza and when your social media posts hurt more than help
Some relationships may not survive disagreements of this nature.
And that is OK, too.
They'll sit as open wounds.
"Some of the damage that has been done to me, and some of the relationships that I have around this, I think are irreparable," he says.
And sometimes we out of fear lash out.
Remember, as Abu-Sarah says: "Behind every angry statement, behind every talking point we throw at each other, there's a hurt person."
In case you missed:The videos out of Israel, Gaza are graphic, but some can't look away: How to cope
Ron DeSantis was able to transport hundreds of people from Israel to Florida just days after announcing an evacuation initiative by tapping into an existing rescue program, Project Dynamo, that likely would have gone forward with the effort regardless of the state’s support.
Florida has paid for five flights to evacuate people out of Israel between Friday and Sunday, including one that landed in Tampa Sunday night with 270 people, but Project Dynamo coordinated everything else, according to the group’s CEO and founder Bryan Stern.
Project Dynamo was founded in 2021 to help rescue people from Afghanistan after American troops withdrew from the country and has conducted missions everywhere from Ukraine to Sudan.
The flight to Tampa Sunday was the group’s 602nd evacuation mission.
Stern spoke about the rescue missions during a news conference Monday and said he was raising money to pay for the Tampa flight when the state of Florida stepped in to offer assistance.
Many commercial flights out of Israel were canceled following a surprise attack by Hamas and subsequent retaliatory measures by Israel.
That has left many Americans struggling to find a way out of Israel.
DeSantis declared a state of emergency last week and directed the Florida Division of Emergency Management to coordinate evacuation efforts.
Stern said he was grateful for Florida's financial support, the first time a government agency has funded one of his evacuation efforts, but also made it clear that he would've done everything to get people home safely, regardless of whether Florida funded the effort.
DeSantis' trip to Tampa on Sunday was “the first time an American politician has ever met us home,” Stern said.
The evacuation flight to Tampa involved gathering people from more than 12 different areas across Israel, Stern said.
On the flight were Ron and Linda Neumann, who are trying to become dual citizens of Israel and the United States, and their dog.
Ron Neumann said after two flights out of Israel were canceled he tried to find a way out of the country by contacting U.S. State Department officials and state officials in Florida.
Stern didn't know the exact cost of the most recent flight from Israel to Florida, but said the average cost to charter a plane from Tampa to Israel right now is around $2 million.
The governor's office and the Florida Division of Emergency Management provided no answers to questions from the USA TODAY Network - Florida on costs of the trips.
DeSantis has slammed the White House for "dragging its feet" on the charters and said its flights "dump people in Europe."
The flights from Israel occurred the same weekend CBS News' 60 Minutes aired a segment Sunday critical of DeSantis' actions in September 2022, when his administration lured about 50 mostly Venezuelan asylum-seekers from Texas to Martha's Vineyard, off the Massachusetts' coast, with the false promise of jobs and housing.
Money for that trip came from a $12 million fund established within the state's Division of Emergency Management for relocating undocumented migrants from within Florida to other locations.
The program has since been expanded and rewritten by the Florida Legislature to authorize DeSantis' action, after its legality was challenged in a handful of lawsuits.
DeSantis while campaigning in Iowa, home of the first Republican presidential nomination contest, has cited the Martha's Vineyard trip as proof of his commitment to combating illegal immigration and to underscore the failures of the Biden administration.
DeSantis' White House bid probably lives or dies based on how he performs in Iowa.
Those evacuated from Israel by the state-financed effort focused their praise on Project Dynamo, touting the team's skills and efficiency.
"I'm humbled," said Linda Neumann.
John Kennedy of the USA Today Network-Florida's capital bureau contributed to this report.
Arizona State University police say they are investigating an incident in which a queer faculty member was confronted and injured on the school's campus.
An official with the conservative group Turning Point USA said late Thursday night that two of their "crew members" were involved in the altercation.
The incident occurred Wednesday afternoon in Tempe, according to police spokesperson Adam Wolfe.
Wurlitzer is one of the oldest and most respected names in the music industry.
The Rudolph Wurlitzer Co. began in Cincinnati in 1856 and went on to worldwide recognition for its pianos, theater organs and jukeboxes.
For more than 130 years, Wurlitzer was, as the company slogan said, “The Name That Means Music to Millions.”
As with many Cincinnati institutions, Wurlitzer had German roots.
The undertow and the waves.
A black ski mask conceals the man’s face.
The anonymous YouTube channel host almost always sports a black baseball cap embellished with the channel’s logo above his mask.
The channel had nearly 9,000 subscribers and a catalog of 180 videos that offered advice, stories and tips on the process of crossing the Arizona-Mexico border.
Videos walked viewers through how much they would have to pay in smuggling fees and advice on how to cross without a guide or “coyote.”
NFL power rankings entering Week 7 of the 2023 season (previous rank in parentheses):
49ers (1): Way too premature to suggest they got exposed against the league's No.
Lions (3): They're indeed in rare air – one more win would make them 6-1 for the first time in the Super Bowl era (since 1966).
And while it can be dangerous to look too far ahead, even for a team on a four-game heater, there don't appear to be many losses on the other side of Detroit's Week 9 bye.
And if their RB room gets healthy, and WR Jameson Williams continues morphing into the weapon he was intended to be?
Chiefs (4): Including postseason, QB Patrick Mahomes has now started 100 NFL games … and won 80 of them.
Fifteen percent of his career victories, or 12, have come against Denver – a team that will be back in Kansas City's crosshairs in Week 8.
But Philly couldn't hang in the Jets' mosh pit, and next must try and keep pace with Miami's track team.
Maybe breaking out the Kelly Green for "Sunday Night Football" will have the desired effect, though.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
New England should pose little problem in Week 7, but then Buffalo will be under the prime-time microscope for three in a row.
Dolphins (6): How good – really – is this offense?
The numbers, individually and collectively, have it tracking to be among the best in league history.
In fact, Miami's O is averaging better than 100 yards more than the second-ranked Eagles.
But dates with the Philly and K.C.
Jaguars (7): A club that just spent two weeks in London now hits the road for two more games outside Duval County.
Ravens (10): A team that's only had two home games will play four of its next five in Baltimore.
On average, the Browns are surrendering 200.4 yards a week, more than 60 fewer than Baltimore's second-ranked defense.
Bengals (22): They leveled back to .500 entering a much-needed bye week.
The rookie's 50 catches for 598 yards are both records in the Super Bowl era for a player through six career games.
It's his touchdown production that's down by nearly half.
(And, yes, it was to Tom Brady, who was rarely embarrassed by the Jets.)
Texans (18): They have two players with at least three TD catches … same as the entirety of Houston's 2022 season.
No team has fewer giveaways than their three.
Buccaneers (14): If you don't want QB Baker Mayfield to shoulder an inordinate amount of the offensive load, you can't wallow at the bottom of the league with 3.0 yards per carry.
Chargers (20): You can argue they stole defeat from the jaws of victory yet again.
Better regroup quickly for a short week that will end in Kansas City against the rested Chiefs … in a game the Bolts really need.
Raiders (23): A win at Chicago on Sunday puts Las Vegas above .500 … which wouldn’t be bad at all for a team tied for the AFC lead with 12 turnovers.
Packers (24): Assuming they're revitalized coming out of their bye, could be time to go on a run given they're not scheduled to see an opponent currently sporting a winning record until Week 10.
Vikings (25): Another week and another key injury (LB Marcus Davenport, ankle) for a struggling team apparently determined not to have a fire sale.
Commanders (27): With four of their next six against NFC East opponents, including both games against the Giants, Washington could well be entering a stretch that determines its season … and quite possibly HC Ron Rivera's viability beyond 2023.
Falcons (16): Is there any head coach more fun to watch – meaning, literally taking in his facial expressions – than Arthur Smith?
It's come earlier this year.
Giants (29): ESPN Stats & Info sums up their start pretty well, noting the G-Men are the fourth team since 1950 which failed to score an offensive touchdown before halftime in each of their first six games.
In fact, New York's offense hasn't scored a TD since Week 3.
Broncos (28): They'll only leave Denver one time from now until December.
That may not necessarily be a plus given how this 1-5 outfit is trending … though if Sean Payton continues offloading players, at least the home fans will have some new guys to boo.
Bears (26): Two steps forward, one step back for QB Justin Fields, whose dislocated thumb threatens to send this squad back into hibernation.
Cardinals (30): That's three straight losses by an average of 16.7 points per.
It took a month, but it appears the Cards are who we thought they were.
Patriots (31): Among their many, many failings?
No team has fewer takeaways (3).
And no team has a higher percentage of drives (81.7%) that end without points.
Follow USA TODAY Sports' Nate Davis on X, formerly Twitter @ByNateDavis.
Tests apparently ruled out internal injuries.
“So that’s good news.”
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
LAS VEGAS – Well, at least one thing hasn’t changed when it comes to the Patriot Way.
And there’s been so much of that lately.
If only it were that simple.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
They didn’t quit, cave or fold up the tent.
But they wound up with the same lousy result.
And the story again is that New England just isn’t good enough anymore.
The Patriots are 1-5.
Here’s another one: The Patriots had a grand total of -2 net yards in the first quarter.
The last time they were 1-5?
Go back to 1995 – the year after Robert Kraft bought the franchise.
Funny, the team wore the New England uniforms.
But somewhere along the way – or sometime after Tom Brady departed – they changed the definition of the Patriot Way.
Remember how it used to be?
During those glory years spanning two decades, they often came back because they could count on the other guys screwing up in crunch time.
Now, with Sunday providing another example, the shoe is other the other foot.
Start with this: The Patriots committed 10 penalties for 79 yards.
This is the undisciplined stuff that facilitates losing football games.
The flags came early, as in two penalties on two linemen on the first two offensive snaps.
And they came late, as in three penalties in the final three minutes.
A defensive pass interference call on third down extended a Raiders drive, then after New England forced a punt, holding and delay-of-game penalties backed up the offense and set up the disaster of a game-clinching safety with 1:47 remaining as Mac Jones was sacked in the end zone.
There was also a sweet catch-and-run by Ezekiel Elliott in the second quarter that went for a 74-yard touchdown…until it was called back by a holding penalty.
Yeah, there’s another type of Patriot Way showing up these days.
Jones, the third-year quarterback, led a promising drive into Raiders territory late in the second quarter that might have tied the game.
Then as he rolled away from pursuit on a second down, he threw across his body and way the head of tight end Hunter Henry.
"Just trying to do too much," said Jones, who passed for 200 yards but didn’t throw for a TD.
The football glanced off Parker’s hands, the receiver blowing an opportunity to at least position for a possible go-ahead field goal.
The collection of gaffes is more stunning when considering the man in charge.
For a coach who has preached details while enjoying so much success – including six Super Bowl championships with the Patriots – this has to turn his stomach to watch.
"Right now, it’s just about this game," he said.
"So, you can’t compare those."
There was a measure of progress.
Yet just like last week and the week before, the Patriots are left to process their reality.
As Jones put it, “You’ve got to watch the film with truthful eyes.”
There’s a lot of football left.
That can be interpreted as half-full or half-empty.
If the losing continues, the questions about the team’s focus and intensity will escalate.
"It’s up to us to look ourselves in the mirror and see who we are individually and what are we going to bring every day," said receiver Kendrick Bourne, who caught 10 passes for 89 yards on Sunday.
The morale is certainly being tested, if it isn’t shaken.
David Andrews, the ninth-year veteran center, is the only starter on offense or defense who remains from the last Super Bowl title team.
He doesn’t see much choice when it comes to the approach to this crisis.
"Football is like life," Andrews said.
You can’t lay down.
You can’t quit.
I don’t believe in that.
Never believed in that.
And lately, keep getting off the mat as another version of the Patriot Way.
Week 6 in the NFL brought some stunning upsets, including a pair that unseated the last remaining undefeated teams.
Elsewhere in the NFC, a team that had been waiting a long time to contend, the Detroit Lions, are balanced, versatile and looking poised to make a run.
Here are the winners and losers from Sunday of Week 6.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
On the back of an aggressive defense, the Jacksonville Jaguars (4-2) took down the Indianapolis Colts 37-20 for a season sweep against their AFC South rivals.
That gives Jacksonville a nice bump in the race for the division title, but if there’s any indication that that Jaguars may stick around, it’s the team’s turnover differential of +7, which ranks second in the NFL.
Jacksonville leads the NFL in takeaways with 15.
By comparison, the Jaguars had 27 last season, tied for fourth-best.
Their four takeaways against the Colts helped them build an early lead.
Jacksonville still allows far too many explosive passing plays (it allowed three completions of 40 or more yards Sunday) and will need to limit those moving forward.
The Lions (5-1), as the only team in the NFC North with a winning record, are running away with the division.
They have a two-and-a-half game lead on the next closest team.
They are balanced, with an offense capable of explosive fits and a defense that limits big plays.
What makes Detroit so fun to watch is that it is versatile enough to win in different ways.
And its players are maximizing effort, too.
In a 20-6 road win against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, quarterback Jared Goff lit up the box score to the tune of 353 yards and a pair of touchdowns.
In previous weeks, it had been David Montgomery and the rushing game posting big numbers.
The defense has been steadily productive and limited Tampa Bay to two third-down conversions and no red=zone touchdowns on two tries.
For the first time since 1969, the Lions have won four straight games by 14 points or more.
More may be coming.
It was still missing Aaron Rodgers, yet the Jets defeated the Eagles 20-14 for the first time in franchise history.
The Jets (3-3) are hanging around in the AFC East, though the offense with Zach Wilson (19-of-33 for 186 yards) under center remains anemic.
The Jets converted just two-of-11 third-down attempts (18.2%).
They went just one-of-four in the red zone.
Those numbers alone make it remarkable that New York upset the Eagles, but it also shows the proficiency of the defense.
This was a statement victory.
But unless the offense eventually shows it can bear some weight, this style will prove unsustainable.
By no means is he a finished product, and he still needs to sustain this production over a longer sample size, but second-year Washington Commanders quarterback Sam Howell is taking steps toward becoming a reliable option.
Howell, 23, ranks ninth in the NFL in passing (1,500 yards) and is posting an above-average completion rate (67.8%).
In a 24-16 win against the Atlanta Falcons, Howell recorded his first three-touchdown game.
He also did it against a team that came into Sunday with the eighth-ranked passing defense (190.8 yards per game allowed).
Yet, what has made Howell’s performance this year so impressive is that he’s doing it behind a tattered Washington (3-3) offensive line that has yielded more sacks (34) than any other in the NFL.
Some of those sacks, of course, are on Howell, but his ability to evade pressure and release the ball quickly should give him some staying power in the league.
San Francisco, the most consistent team in the league thus far, failed to seize opportunities against the Browns in a 19-17 defeat.
And while a pair of missed field goals loom large, second-year quarterback Brock Purdy played the worst game of his career.
Rookie third-round place kicker Jake Moody pushed a 41-yard field goal that would have won the game, and he also hooked a 54-yarder in the first quarter.
This was a game in which P.J.
Walker started at quarterback for the Browns, who were also Chubb, their longtime offensive engine.
But New York (1-5) settled for a pair of field goals Sunday night after it had marched the ball down to Buffalo’s 11-yard line and failed miserably in the red zone.
There was the end of the first half, when New York got it down to the Bills’ 1-yard line.
Then there was the final play of the game, an untimed down with the Giants again at the Buffalo 1-yard line.
This time New York did opt to pass, but the attempt fell incomplete, cementing a 14-9 loss.
New York ended the game 0-for-5 in red zone tries and 0-for-3 in goal-to-go spots.
Against weaker teams, maybe those missteps aren't fatal.
Against the Bills, you’re asking to lose.
They recorded 24 first downs to Cincinnati’s 15.
They held the ball for eight more minutes.
But Seattle was just 1-of-5 in red-zone situations, including 1-of-4 in goal-to-go scenarios.
The Seahawks had a couple of shots at the end zone inside the four-minute mark in the fourth quarter.
The first time, Smith was sacked twice in four plays.
The second, he couldn’t connect with receiver DK Metcalf twice for the game-winning touchdown.
All in all, it wasted a solid defensive performance.
They’ve had a winning record in four of the last five years.
Tennessee has claimed the division twice and has made three trips to the postseason.
Now, as it heads home from London after a 24-16 setback against the Baltimore Ravens and goes into the bye week with a 2-4 record and sitting in last place, Tennessee faces a crossroads.
He was never a star in Tennessee, but the offense was at its best when he could play turnover-free, clean football.
He has a 2:6 touchdown-to-interception ratio this year and is on pace for a career-low 71.9 QB rating.
It might be time to look to the future.
WASHINGTON - Hunter Biden's lawyers are carrying out an aggressive counterattack as Republicans make the president's son the focus of an impeachment inquiry and a special counsel investigation threatens to hang over the 2024 election.
In a two-week span in September, President Joe Biden's son Hunter Biden sued Rudy Giuliani over the release of personal material on Biden's laptop, the Internal Revenue Service for allegedly revealing confidential information about his taxes and former Trump White House aide Garrett Ziegler for allegedly accessing and tampering with computer data that he does not own.
Hunter Biden's legal team also issued third-party subpoenas to Trump allies Roger Stone, Steve Bannon and Giuliani, along with six others, in recent weeks seeking information and documents related to Hunter Biden's external hard drive and laptop - contents of which each have boasted about possessing.
Morris advised going on offense after Republicans gained control of the House in the 2022 midterm elections.
"The Republicans have had the microphone to themselves for many, many months," said David Brock, a Democratic operative and president of Facts First USA, which he launched to counter Republicans' claims about the president's son.
"The thinking is to put some facts out there in the public domain so that the public can have a more accurate picture of Hunter and what went on here rather than the distorted Republican lens that is refracted through most of the media coverage," Brock said.
More:Hunter Biden as a 'foreign agent'?
Inquiry comes as DOJ ramps up previously 'rare' enforcement
Lowell, in a statement, slammed the charges as "the result of political pressure from President Trump and his MAGA allies to force the Justice Department to ignore the law and deviate from its policies in cases like this one."
Hunter Biden pleaded not guilty to three gun-related charges for his purchase of a Colt Cobra 38SPL revolver on Oct. 12, 2018 when he has said he was on drugs.
Hunter Biden's lawyers have argued the charges are unconstitutional under the Second Amendment and barred under the prior plea agreement that fell apart.
Hunter Biden could also face tax-evasion charges under an ongoing investigation by U.S. Attorney David Weiss, a Trump-appointed prosecutor who was given special counsel status in August.
Like the gun charges, Biden had previously reached a deal with prosecutors to plead guilty to two misdemeanors for not paying taxes in 2017 and 2018 before the agreement collapsed.
In addition, the Justice Department is considering a possible third set of charges over Hunter Biden's decision not to register as a "foreign agent" while working with companies in Ukraine and China.
The recent subpoena letters are part of counter lawsuit Hunter Biden filed in March against John Paul Mac Isaac - the owner of a Delaware computer shop - that fights the dissemination of material from an external hard drive and personal laptop that's long been at the heart of the Hunter Biden controversy.
For years, Republicans have exploited material found on a hard drive on Hunter Biden's personal laptop that he left at Mac Isaac's Delaware store in 2019 but never returned to pick back up.
Mac Isaac, an outspoken supporter of former President Donald Trump, claimed ownership of the equipment and passed it along to the FBI and to Giuliani ahead of the 2020 election.
Hunter Biden's lawyers accuse Mac Isaac of invasion of privacy, arguing that Hunter Biden never gave him permission to access, copy and share electronically stored data on the computer.
The subpoena letters to others like Stone and Bannon could preview future litigation against others who disseminated the material.
Garrett Ziegler, who has also claimed to possess a copy of Hunter Biden's hard drive, is accused of similar violations in a separate lawsuit for his role in publishing a trove of emails and images of Hunter Biden on the Internet.
House Republicans have been unable to prove their most serious claim: that Joe Biden, as vice president, received bribe payments through his son to steer U.S. policy.
The laptop also contained nude photos of Hunter Biden that Republicans have seized on to embarrass the president and his son.
But he is skeptical the argument will prove effective with a privileged son of a president.
"This isn't someone I think most people are predisposed to feel any real pity for," he said.
"I'm pretty dubious it will work."
Mac Isaac claims Hunter Biden signed a form stating that any equipment left at the repair shop for more than 90 days would be considered abandoned.
The lawsuit against Giuliani alleges he and Costello spent months reviewing and manipulating the data before releasing it - accusing them of violating the federal Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, California’s Computer Data Access and Fraud Act and California’s Unfair Competition Law.
Hunter Biden currently resides in California.
Hunter Biden's attorneys also pointed to comments Giuliani made this year on his podcasts bragging about loading data from Hunter Biden's equipment onto his own computer and accessing it during the program.
Meanwhile, Costello stated publicly he “scrolled through” thousands of emails, bank statements and pictures, which made him “feel like a voyeur,” according to the lawsuit.
The lawsuit contends Biden is eligible for $1,000 in statutory damages for each unauthorized disclosure and also unspecified punitive damages.
But he said the goal is more than just changing the public narrative about Hunter Biden.
"I don't think that a strategy like this is meant primarily for PR purposes," he said, arguing the larger purpose is to gather additional evidence and "put adversaries on the defensive."
That strategy, of course, could have major political ramifications for President Joe Biden.
Rather than dealing with his legal troubles quietly, Hunter Biden's lawsuits and his legal team's public jabs against his Republican foes and the IRS could ensure the controversy remains in the spotlight during Joe Biden's 2024 reelection bid.
Contributing: Bart Jansen.
Reach Joey Garrison on X, formerly known as Twitter, @joeygarrison.
GOP presidential hopeful Asa Hutchinson might be trailing in 2024 polls, but that hasn’t stopped the former Arkansas governor from making his case on the campaign trail.
While Hutchinson is currently hovering around 1% in polls of Republican voters, he said he hopes to reach 4% by Thanksgiving and doesn’t plan on dropping out of the race before New Hampshire’s first-in-the-nation primary.
"It's up to the voters of this state to determine what kind of leadership we want," the former congressman and head of the Drug Enforcement Administration said.
The New England state has a comparatively small number of delegates in the Republican presidential nomination process.
But its historic status as the first primary state on the party’s calendar, has made it a testing ground for White House hopefuls.
Results of the state's primary can make or break campaigns.
As Hutchinson jockeys for more space in the Republican presidential contest, here’s a look at the issues he talked about in New Hampshire that would impact voters from coast to coast.
Hutchinson described securing the U.S. southern border as “the most fundamental question and responsibility the next president will have.”
Among his first acts as president would be providing additional resources for the U.S. Border Patrol.
Hutchinson also vowed to continue construction of the border wall that became a signature conservative policy during the Trump administration.
The former Arkansas governor called on leaders to streamline the processing of asylum seekers, “so we’re not catching and then releasing them and expecting them to show up four years later,” referring to the practice of releasing, rather than detaining, migrants while they await hearings.
Hutchinson suggested he would forge partnerships with southern allies, particularly Mexican President Andrés Manuel López Obrador, along with governors across the country to design solutions at the border.
In particular, he expressed support for the 1,000-foot water barrier Texas Gov.
Greg Abbott constructed in the Rio Grande earlier this year to prevent border crossings.
Nearly 110,000 people died of an opioid overdose in the U.S. in 2022, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Tackling the issue is top of mind for millions of Americans, especially voters in New Hampshire, which is among the states with the highest rates of opioid-related deaths.
Addressing voters in the Granite State, Hutchinson said he’d take a three-pronged approach to thwart the epidemic by providing improving education about addiction, boosting treatment options and cracking down on drug trafficking from other countries.
Once head of the DEA during former President George W. Bush's administration, Hutchinson criticized candidates in the 2024 race who have called for using force against Mexico in an effort to stop the importation of fentanyl.
“We work with them in partnership, but we have to make sure that they support the rule of law.”
Fielding a question about how he would protect children from school shootings and during active shooter drills, Hutchinson pushed for investing in security measures in schools and increased mental health resources for kids from coast to coast.
“Today, to have active shooter drills is not what we want our children to experience in life, but they are adaptable,” he said, noting that his generation experienced nuclear attack duck and cover drills.
“The most important thing is parents need to know their children are safe when they drop them off for school, so we need to invest in our school security.”
However, Hutchinson's comments weren't an endorsement of gun control measures, and the Arkansas governor vowed that he would not take firearms away from Americans.
Hutchinson also spoke more broadly about the state of schools in the U.S.
Responding to a voter's question about how he would slim down the federal bureaucracy, the former Arkansas governor said that, if Congress passed a bill abolishing the Department of Education, he would sign it to give states more authority over their school systems.
School choice refers to the process of using taxpayer funds to potentially send a child to a school other than their local public school.
A report published earlier this year by the Social Security Administration found that the estimated 67 million Americans who collect Social Security funds each month could see their benefits cut short by up to 25% by 2034, as the ratio of retirees to workers in the U.S. increases.
When asked about his plans to tackle the problem and keep social security solvent, Hutchinson said he’d employ a strategy used by former President Ronald Reagan, relying on a commission to investigate and make recommendations to Congress on how to finance Medicare and Social Security for the future.
“There are a lot of ideas out there, all of those ideas will be on the table,” he said.
But Hutchinson didn't suggest shrinking the program.
For example, he said, if elected president, he would remove penalties for people ages 62 to 66 who are in the workforce and earn more than $21,240, but want to take Social Security benefits.
But the youngest presidential candidate also took the USA TODAY Network behind the scenes, sharing his day-to-day habits on the campaign trail.
“I get that.”
Part of addressing these frustrations is to lower inflation and bring down other costs, he said.
That's also how we grow our economy.
He also said he wants to help provide multiple paths to success for young people.
“There have to be multiple paths to success, including even one or two year vocational education, building skills in the trades.”
WASHINGTON — Former President Donald Trump continued to walk back his previous criticism of Israel, telling Iowa voters on Monday that he has always supported the longtime ally now engaged in a war with Hamas.
"We stand with Israel," Trump said during a rally encouraging supporters to attend the Jan. 15 Iowa caucuses that kick off the Republican presidential nomination.
Trump's two appearances in Iowa on Monday were his first speeches since his criticism of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu - and compliments of Hezbollah - drew counterattacks from his Republican primary opponents.
Speaking before supporters last week in West Palm Beach, Fla., Trump attacked Netanyahu for refusing to participate in the 2020 targeted killing of an Iranian general.
Trump also criticized unnamed Israeli officials for discussing the possibility of attacks from Hezbollah, saying those comments might tip off the militant group to the county's vulnerabilities.
Trump additionally criticized Netanyahu in an interview with Fox News Radio over the Hamas attack.
"He was not prepared," Trump said.
"He was not prepared and Israel was not prepared."
During his Iowa appearances, Trump did not mention Netanyahu and Hezbollah.
He focused instead on Iran and President Joe Biden, blaming both for the outbreak of more violence in the region earlier this month.
Trump first sought to clean up the damage with social media posts and written statements over the weekend.
Trump's opponents for the Republican presidential nomination have spent days denouncing his comments on Israel, saying they undermined an ally in the midst of a crisis and could embolden Iran.
Former South Carolina governor - and United Nations ambassador - Nikki Haley said Trump's comments underscore that he is out of touch.
"It's why I continue to say it is time for a new, generational leader," Haley said on CNN's "State of the Union."
Ron DeSantis, speaking on Fox News, said Trump seems to have a personal beef with Netanyahu because the Israeli prime minister called Biden to congratulate him on winning the 2020 election, despite Trump's protests about the race.
Trump enjoys big leads in state and national polls, including ones conducted in Iowa and New Hampshire.
The judge said Trump did not have the right to use his campaign to mount a "smear campaign" against legal officials.
While Trump did not single out individuals, he did claim that "they've weaponized the Justice Department and the FBI," and he protested the new order.
This order does not apply to the charges he faces in Georgia over allegations he tried to steal the election in the Peach State.
"I'll be the only politician in history that runs with a gag order where I'm not allowed to criticize people," Trump said during his first speech in Adel, Iowa.
At a moment when banks are slashing overdraft fees and President Biden is vowing a crackdown on hidden “junk” fees, the dreaded ATM surcharge has never been higher.
As other routine banking charges trend downward, ATM fees are creeping up.
The average rose to $3.74 in 2010 and $4.52 in 2015.
Banks generally allow free use of their own ATMs.
They may be leveraging out-of-network fees, banking experts say, to replace lost revenue from other sources.
Fees for overdrafts and insufficient funds have declined by nearly half since pre-pandemic 2019, according to a report by the federal Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, or CFPB.
Banks collected $1.6 billion in overdraft and insufficient-fund fees in the fourth quarter of 2022, compared with $3.1 billion in the same period of 2019.
Many large banks voluntarily reduced or eliminated overdraft fees in 2021 and 2022, under pressure from lawmakers and regulators.
That is not to say the overdraft fee is extinct.
It declined to $26.61 in 2023.
Those $30 and $35 fees were hard for banks to justify, analysts say, and they unduly burdened those living from paycheck to paycheck.
Not surprisingly, the fees proved unpopular with customers.
The Federal Trade Commission would require companies it regulates to be upfront about the full price of concert and sports tickets, hotel rooms and apartment and car rentals.
The Biden administration also warned banks not to charge fees for basic services, such as checking an account balance.
No account holder likes ATM fees.
But customers may find it tricky to assign blame.
ATM fees are a one-two punch.
One fee comes from whomever owns the ATM: A bank that isn’t yours, or a cash-only restaurant in Detroit, or a bodega in Brooklyn.
The ATM surcharge is generally stated upfront.
An ATM customer might fume about paying it, but it would be illogical to direct that wrath at their bank.
The second fee comes from your own bank, ostensibly for the service of dispensing cash through someone else’s ATM.
Out-of-network fees average $1.58.
Customers might not be aware of the second fee, unless they pay close attention to their transaction records.
The out-of-network fee isn’t likely to appear on an ATM screen.
As a consumer watchdog issue, the out-of-network fee “is a tough one,” said Elizabeth Renter, a data journalist at NerdWallet.
“At a surface level, I don’t think that they should [charge it], because you’re their customer.”
At nearly $5 a pop, all told, ATM fees can add up.
In that poll, a solid majority of respondents said they would drive miles to avoid an ATM fee.
The solution to ATM fees: Find a bank that doesn’t charge them.
Unfortunately, it’s hard to shop for a bank by comparing those fees.
“It is difficult to make apples-to-apples comparisons, because many key details are buried in the fine print of how ancillary fees, like ATM fees, will be charged,” said Chuck Bell, programs director at Consumer Reports.
Happily, banking customers who wish to avoid ATM fees do have options.
Many supermarkets, pharmacies and other businesses will dispense cash, without a fee, to customers who make store purchases with debit cards.
“I always get cash back from Publix,” Renter said.
Many banks belong to broad ATM networks and partnerships that allow zero-fee withdrawals from ATMs that aren’t owned by the bank.
“It is worthwhile, sometimes, to call your bank and find out what your options are,” Renter said.
Many online banks, with little or no brick-and-mortar presence, will refund ATM fees charged by others.
More on bank fees:President Biden looks to trash 'junk fees' in new rule aiming to protect consumers
A $5 fee on a $20 ATM withdrawal amounts to a 25% surcharge: pretty steep.
Consider withdrawing more money, to lower the effective surcharge rate and put more cash in your pocket.
As a surcharge rate on a $200 ATM withdrawal, that same $5 fee shrinks to 2.5%.
Choice Hotels International on Tuesday said it has offered to buy rival chain Wyndham Hotels & Resorts for nearly $8 billion.
The Maryland-based hotel operator shared details on its proposal after it said Wyndham walked away from nearly six months of merger discussions.
Choice is offering to pay $90 per share in a mix of cash and stock, a deal valued at roughly $7.8 billion, or $9.8 billion when including debt.
The proposal is a 30% premium to Wyndham's latest closing price.
A statement from Wyndham said it rejected the offer after determining that it was "not in the best interest of shareholders."
"Choice's offer is underwhelming, highly conditional, and subject to significant business, regulatory and execution risk," Wyndham Board of Directors Chairman Stephen Holmes said.
"Choice has been unwilling or unable to address our concerns."
Choice Hotels currently operates 7,500 hotels across 46 countries and territories across brands like Radisson, Country Inn & Suites and Quality Inn, while Wyndham operates approximately 9,100 hotels across 95 countries across brands like Super 8, Days Inn and La Quinta.
Timeshares:Timeshares are making a comeback with younger Americans, and here's the appeal.
Choice sent its initial proposal of $80 per share to Wyndham in April.
The deal was rejected, but Choice continued to try to persuade Wyndham by increasing its proposal to $85 per share – which resulted in a meeting between the companies’ boards and CEOs – and then $90 per share.
But New Jersey-based Wyndham questioned Choice’s stock value and the timing for obtaining regulatory approvals, and pulled out of discussions, according to Choice’s statement.
“We were therefore surprised and disappointed that Wyndham decided to disengage.”
But Wyndham's board disagrees.
Its statement called the offer "opportunistic" and said it undervalues Wyndham's future growth potential.
Holmes said the proposed transaction would likely take more than a year to determine if it could clear antitrust review, and Choice "was unable to address these long-term risks to Wyndham's business and shareholders."
"We are disappointed that Choice's description of our engagement disingenuously suggests that we were in alignment on core terms and omits to describe the true reasons we have consistently questioned the merits of this combination – Choice's inability and unwillingness to address our significant concerns about regulatory and execution risk and our deep concerns about the value of their stock," Holmes said.
Choice Hotels shares were down over 5% at 12:31 p.m. Eastern, trading at $118.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.
A proposed ruling filed from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration could mean bans on some chemical hair-smoothing and straightening products that have been linked to cancer.
The FDA has proposed a rule banning formaldehyde and other formaldehyde-releasing chemicals from being used in hair-smoothing and straightening products sold in the U.S.
The use of such chemicals has been linked to long-term health concerns, including an increased risk of cancer, according to the FDA.
They can also cause short-term health risks, including sensitization reactions and breathing problems, the agency says.
Maternity units closing in Alabama:Pregnant women have to travel further for care
A 2019 study published in the International Journal of Cancer linked hair dye and chemical straightener use to a risk of breast cancer in women in the U.S.
The link was further solidified in 2022, when the National Institutes of Health published a study that found women who used hair-straightening chemicals were associated with a higher uterine cancer risk, and that Black women may be more affected due to a higher use.
There has also been Congressional pressure to look into the link between chemical straighteners and cancer.
"We urge the FDA to investigate the potential health threat posed by chemical hair straightening products," the letter reads.
DENVER — It’s difficult to overstate how good the 2024 Chevrolet Corvette E-Ray is, or what an important step it constitutes for America’s great sports car.
Now, maybe the world’s great sports car.
Performance, design, technology, value: It’s hard to think of an area where the E-Ray isn't at least among the leaders.
All-wheel drive and hybrid-powered, the E-Ray is the biggest leap of imagination and engineering in the Corvette’s 70-year history.
Take your pick.
You’ll never get a consensus, but that’s the point: Each car is as good as it gets.
The fun is in the debate, specifications, lap times and unforgettable road trips.
Chevy engineers had been kicking around proposals for mid- and rear-engine models for decades.
That was a question of when, not if.
Locating the engine's weight over the rear wheels improves traction.
Powering the front axle with a small, efficient electric motor provides instant torque and precise control.
It’s also unrelated to the inexpensive Chevy Bolt.
The E-Ray was part of the plan for the eighth generation C8 model from the start.
That’s why its lithium-ion battery fits tidily in the center tunnel, and why the front electric motor and reworked steering and suspension don’t reduce space in the car’s front trunk.
Corvette Stingray coupe - $66,300
Stingray convertible - $73,300
Corvette E-Ray coupe - $102,900
E-Ray convertible - $109,900
Corvette Z06 - coupe $112,495
Z06 - convertible - $117,700
Prices exclude $1,695 destination charge
The E-Ray is 3 inches wider than a Stingray, with staggered 20- and 21-inch wheels.
Chevy explains the distinction between the two models thus:
The track-ready Z06 covers a standing quarter-mile in 10.6 seconds and hits 130 mph, while the E-Ray slouches through it in 10.5 and 129 mph.
Of such distinctions are buying decisions made, particularly when you’re dealing with some of the most passionate and informed car buyers on Earth.
And remember, this is the company that developed Lunar Rovers for the Apollo program.
“Electrification increases the driver’s feeling of control and composure in all conditions.”
The E-Ray’s sensors also interpret steering angle and pedal inputs to determine the driver’s intent and keep the car on course and at speed.
The electric all-wheel drive system dispenses torque for secure traction accelerating out of curves.
The 6.2L V8 engine produces 495 hp that go to the rear wheels, via the same eight-speed dual-clutch automatic transmission that powers all current Corvettes.
An electric motor located under the front trunk delivers another 160 hp.
There’s no physical connection between the two drivetrains, which must operate in harmony at all speeds, road surfaces and conditions.
The Acura NSX, which ended production last year, was the only other supercar with independently powered front and rear ends.
Its front wheels are driven by two separate electric motors.
A turbocharged V6 and electric motor power the rear.
The NSX developed 600 hp and accelerated to 60 mph in 2.9 seconds.
Prices started at $169,500.
Car recalls:Ford and Mercedes-Benz among nearly 250,000 vehicles recalled: Check car recalls here
I found the E-Ray remarkably easy to drive over two days that included highways, twisting mountain roads north of Denver and a tight slalom course at Pikes Peak International Raceway, 90 miles south of the city.
The power comes on with smooth precision, the steering is responsive and neutral, the ride surprisingly comfortable over bumps.
Speaking of running without gasoline, the electric front axle provides a "stealth mode," with speeds up to 45 mph when leaving home or driving through the neighborhood.
The electric motor also extends the V8’s four-cylinder operating mode on the highway, reducing fuel consumption and emissions.
The interior is luxuriously trimmed in leather, suede and carbon fiber.
The touch screen includes performance displays.
Other key features include:
Base price: $102,900 (all prices exclude $1,595 destination charge)
All-wheel drive hybrid two-seat sports coupe or convertible
On sale late 2023
Specifications as tested:
Model tested: Corvette E-Ray coupe
Price as tested: $102,900
Power: Electric motor powering front axle, 6.2L V8 powering rear axle
Output: 655 hp, 470 pound-feet of torque from V8, 125 from front-axle motor
Transmission: Eight-speed dual clutch automatic driving the rear wheels, front single-speed direct drive
0-60 time: 2.5 seconds
Wheelbase: 107.2 inches
Length: 184.6 inches
Width: 79.7 inches
Height: 48.6 inches
Cargo volume: 12.5 cubic feet combined front and rear
Dry weight: 3,774 pounds
Assembled in Bowling Green, Kentucky
Become a subscriber.
For a lot of amateur or busy family chefs, chicken is an easy go-to dinner option.
Tacos, enchiladas, chicken noodle soup, or even a salad, chicken is a classic centerpiece to a quality meal.
Once you have decided on your choice of meal (which is the hardest part), it is time to prepare your chicken.
Not only is boiling chicken faster and easier than roasting or grilling it, but it is also a safer way to ensure your chicken will be juicy without drying out, according to Better Homes & Garden.
Regardless if you have boned or boneless chicken, here is how long it takes to boil it to perfection.
Ideally, the chicken will be done once it has reached 165 degrees Fahrenheit, according to the U.S. Food Safety and Inspection Service.
However, here are a few timing guidelines you can follow if you are unsure, based on chicken type.
Need a side dish?
It is advised that you thaw the chicken first before boiling it frozen.
If able, leave the chicken in a fridge for at least nine hours.
If unable, the U.S. Food Safety and Inspection Service recommends boiling frozen chicken 50% longer in time than already thawed chicken.
Cook for about 30 minutes, or 45 minutes if frozen, according to Better Homes & Garden.
Cook for about 12 to 15 minutes, or 18 to 22 minutes if frozen, according to Better Homes & Garden.
Step 1: Select a liquid
Based on your overall meal, you can boil your chicken in a variety of ways.
Whether you want to boil in water or something more flavorful like chicken broth, there is no wrong answer as long as you have a liquid in the pot.
Step 2: Season up
Place your chicken in a large pot with a tight-fitting lid that has enough liquid to cover the chicken.
Add any additional seasonings, such as salt and pepper.
Step 3: Begin to boil
After the chicken is covered up in your chosen liquid and additional flavors, bring your water to a boil.
Cover the pot with your tight-fitting lid, slightly lowering the heat once the water is boiling.
Leave your chicken to simmer in the pot until the internal temperature is 165 degrees Fahrenheit (this can be checked with a meat thermometer).
Hungry for more?
Here at Just Curious, we're looking into all of your questions.
Make sure to check out USA TODAY's Just Curious section for more trivia, tidbits and information you might want to know.
Turning your keys in the ignition, only to realize your car battery died is an irritation most people experience at one time or another.
This can happen because the headlights were left on, extreme outside weather or your car battery needs a simple replacement, according to Firestone Complete Auto Care.
Jumping a car can be a daunting task, but as long as you come prepared with the required and recommended equipment as well as an additional car to jump the dead battery, you’ll be back on the highway again in no time.
You will need jumper cables to jump the car, gloves and coveralls for protection, a flashlight to identify the correct parts of the car and the owner’s manual.
Also required is another car with a charged battery.
Home Depot advises drivers to follow these steps:
What is a catalytic converter?
USA TODAY is exploring the questions you and others ask every day.
From "When were cars invented?"
Head to our Just Curious section to see what else we can answer for you.
To define is to limit.
NCT 127 lives by that motto, and the boy group is constantly evolving, whether it be their experimental sound, complex choreographies, or intricate concepts.
Their latest album, "Fact Check," out now, underscores the diverse sonic range of the nine-member band.
"We really put all of our hearts in it," Johnny told USA TODAY about the group's fifth album.
NCT 127 debuted in July 2016 with EP "NCT #127" and lead single "Fire Truck."
The group is under the greater umbrella that is NCT, which stands for Neo Culture Technology.
The latter half of its name represents the longitudinal coordinate of the city.
While the group actively promotes in South Korea, their reach is worldwide.
They've toured the globe, received top awards and released chart-hitting records, cementing their spot within an ever-changing industry.
The group's last album "2 Baddies" debuted at No.
3 on the Billboard 200, making NCT 127 the second K-pop artist in history to land three albums in the Top 5.
The multitude of talents of NCT 127 can't be boxed into a specific definition or genre.
"Fact Check" embodies this phrase, featuring the pop rock "Angel Eyes" to smooth R&B "Misty."
The nine tracks capture NCT 127's ethos.
"Being as diverse as we can be and being very limitless with our music and our styles, that's the approach we've always had when we start making a new album," said Mark.
While working on "Fact Check," Mark said the members considered not only the audible aspect but also the performance side.
"We wanted to create another great album that would be amazing not just to hear, but to also see on stage," he explained.
The title track, in particular, leans into the group's innovative nature through its kinetic choreography and vibrant tonality.
Its music video also gives a nod to NCT 127's base with traditional Korean settings.
NCT 127 has experienced a lot over the years.
They even got to share some of those stories in the docuseries, "NCT 127: The Lost Boys."
"We shared deep secrets, stories that we really didn't say out loud," Mark said.
"To share that vulnerability with our audience is something that is great for us to treasure."
Reflecting on growth, each member has developed in his own way.
"I tend to learn how I can use my voice a bit better and also how to use that into the songs," he said.
This sentiment was echoed by others.
A humble mentality resonates throughout NCT 127.
"Right now, I'm trying more hard to be a good person and I think I have become one."
And this process never stops.
"I'm always learning more and more about myself," said Johnny.
"I am figuring out or have figured out a lot about what I think is important, what I find important, what I think are my priorities."
In all that they do, the members wish to foster connections with them.
As for their music, NCT 127 wants to continue pushing boundaries.
There are different levels of Halloween lovers.
For some, the holiday is an excuse to dress up and party.
Many use it as a chance to pull out the festive decor.
For some, it's just a candy free-for-all.
But for others, the Halloween season is a personality trait.
With the holiday just around the corner, it's time to up your social media game and fill your timeline with the magic of Halloween.
Halloween jokes:150 quips the whole family will love for spooky season
USA TODAY is exploring the questions you and others ask every day.
From "Are witches real?"
Head to our Just Curious section to see what else we can answer for you.
Before Oct. 7, my brother, his girlfriend and his kids were just parts of my greater identity and what I love and hold dear in this world.
Now, as I live through a waking nightmare in which they have been taken hostage by Hamas − this part of my identity consumes me.
And it's what drives and will drive my every action and thought, until my family comes home.
My heart is heavy with sorrow, anger and, most of all, a profound sense of helplessness after an act so horrific and brutal that we never could have imagined it.
My brother reassured my wife that they were in their shelter/safe room.
His two sons were staying at their mother’s house, and my brother, no matter how much he may have wished he could race to the rest of his family and bring them all together to protect them, couldn’t leave the safe room in his house at the kibbutz.
They were strictly instructed to stay in place, and they heard gunshots outside the house.
Everyone was frozen as they faced the approaching fear and horror of Hamas terrorists closing in.
Her voice was shaking as she told us that terrorists had entered their home.
But in the end, he did not prevail.
This was the last time we had contact with them.
Our family was thrown into darkness.
We searched every minute of that day for any sign of them.
We tried using Apple’s “Find my iPhone” feature to no avail.
We fought fear and panic all day to remain focused on locating our family.
Later that afternoon, the mother of my nephews shared with us through tears that she had confirmation that her two sons had been kidnapped.
Our world collapsed around us.
For nearly 30 agonizing hours, we had no idea where any of them were.
The silence that returned became overwhelming as we learned that we were going to face this nightmare primarily on our own.
We turned to social media, sharing pictures and heartfelt pleas, hoping someone in our connected web would come forward with information.
This wasn't just a crime; it was an inversion of humanity.
Innocent people, including children and women, were forcibly taken from their homes where they should feel safe and torn away from their lives, their families and their communities.
They are now pawns in a war.
'Take a lesson from the dead':Fatal stabbing of 6-year-old in Illinois serves as warning to divided US
The days since have been dark with just one glimmer of light.
As a family, we appeal to the world for one thing: the safe return of our loved ones.
We were brought up to believe that everyone has a family and deserves to be treated humanely.
Hamas operates in stark contrast to these principles.
Our only plea is to bring our kidnapped family members back home safely.
We don’t know if they are being fed.
We don’t know the state of their health.
We don’t know where they are.
The uncertainty about their fate is what our lives are defined by now, and we are desperate for the day that we can receive good news about their well-being.
Until then, I am a brother and an uncle who refuses to give up.
This time, I almost gave up the hope that one day, people will see the humanity in Palestinians, my people.
See the humanity in me.
As if the number of innocent civilians killed in the latest war between Israel and Hamas hasn’t been horrifying enough, the count continues to rise.
The sheer number of bombs Israel dropped in five days is more than the United States dropped in Afghanistan in a year after 9/11, The Washington Post reported.
Condemnation of the killing of innocent Palestinian and Israeli civilians should be easy to come by, yet I watch in frustration as Palestinians are dehumanized, as if their lives are less valuable.
I’ve felt this frustration before – too many times.
The pain of feeling less than human is never less gut-wrenching.
I feel this rage and sadness, but I harness that.
It drives what I do, who I am.
And instead of waiting for people to see Palestinians as humans, I have the power to show them.
As journalists, we have a duty to expose injustice, to think critically.
To show humanity.
As a woman living in diaspora, I watch events in the Palestinian territories from afar while my family there lives through it.
They demanded the end of Israel’s blockade of the Gaza Strip, the end of its now 75-year brutal military occupation that human rights groups have described as apartheid, and the return of the 750,000 Palestinians expelled from their homes to make way for the creation of Israel in 1948.
Today, there are an estimated 6 million Palestinian refugees.
I did what I always do when Palestinians dare demand their right to live freely: I checked on my family in the West Bank to make sure they were safe.
And then, my stomach already in knots, I braced myself for what was to come.
Israel responded to these protests in 2018 by using live ammunition on peaceful protesters, the United Nations reported, sniping down women, children, journalists and medics, along with tear gas, rubber bullets, drones; 214 Palestinians were killed, 46 of them children.
More than 36,100 Palestinians were injured, including about 8,800 children.
One in 5 were injured by live ammunition.
Watching these events unfold in horror and devastation, I remember thinking to myself, maybe this time the world will get it.
Palestinians just want to live.
We want to be regarded as human.
And even when protesting peacefully, Palestinians still pay the price in blood.
Looking back, I realize I was naive.
Her cousin, 15 at the time, was injured after an Israeli soldier shot him in the head with a rubber bullet at close range.
I feel such frustration that a child was imprisoned for eight months, in a country the United States supports and in which there is little challenge to these practices and policies by the news media, the Israeli government or our own government.
(The image of Palestinians beaten by Israeli forces has been juxtaposed with images of the soldiers protecting Israelis as they marched chanting “death to Arabs” during that same time.)
More than 2 million Palestinians are trapped in Gaza under a 16-year Israeli siege, now subjected to repeated bombings described by the U.N. as collective punishment.
Or even now, maybe the news of entire neighborhoods, entire families, obliterated by Israel’s bombs in the latest war between Israel and Hamas – and now Israel’s order for the forced evacuation of more than a million people from northern Gaza, which the U.N. calls an impending humanitarian crisis – would be enough to show people just how unequal this war really is.
Maybe the 6,000 Israeli bombs that have hit Gaza since Oct. 7 would be enough to remind people that Israel occupies Palestinian territories, subjecting them to violent oppression for the last 75 years.
Or maybe the Israeli minster of defense calling Palestinians “human animals” when he ordered “complete siege” on the 2 million people of Gaza – cutting off water, electricity, fuel and food as hospitals are bombed and on the verge of collapse – would spark some sympathy.
'Take a lesson from the dead':Fatal stabbing of 6-year-old serves warning to divided US
It can feel lonely and empty to see others disregard your humanity.
To paint your people with the broad brush of terrorism.
I’ve seen the separation wall.
I’ve heard the gunfire.
I’ve driven segregated roads.
I’ve seen Palestinian homes bulldozed in East Jerusalem, settlements built right in the middle of Palestinian neighborhoods, settlements that continue to expand, surrounding my family’s villages in the West Bank.
It’s injustice that I cannot unsee, I cannot unlive.
But Palestinians are strong, they are resilient.
Both our strength and our suffering reminds me of why I’m a journalist.
Because I’ve seen firsthand the oppression that Palestinians face, and I’ve lived it during every visit home.
Interrogation by Israeli soldiers, and at military checkpoints, guns pointed at me by Israeli soldiers.
Palestinians protest even though they know that they can die, and they do it because they have no other choice.
It's their freedom they're protesting for.
I have faith that journalists will find the bravery, as Palestinian journalists have, leading the way for humanity to be acknowledged – to ask these questions and think critically and demand that Palestinians be seen as worthy.
To see our humanity, our right to self-determination.
Our right to simply live.
I realize this may be asking a lot, but wouldn’t it be great if so many of our politicians weren’t unscrupulous creeps?
These days, after scanning the headlines about the folks “running” the government, I often feel like I need a shower.
It seems like an almost daily occurrence that a current or former elected official lands in court for one shady misdeed or another.
Government corruption almost seems normal.
It shouldn’t be.
Between the alarming attack on Israel this month and the Republicans bungling their House leadership, some of the latest scandals have gotten the amount of attention they deserve.
Republicans fiddle while world burns:Listen up, Republicans.
The world is in chaos, so why are you playing stupid games?
Let me refresh you on what’s been happening.
His seniority earned him the powerful position of chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which he is now charged with abusing for his personal gain.
That is on top of last month's indictment on bribery charges.
Stop and think about that: The (now former) chair of Foreign Relations, a committee that reviews treaties with other nations and votes on all diplomatic nominations, is accused of acting as a foreign agent for hire.
What he’s accused of is extremely serious.
In 2017, a federal jury deadlocked on whether to convict the senator, which led to a mistrial.
See a pattern here?
Now, if you’re a liberal, I can bet what you’re thinking: “Well, look at former President Donald Trump!” or “How about Rep. George Santos?”
Trump has been indicted in four criminal cases, as well as a civil fraud case, all of which are unprecedented for a former president (who also is, of course, the leading Republican candidate for president in 2024).
Time for change:Sure, Trump is awful.
But that doesn't mean Biden is a good choice for president.
Then there's curious George.
Last week, a new indictment alleges Santos stole the identities of campaign donors and used donors’ credit cards as his own personal piggy bank.
That comes five months after he was charged with other financial crimes.
It’s really no wonder that his campaign coffers are in arrears.
There’s also the fact that Santos made up his entire résumé.
He’s a first-class sleazebag.
The question remains: What to do with these bad actors?
It’s easy for Democrats to scream and yell that Santos is a disgrace and must go.
And Republicans like to do the same to Democrats.
For instance, Republicans have called for Rep. Jamaal Bowman, a Democrat from New York, to be expelled from the House after he pulled a fire alarm before a key vote to keep the government open.
Bowman says it was a "mistake," and his office released a memo in his defense that labeled Republicans as "Nazis."
Regardless, it’s an odd “mistake” for a former school principal to make and a bizarre incident, even if it doesn’t rise to the level of expulsion.
But I digress.
The bar for expelling a House member is high, and it has only happened a few times in our country’s history.
Of the 15 times the Senate has expelled a member, 14 occurred during the Civil War for supporting the Confederacy.
Unfortunately, partisanship often comes before principle.
The fact remains that with thin margins of control in the House and Senate, both sides need as many warm bodies as they can get, regardless of how repugnant.
Some New York Republicans have called for the House to expel Santos, although that’s not likely to happen.
The same goes for the Senate.
These men deserve their day in court, but I'm less certain they should be roaming the halls of Congress.
The surest way to rid the government of (alleged) weasels is for voters to make sure they don’t get the chance again.
Ingrid Jacques is a columnist at USA TODAY.
You can contact her at ijacques@usatoday.com or on X, formerly Twitter: @Ingrid_Jacques
Great news, America.
Criminal defendant and leading GOP presidential primary candidate Donald Trump has something new to whine about – a partial gag order placed on him by the federal judge in his election interference case.
She added: “His political campaign does not give him carte blanche to vilify public servants for simply doing their job.”
I made that all up, but would you be surprised if Trump wrote something similar?
And if you wouldn't be surprised, doesn't that suggest we're facing a serious problem?
Immediately after the ruling, Trump posted on Truth Social: "A TERRIBLE THING HAPPENED TO DEMOCRACY TODAY – GAG ORDER!"
There's little doubt the angry rants will get worse.
Prior to the gag order, Trump had labeled special counsel Jack Smith “a crackhead” and called him “psycho.”
In August, Trump posted what prosecutors viewed as a threat against witnesses, writing: “IF YOU GO AFTER ME, I’M COMING AFTER YOU!”
Prosecutors, in their filing requesting a gag order, wrote that “no other criminal defendant would be permitted to issue public statements insinuating that a known witness in his case should be executed; this defendant should not be, either.”
Judge muzzles Trump:McCarthy booted from House speaker, Trump gagged.
Trump will squeal desperately and claim his free-speech rights are being trampled, but even a low-functioning mollusk would know that’s nonsense.
Trump was president, true.
He isn’t anymore.
Trump is running for president, true.
But that doesn’t give him the freedom to say whatever the hell he wants about people involved in the multiple criminal cases in which he faces 91 state and federal felony charges.
I’m not above the law, you’re not above the law and Trump, sad as it may be for him to learn, is not above the law.
But at least now he has some new material to work with.
Let’s see how long it takes the whiner in chief to violate the judge’s gag order.
I’m guessing it comes in 3, 2, 1 …
Today, he's a gay, tattooed, non-denominational rabbi living in New York.
Most of the people he went to Jewish boys school with are right-wing.
This week, those same peers bullied him in group chats.
They called him a Hebrew word meaning a traitor to the other side.
His situation resembles many across the U.S. and rest of the world as people grapple with differing opinions among friends, family and colleagues; A college group text devolving because no one can agree.
Millennials walking on eggshells for fear of upsetting their Gen Z partners.
There's no one way to approach sensitive issues of this nature.
"If you’re feeling too overwhelmed with your own emotions, that’s OK. Just let your partner or loved ones know you need some time or space before you are up for having deep conversations."
Emotions have been running high since Hamas attacked Israel on Oct. 7; 4,200 have died on both sides, according to the United Nations.
Many have expressed their fears and frustrations on social media in an effort to empathize and seek personal connections to tragedies in lieu of or in addition to private conversations.
Maybe to alleviate guilt, to feel like they're doing something, to "perform" uneducated solidarity.
These posts often go awry when people play the comparison game.
"The problem is not the desire to find a personal connection," says Benjamin Goldman, licensed mental health counselor.
Anyone can throw statistics at a situation to try and justify their points.
But many aren't really looking for meaningful conversation
Aziz Abu-Sarah's octogenarian parents live in Jerusalem.
He visited them there three weeks ago.
Now, he's afraid for their safety.
A Palestinian peacemaker, his Israeli and Palestinian friends have been asking him how to broker dialogue.
"My advice was this: refrain (from) political discussions," he says.
You always do, you will eventually, but now, maybe is not the time to start going into what happened 100 years ago and 50 years ago.
Are you looking to vent?
For a dialogue?
To change their mind?
Because "if you're looking for a conversation that takes place in a shared experience in pain, and then you go to someone with a conflicting experience from you to have that conversation, you will be hurt," Goldman says.
"And they will also probably be hurt."
It may also be worth some introspection.
"Additionally, we are influenced by the media's synthesis of information and the mediums we trust to deliver it to our screens and inboxes."
Focus less on politics and more on the personal if you're aiming for a productive conversation.
Abu-Sarah adds: "Being vulnerable for each other and being willing to listen, instead of being quick to fight and argue – this is true in all situations."
He suggests focusing less on your position at the start of a dialogue and more on your story: "Before we start taking positions: 'Here why I stand (for Israel's) right to defend itself; here's why I stand for Palestinians' right to end occupation.'
Before you say, your position, tell your story.
Consider, too, "is there any common ground from which you can start?"
That it's not OK to kidnap women and children?
That it's terrible for people not to have access to basic utilities?
You are also allowed to hit pause if you're not ready to talk just yet.
"I've been muting a lot of my Instagram stories – even of people that I agree with – because I go to Instagram to unwind, and the constant barrage of videos on the Israeli-Gaza conflict make me anxious instead."
Watch out:Israel, Gaza and when your social media posts hurt more than help
Some relationships may not survive disagreements of this nature.
And that is OK, too.
They'll sit as open wounds.
"Some of the damage that has been done to me, and some of the relationships that I have around this, I think are irreparable," he says.
And sometimes we out of fear lash out.
Remember, as Abu-Sarah says: "Behind every angry statement, behind every talking point we throw at each other, there's a hurt person."
In case you missed:The videos out of Israel, Gaza are graphic, but some can't look away: How to cope
We always want what we don’t have, whether it’s a different hair color or longer lashes.
Now, in what appears to be the rebirth of a beauty trend with a storied history, people are giving themselves pseudo dimples — and not the surgical kind, which yes, is a thing.
Behold the “dimple maker”: a cherry-shaped device with a curved wire sporting marble-like balls on each end.
All you have to do, according to people on TikTok, is pry the device open and slip it onto your cheek as the balls clamp the inner and outer sides together.
Over time, the device may leave impressions on the muscles and fat pads in your cheek, although plastic surgeons who spoke to USA TODAY aren’t convinced they’ll last long.
Doctors came to the same conclusion nearly 90 years ago after a woman named Isabelle Gilbert invented a similar product.
Today, interest persists and is growing.
The hashtag #dimplemaker has over 60 million views on TikTok, with the devices springing up on Etsy and other shops for about $15.
“You especially have to be careful with anything on the face that's not reversible.”
Dimple makers compress the skin and underlying fat in the cheek, squeezing fluid out of surrounding tissue and creating a temporary inward dent, according to Dr. Jonathan Kaplan, a plastic surgeon with Pacific Heights Plastic Surgery in San Francisco, California, who likens the device to a waist trainer.
It’s unclear how long it takes to work, but results will vary depending on how tight the clamp is, how long it’s worn and the amount of fat in the cheek, experts say.
Dimple makers that are too tight and worn for too long could potentially restrict blood flow to the spot on the cheek that’s being compressed, leading to the death of fat tissue (necrosis), Kaplan said.
A hard lump could develop in your cheek as a result, but it’s unlikely to be noticeable from the outside and can go away with time, Kaplan said.
If enough blood supply is cut off, your skin cells in the area could die, which can leave a scab and scar.
“Think of it as a wet match — sometimes it'll dry off, but if you soak that match enough, it's never going to strike a fire.”
Dimple makers, on the other hand, may pose greater risks of nerve damage because you’re compressing a larger surface area of the cheek, he added.
However, Kaplan speculates that most people wouldn’t be able to tolerate the pain associated with these kinds of injuries for long enough to sustain any kind of permanent damage.
“I’ve always adored people who had dimples, so I got the surgery because I wanted to,” Fernandes said.
“I’m not doing anything for the opinions of others, I just think it’s valuable to be as transparent as possible.”
Interest in bodybuilding has skyrocketed since the pandemic began.
Searches for "bodybuilding" or "weightlifting" apps have grown by over 190% year over year, according to Google Trends data.
Among the most popular bodybuilding gym exercises that people seek out are squats, dumbbells and deadlifts.
But one analysis shows that by far the most popular weightlifting exercise – among both men and women – is the bench press.
The bench press is such a sought-after piece of gym equipment because the workout produces the kind of results bodybuilders are after, it's a straightforward exercise that's easy to do and because it offers a host of other health benefits beyond muscle growth alone.
Like many forms of resistance training, the bench press requires the use of some basic gym equipment.
These include a workout bench to lay back on, a long barbell that sits atop a secure rack frame on both sides of the bench, and weight plates of varying poundage that are added to each side of the barbell in equal amounts and then secured with clips at each end.
Once the right equipment is in place, getting the most out of the exercise requires good form.
Done properly, the exercise works several muscle groups, but its primary target is the pectoralis major, often called pecs.
"This is the large, fan-shaped muscle on top of our ribs and over our chest," says Adams.
She explains that the job of these chest muscles is to help move one's shoulders and control movement of both arms across the front of the body.
The bench press works other muscles, too.
"The triceps get some good stress as well as the exercise extends the elbow," Adams explains.
The exercise is also unique because it can be adjusted to target each muscle group more extensively.
Lifting from an inclined workout bench will target one's upper chest muscles, while decline bench-pressing movements will target one's lower chest muscles, explains Dr. Matthew Best, director of research in the sports medicine division at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine.
At either setting, however, "it's important to avoid trying to lift too much weight or performing the exercise too rapidly, which can predispose to injury," he adds.
More on squats:Squat challenges are all over social media.
What muscles does the exercise work?
Beyond increased upper-body strength in each of these muscle groups, bench pressing has other health benefits as well.
These include improved stamina and endurance, increased mobility and some research shows that the exercise can also increase bone density.
Performing the exercise also partly satisfies the physical activity recommendations set forth by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
For optimal health and strength, the agency recommends 75 to 150 minutes of moderate to vigorous aerobic activity each week in addition to muscle strengthening activities at least twice a week.
Maintaining such levels of physical activity, the CDC notes, can improve one's brain health, help manage weight, reduce the risk of disease and improve one's ability to do everyday activities.
"Many people are initially interested in weightlifting to increase muscle size, but quickly learn our muscles are involved in all kinds of hormonal interactions like lowering inflammation, stopping stress response and growing brain cells," explains Adams.
"Building both muscular endurance and muscular strength throughout the body pays off for your health."
In case you want to try:What do deadlifts work?
Understanding this popular weight-training exercise.
"A true icon and overall amazing human being."
"She was a sweetheart!!!"
Grief is different for everyone, and experts say mourning someone you didn't personally know − a phenomenon called collective or public grief − is a complicated, yet valid, experience.
"Collective and public grief, as I call it, is always unique in how we attach," David Kessler, grief expert and founder of Grief.com, previously told USA TODAY.
This form of grief can be further compounded when the death of a beloved public figure is read about unexpectedly in the news.
"The suddenness of the loss may be too much to process and feel too unreal for a person to immediately grasp."
"However, it is still hard to prepare for anything that is life-altering, whether a person knew it was coming."
More:The Titanic submersible passengers have died.
It's OK to grieve.
You feel close to them like they're your friend or relative.
Just because collective or public grief doesn't match how one might grieve someone close to them, that doesn't make the experience any less real.
"It's a fascinating thing that people don't realize we really can grieve people we didn't know," Kessler added.
"And it doesn't mean we're going to grieve them like our spouse or mother, father, or sister or child, but we will grieve them."
If you're trying to comfort someone going through loss, don't try to minimize it or put a timetable to the grieving process.
If you're going through loss yourself, talk about it.
The deaths of public figures may also serve as opportunities to widen discussions on grief.
"We have a relationship with death that we don't quite know how to explore as a society," Kessler said.
So we know we're all going to die someday, intellectually, but we don't know, is death the great enemy?
Is it the great comforter, when we're in pain?
Contributing: David Oliver and Pamela Avila
Britney Spears is opening up in a new interview, her first in years, about her anticipated tell-all and becoming her own woman after being freed from her 13-year conservatorship.
The pop star's anticipated new memoir, "The Woman in Me," is set to debut on Oct. 24, and excerpts from the book were released on Tuesday via People.
In a shocking revelation, Spears, 41, claimed in her memoir that she became pregnant during her relationship with Justin Timberlake and had an abortion.
Spears and Timberlake dated from 1999 until 2002 in their early adult years.
In an accompanying new interview done via email with People, Spears discussed how she is handling her "new freedom" in the wake of the nearly 14-year-long conservatorship under her father, Jamie Spears, 71, which a Los Angeles County judge terminated in November 2021.
But in releasing her memoir, she tells people she is "finally free" to tell her story.
"Over the past 15 years or even at the start of my career, I sat back while people spoke about me and told my story for me," she said.
Spears has accused her father and others of exploitation and abuse under the conservatorship, detailing in the memoir how she was made to feel like "a sort of child-robot" and a "shadow" of herself.
"The conservatorship stripped me of my womanhood, made me into a child," the "Womanizer" singer writes in the excerpt of the memoir shared with People.
"At a sleepover, we played Truth or Dare, and someone dared Justin to kiss me," Spears writes.
"A Janet Jackson song was playing in the background as he leaned in and kissed me."
Spears also details how her first movie role in the 2002 year drama-comedy film "Crossroads" caused her to inadvertently fall into method acting.
Getting too deep into a character made her "glad" she didn't get the role of Allie Hamilton in "The Notebook" opposite Gosling, which ended up going to Rachel McAdams.
"That was pretty much the beginning and end of my acting career, and I was relieved," she continued.
"'The Notebook' casting came down to me and Rachel McAdams, and even though it would have been fun to reconnect with Ryan Gosling after our time on the Mickey Mouse Club, I'm glad I didn't do it."
Spears also talked about growing up in Louisiana, her work ethic as a child star, getting a record deal at Jive Records at 15, and her infamous 2001 VMA performance of "I'm a Slave 4 U."
"Finally, I got to the part where I handed it back, thank God."
The excerpts also include her thoughts on becoming a tabloid fixture in the early 2000s, the harm it caused, the termination of her conservatorship, and how she hopes telling her story inspires others.
"Shaving my head and acting out were my ways of pushing back," Spears writes.
"It took a long time and a lot of work for me to feel ready to tell my story," she said.
"I hope it inspires people on some level and can touch hearts."
"The Woman in Me" will be released on Oct. 24 by Gallery Books, a Simon & Schuster imprint.
Spears previously co-authored the 2000 autobiography "Britney Spears' Heart to Heart," and the 2001 young adult novel "A Mother's Gift" with her mother, Lynne Spears, both of which appeared on the USA TODAY Best-Selling books list.
Contributing: Morgan Hines, USA TODAY
Outfitted in knee-high cowboy boots, black pants and a black, gold and white sweater, McEntire is excited to connect with young up-and-coming artists and marvel at their talent.
She’s also quick to empathize with them.
“I was nervous, also,” she tells one of the singers, who confesses to being anxious during the Blind Auditions.
After all, she’s still finding her legs on “The Voice” – just like they are.
“My mentality at first in the Blind Auditions was to hit the button every time when I like somebody,” McEntire tells USA TODAY in an exclusive interview.
McEntire was having none of it.
I want this person!
I'm going to get them.
After giving feedback to two of her Battles pairings, McEntire takes a break from taping to reflect on how she can put herself in the contestants’ shoes.
The hottest topic on set during rehearsals is how to deal with performance jitters.
“The one thing that each team asked is, 'What do you do about nerves?'
She may be a veteran in the industry who can boast of membership in the Country Music Hall of Fame, but McEntire still brings a sense of humility and excitement for making the most of her experience coaching on “The Voice.”
And I'm not the best.
“It just made it very interesting to apply to my own career, because you're always looking for advice yourself.”
Monday's recap:'The Voice': Reba McEntire connects with Dylan Carter after emotional tribute to late mother
As the season progresses, McEntire reveals that underneath the Southern charm and tater-tot bribery is a killer instinct and a bluntness that she can employ at will.
Unfortunately for her fellow coaches, she's not afraid to use her power to block them from pitching the contestants she wants for her team.
As Legend put it in an earlier episode, “Most of the time (McEntire is) a benevolent queen, but every once in a while she’ll do some ruthless, cold-blooded (and) dirty things.”
Sometimes, helping young artists hone their talent means giving them tough love.
When two of her pop singers bring a slightly different version of a song than they’d rehearsed to the Battles stage, McEntire doesn’t hold back in letting them know that their choice to go off-script has consequences.
In rehearsals, two of her artists are given the daunting task of singing McEntire’s “The Heart Won’t Lie.” This marks one of the few times McEntire isn’t smiling.
Knowing the 1993 single that she performed with Vince Gill all too well, her ear picks up the errors in the performance.
But she approaches the feedback with tact and class, asking the country vocalist and Nashville veteran pairing whether they changed the melody in one section on purpose.
The Nashville singer admits they need to familiarize themselves with the song more and “tighten it up.”
Other than understandably being critical of a performance of one of her own songs, McEntire isn’t here to nitpick.
She wants to help her artists reach new heights: “That's what I'm looking for, something that will surprise them and make them feel like, ‘Man, this was really worth doing,’” she says.
“If your heart and soul is in it and I felt something, we've done our job.”
Millie Bobby Brown had an unexpected feminist awakening.
The "Stranger Things" star, 19, revealed in her Glamour UK "Women of the Year" cover story published Monday that she discovered she was a feminist after a psychic told her she was.
After the session, Brown recalled searching, "How do I know if I'm a feminist?"
"Ultimately (feminism is) about opportunity," she discovered in her quest for more knowledge on the topic.
Her upcoming film "Damsel" takes it to the next level: "The theme is feminism," she told the outlet.
Although the British actress didn't realize at an early age that she was a feminist, she had already been doing the work as UNICEF's youngest Goodwill Ambassador at age 14, promoting the need for menstrual products around the world.
"I think I was so afraid to be a strong woman in a relationship," she said.
He embraced that and encouraged that.
"It was like, 'Wow, I really love this person because he allows me to love myself.'"
The "Stranger Things" star wore a beautiful ring on her engagement finger as she cuddled into her boyfriend.
"I've loved you three summers now, honey, I want 'em all," she captioned the post, referencing lyrics from Taylor Swift's 2019 hit "Lover."
Drake calls out 'weirdos'discussing Millie Bobby Brown friendship in 'For All the Dogs'
LSU will start the upcoming women’s basketball season where it ended the last one.
The defending NCAA champion Tigers were voted No.
1 in the preseason USA TODAY Sports Coaches Poll.
Picked first on 29 of 32 ballots, LSU will start the campaign as the preseason No.
1 for the first time in program history after winning the school's first national championship.
The remaining three first-place nods went to perennial power Connecticut.
2 overall as they begin their quest for the program’s 12th NCAA title.
Next comes Caitlin Clark-led Iowa at No.
3, also with its highest starting point in program history.
South Carolina, which began each of the last three seasons at the top, will start this time at No.
Virginia Tech rounds out the top five, also with its highest preseason position.
TOP 25:Complete USA TODAY Sports women's basketball poll
OUTLOOKS:Previewing each team ranked in the preseason Top 25
Though all 32 Division I conferences are represented on the voting panel, the preseason Top 25 is the exclusive realm of the six power leagues.
The Big Ten and Pac-12 come next with five apiece.
The SEC has four overall, followed by the Big 12 with three and the Big East with two.
Readers with quick math skills will notice that adds up to 26.
That is because Miami (Fla.) and Michigan are in a tie for 25th.
Curiously, the poll also features a tie at No.
23 between Creighton and Oklahoma.
The women's game continues to grow exponentially in popularity, evidenced by another March Madness of record TV ratings and the fact that Iowa just packed 55,464 fans into their football stadium for an exhibition game against DePaul.
We're not entirely sure what the 2023-24 season will hold, but we know it'll be star-studded with the return of Reese, Clark, Stanford's Cameron Brink and (finally!)
Here are season outlooks for the 25 teams in the USA TODAY Sports preseason women's basketball poll:
Points: 797 (29 first-place votes).
Last year's final ranking: 1.
TIGERS ON TOP: LSU is No.
1 in preseason women's basketball poll for first time
Points: 727 (3 first-place votes).
Last year's final ranking: 9.
Can they fix that this year?
Last year's final ranking: 2.
Is her shooting range even more impressive than last year, when she won every national player award and led Iowa to the Final Four?
We’ll find out soon enough.
Last year's final ranking: 3.
The Gamecocks' biggest strength last year was depth, which is why they’ll be a top team in 2023-24, too.
Yes, they’ll miss Aliyah Boston.
Last year's final ranking: 4.
Last year's final ranking: 6.
The Buckeyes have her back, and got one of the best defensive guards in the country when Celeste Taylor transferred from Duke.
The addition of Taylor will make Ohio State’s press even more suffocating.
Points: 565 Last year's final ranking: 8.
Utah’s offense is scary efficient, but the defense has to get better if the Utes want to make another deep run.
Last year's final ranking: 13.
Last year's final ranking: 7.
Mackenzie Holmes, the Hoosiers’ 6-foot-3 All-American who averaged 22.3 points and 7.3 rebounds per game, is back and the perfect piece to build around.
The Hoosiers aren’t flashy, but they’re solid, especially defensively, and extremely tough to beat home.
Last year's final ranking: 11.
Point guard Olivia Miles is one of the top playmakers in women’s basketball and as soon as she gets healthy from a knee injury, the Irish will be a nightmare in the open floor.
While Miles rehabs, look for freshman point guard Hannah Hidalgo to make an immediate impact.
Last year's final ranking: 5.
Last year's final ranking: 20.
Together, they give the Lady Vols a formidable one-two punch.
Last year's final ranking: 10.
Last year's final ranking: 19.
The Longhorns’ defense keeps them in every game.
Last year's final ranking: 14.
Three other big portal pick-ups, plus improved play from Olivia Cochran, will put Louisville in a position to contend for the ACC title.
Last year's final ranking: 22.
Add returners and a couple of other top-notch transfers, and things should keep rolling in Oxford.
Points: 278, Last year's final ranking: 21.
Last year's final ranking: 18.
Last year's final ranking: 16.
Last year's final ranking: Not ranked.
Last year's final ranking: Not ranked.
Last year's final ranking: Not ranked.
Last year's final ranking: 17.
Last year's final ranking: Not ranked.
The Blue Jays run one of the best, most efficient offenses in the country, and when they’re hot, everyone is hitting from three and scoring layups at will.
Last year's final ranking: 18.
The Hurricanes were one of the surprises of the last year's tournament, stunning top-seeded Indiana on the Hoosiers’ home floor to reach the program’s first-ever Elite Eight.
Last year's final ranking: 23.
She’ll lead a talented roster featuring three graduate transfers, all of whom have topped the 1,000-point mark already in their careers.
INGLEWOOD, Calif. — The importance of Monday night’s game between the Dallas Cowboys and Los Angeles Chargers was palpable.
The Cowboys were embarrassed by the San Francisco 49ers in Week 5, while the Chargers, coming off a bye week, were attempting to get above .500 for the first time this season with a matchup against the defending Super Bowl champion Kansas City Chiefs in Week 7 looming.
The urgency was evident even before kickoff with a pregame skirmish breaking out along the visiting sideline.
Fists were thrown and there was plenty of shoving.
You got to show it week in and week out in this league.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
The word "resilient" was uttered multiple times in the postgame visiting locker room as the Cowboys bounced back from being humiliated just eight days ago in the same state.
The Cowboys now head into their bye week 4-2 and with a positive psyche.
Monday’s win should give the Cowboys a renewed jolt of optimism aided by the stunning Week 6 defeats by the 49ers and Philadelphia Eagles, two teams Dallas is measured up to and will likely have to go through in its quest for NFC supremacy.
"It’s a good weekend," Cowboys coach Mike McCarthy said with a smile when asked about the surprising losses by the 49ers and Eagles.
"Crazy weekend in the NFL, but we were on the right side of this week."
It was a good bounce-back week for the Cowboys.
The franchise hasn’t lost back-to-back regular-season games since Week 11 and 12 of the 2021 season, they avoided going 0-2 in California and can now reset heading into the bye just one game behind the Eagles, 49ers and Detroit Lions for the best record in the conference with plenty of football left to play.
Obviously, I think a win like this allows you to really close that book.
Follow USA TODAY Sports' Tyler Dragon on X @TheTylerDragon.
Four pitches later, there was another one flying deep into the night, traveling 420 feet, clearing the bullpen and clanking off the right-field seats.
This place is unbelievable.
"You can’t explain what it feels like."
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
And then Nick Castellanos added another one in the second inning.
The home run barrage, and ace Zack Wheeler’s dominant performance, provided the Phillies a powerful 5-3 victory in Game 1 over the Arizona Diamondbacks in the National League Championship Series, the D-backs’ first loss of the postseason.
"That gave us the momentum," said Castellanos, who has homered five times in his last three postseason games, tying Hall of Fame slugger Reggie Jackson’s record.
It unlocked the atmosphere.
Uh, yes, to say the least.
The power show gave the Phillies 16 home runs this postseason, out-homering the opposition by 12 in their seven games.
Their 12 homers alone in the past three games are the most by any team in a three-game span in postseason history.
Since the last postseason, the Phillies have out-homered their opponents, 32-9, at Citizens Bank Park.
"I am amazed," Castellanos says.
"They came out ready to jump on his fastball."
If the three home runs traveling 1,202 feet weren’t impressive enough, the Phillies provided a little theater, too, courtesy of Harper, who celebrated his 31st birthday with 45,396 of his closest friends at Citizens Bank Park.
"It's crazy, sometimes I just do stuff, and that felt right," Harper said.
"So I thought I would step on home plate and do that."
He’s doing such an unbelievable job for us.
But that’s what everyone is thinking when you’re in the dugout, 'Man, what’s this guy going to do next?'"
BASEBALL in 2028 OLYMPICS: Bryce Harper says it'd be 'a dream' to play in Los Angeles Games
Well, the truth is that the Phillies are now starting to have the same expectations of Castellanos, who has five home runs this postseason from the No.
7 spot in the batting order.
"Nick definitely brings some swag to the game," Phillies outfielder Brandon Marsh said.
It’s truly special, seeing a guy, with the pitching caliber we’re going up against, and taking care of business.
"He’s just an unbelievable talent."
So, if Reggie Jackson is Mr. October, just what are we supposed to call Castellanos?
There’s only one of them.
I think your best bet is probably to hold four fingers up against him right now.
"I mean, if you tried to pitch around him, he’d probably hit that too."
The Phillies, who celebrated their victory with a strobe light and fog machine, know that one game hardly makes a series.
They still need to defeat the D-backs three more times to reach the World Series for the second consecutive year.
But they’re starting to feel invincible at home, winning a record 10 consecutive postseason games at Citizens Bank Park against National League teams, and are 27-11 overall at their ballpark in October.
Harper reminded everyone before and after the game that no one is going to take the D-backs lightly, praising them for their scrappy play.
Once the team briefly celebrated their win, Harper was quite mellow, sitting alone in front of his locker and looking at his cell phone.
He finally got up, showered, and met the media.
"I’m just very thankful to play this game," said Harper, who also drove in a run in the third inning, and is hitting .409 with a .567 on-base percentage and .955 slugging percentage this postseason.
I mean, it's a lot of fun.
"I’m pumped man."
Harper walked out of the clubhouse at 11:26 p.m. local time to see his family, but long after he departed, his teammates still couldn’t stop talking about him.
One day, they'll tell all of their friends and family, that they played with a player who could go down as one of the greatest clutch performers in the history of the sport.
The bigger the stage, the brighter the lights, there is Harper.
This is a guy whose career 1.044 OPS in the postseason ranks third among all players with at least 150 plate appearances, trailing only Babe Ruth and Lou Gehrig.
A Royal Caribbean International cruise ship helped evacuate U.S. nationals from Israel on Monday.
“Now, with enhanced safety precautions in place, our ship is providing free passage, including accommodation and food, for Americans in the region wishing to leave and find safer ground,” Jason Liberty, president and CEO of the line’s parent company Royal Caribbean Group, said in an email to employees that was shared with USA TODAY.
The evacuation was conducted in partnership with the U.S. State Department, Liberty said.
The U.S. Embassy in Israel said in a security alert Sunday that boarding would begin in order of arrival on Monday at 8:00 a.m. local time, and the ship would sail from Haifa to Limassol, Cyprus.
The Rhapsody of the Seas ship can accommodate more than 2,400 passengers, according to Royal Caribbean’s website.
“Each traveler must be a U.S. national or the immediate family member (spouse/partner, children under age 21) of a U.S. national and have a valid passport,” the alert said.
The embassy said travelers would be responsible for arranging their own accommodations and travel from Cyprus, but that chartered flights were also being arranged.
“This has truly been an incredible effort as our teams worked tirelessly over the past week to make this mission possible,” Liberty added in the email.
“My heartfelt gratitude goes out to all involved and especially to the ship’s officers and crew for their unwavering support of this call to serve others in the midst of unimaginable tragedy.”
Escaping from Israel:U.S. families take tumultuous flights home after Hamas attacks
Many cruise lines changed itineraries following the conflict, in some cases suspending stops in Israel altogether.
The State Department has an advisory in place for the region, warning against travel to Gaza and urging travelers to reconsider going to Israel and the West Bank.
You can reach him at ndiller@usatoday.com.
A Florida-bound airplane had to turn around after receiving reports of a possible bomb on board, but airport officials found an adult diaper instead.
The plane landed back in Panama and went to a solitary tarmac before evacuating 144 passengers and having an anti-explosives team inspect the aircraft, according to AP.
Head of airport security José Castro said that the suspicious object was not in fact a dangerous explosive, but an adult diaper.
“We had it on a secure runway where police special explosives canine units and special forces examined the object, and found it to be an adult diaper, ruling out any risk,” Castro said, according to AP.
Learn more: Best travel insurance
More:8 hospitalized after JetBlue flight hit severe turbulence approaching Fort Lauderdale, Florida
Southwest Airlines wants to make it easier for you to get status in its Rapid Rewards program.
Beginning Jan. 1, it’s lowering the threshold to qualify for A-List and A-List preferred status.
According to the airline, the new requirements will be 20 qualifying one-way flights for A-List status, down from 25, and 40 qualifying one-way flights for A-List Preferred status, down from 50.
“At a time when other programs, plural, are making it harder to achieve tier status, we’re making it easier.”
Southwest is also lowering the spend-to-earn threshold on its co-branded credit cards.
Other frequent flyer programs have seen a swelling of their elite ranks in recent years, diluting the benefits for some loyal travelers, but Clarkson said he’s not concerned about a similar scenario unfolding at Southwest.
“It will result in a larger program we anticipate, but not to the point where it erodes the benefit of the people who get to take advantage of it.”
Cruising Altitude:Don't bother with an airline loyalty program if you're this traveler
The airline announced other changes to Rapid Rewards benefits as well, including the option to book tickets using a combination of cash and points.
Previously, Southwest tickets had to be purchased using all cash or exclusively points.
Clarkson said A-List Preferred members will also be entitled to up to two free alcoholic drinks per flight.
He added that vouchers for those drinks will be embedded in the passenger’s boarding pass scanner code, rather than travelers needing to present physical certificates onboard.
Customer feedback has been positive about the changes so far, according to Clarkson.
“We have a program we want people to use and get the benefit of.”
JetBlue, Frontier Airlines and Alaska Airlines all moved to capitalize on Delta’s unpopular changes to their loyalty program by enticing flyers with generous matching programs.
You can reach him at zwichter@usatoday.com
UPDATE: This story has been updated with news that within hours of publication of USA TODAY's investigation, MSU suspended Coach Mel Tucker without pay.
Two years ago, one of the nation’s star college football coaches and a prominent rape survivor teamed up to fight the culture of sexual violence in sports.
Their partnership should have been a force for good.
Instead, it has devolved into scandal, with the activist accusing the coach of the same misconduct that both of them preached against.
Accusing him is Brenda Tracy, a rape survivor who has made educating athletes about sexual violence her life’s work.
Over eight months, they developed a professional relationship centered on her advocacy work.
Tucker invited Tracy to campus three times – twice to speak to his players and staff and once to be recognized as an honorary captain at the team's spring football game.
But their relationship was upended during a phone call on April 28, 2022, Tracy says in a complaint she filed with the university’s Title IX office in December that remains under investigation.
According to her complaint, Tracy sat frozen for several minutes while Tucker made sexual comments about her and masturbated.
His violation, she said, reopened 25-year-old wounds from her rape by four men – two Oregon State University football players, a junior college player and a high school recruit.
“The idea that someone could know me and say they understand my trauma but then re-inflict that trauma on me is so disgusting to me, it’s hard for me to even wrap my mind around it,” she told USA TODAY.
“It’s like he sought me out just to betray me.”
In his statements to the Title IX investigator, Tucker acknowledged masturbating on the call but said Tracy grossly mischaracterized the episode.
According to him, they had consensual “phone sex.”
Michigan State hired an outside Title IX attorney to investigate the complaint.
She finished her investigation in July.
A formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated the school’s policy banning sexual harassment and exploitation is scheduled for Oct. 5 and 6, during the Spartans’ bye week.
The stakes are high for everyone.
Tracy says Tucker is following through on a threat to ruin her career and reputation by painting her as a woman who mixes professional and personal relationships and files false reports.
She fears he will undo her legacy.
Tucker, who signed one of the most lucrative contracts in college sports history two years ago, could lose out on the roughly $80 million he is owed if Michigan State fires him for cause, which would be a stunning fall from the elite ranks of college coaches.
Reached by USA TODAY on his cellphone Saturday night, Tucker hung up after a reporter mentioned the case.
Hours after USA TODAY published its investigation, the university suspended Tucker without pay, pending a resolution of the Title IX case.
“This step, suspending Mel Tucker without pay, is … necessary and appropriate for today's circumstances,” Interim President Teresa Woodruff said at a Sunday evening press conference.
“These actions are not taken lightly.”
USA TODAY typically does not identify people who allege sexual harassment.
Tracy agreed to be identified and shared more than 1,200 pages of case documents.
Title IX, the federal law banning sex discrimination in education, requires schools to investigate allegations of sexual harassment that took place in the context of a school program or activity.
Such claims are inherently difficult to adjudicate because of many of the factors at issue in this case: a lack of eyewitnesses and recordings, the passage of time and the thorniness of litigating consent.
Adding to the uncertainty, the institution tasked with sorting out the facts is perhaps best known for missing repeated opportunities to stop one of the most prolific sexual abusers in American history.
Gymnastics and campus physician accused of sexually assaulting more than 300 female athletes under the guise of medical treatments.
He has been sentenced to a minimum of 100 years in prison.
Amid its efforts to rebuild trust among students, employees, alumni and the East Lansing community, Michigan State's leaders must now decide whether the face of its prestigious football program is guilty of sexually harassing one of the country’s most influential advocates against gender-based violence.
For some, how the university navigates the crisis will send a clear message about its commitment to progress.
“This goes beyond coach Tucker and Brenda Tracy,” said Jennifer Gomez, a Boston University professor who researches the effects of interpersonal trauma and violence.
“What happens here has the potential to be very healing or very harmful for lots and lots and lots of other people.”
Tracy and Tucker met in August 2021 during her first visit to Michigan State, after a mutual acquaintance introduced them.
Standing before a packed auditorium in the Spartans’ football operations building, Tracy told a gut-wrenching story of turning her pain into purpose two decades after filing a police report saying she had been gang-raped as a 24-year-old mother of two.
At the end, she challenged the “good men” in the room to use their privilege and influence to educate themselves and call out bad behavior.
By then she had delivered versions of the speech more than 100 times to at least 40,000 athletes and coaches.
Michigan State paid her a $10,000 speaking fee.
Tucker was in his second season as head coach.
A former University of Wisconsin-Madison defensive back, he had spent two decades coaching defenses for 10 college and NFL teams before landing the top job at the University of Colorado in late 2018.
Michigan State lured him away a year later by doubling his salary.
Mel Tucker's career at Michigan State: A timeline
Tucker and Tracy “hit it off” immediately, they would both later tell the Title IX investigator.
They bonded over their love of Jordan sneakers, shelves of which lined Tucker’s office walls.
Tucker had been moved by her speech, and she had been a big hit with players, he told the investigator.
They discussed her coming back to campus in the future.
Tracy left East Lansing feeling she had found a champion in Tucker, she told the investigator.
He seemed engaged with her cause, leading his players in signing her pledge to, among other things, obtain “ongoing, affirmative consent” before engaging in sexual acts with another person.
During that time, the two also talked on the phone at least 27 times, Tracy’s phone bills show – an average of once every two weeks for a half hour.
They often spoke at night to accommodate their work schedules, they said.
They chatted about their jobs and eventually more personal matters, such as their families, mental health and daily lives.
In November, Michigan State signed him to an unprecedented 10-year, $95 million deal that came fully guaranteed, even if it fired him for poor performance.
The only way he could lose out on the money, the contract said, was if he materially breached it, was convicted of a crime or engaged in “conduct which, in the University’s reasonable judgment, would tend to bring public disrespect, contempt or ridicule on the University.”
It was around then that Tucker, who had been married for more than two decades, started becoming interested in Tracy romantically, they both told the investigator.
Whether Tracy reciprocated is where their accounts diverge.
Tucker told the investigator that he and Tracy developed a romantic connection and talked openly about it.
They frequently made flirtatious comments about each other’s looks and bodies, Tucker said.
Tracy told him she wanted a “sugar daddy” who would pay her a monthly amount to be his girlfriend, he said, and that she would be “all over” him if he wasn’t married.
Tucker said they had acknowledged their mutual desire for a romance but agreed it would be “too messy” because of his marriage and the physical distance between them.
By contrast, Tracy told the investigator that Tucker’s romantic interest in her was entirely one-sided.
She said she came to feel he was less interested in her cause than in her.
Tucker messaged her photos of herself that he had found on her Instagram page, making comments such as, “This is the one,” or complimenting her eyes, Tracy said.
Once, Tucker called Tracy via FaceTime.
He was in bed, shirtless.
He talked about his unhappy marriage, describing himself as “more or less single.” Then, during a Nov. 9, 2021, call, she said he asked her, “If I wasn’t a football coach and if I wasn’t married, would you date me?”
Tracy said she responded that she would not because they worked together – one of several times she recalled trying to set boundaries.
She said she made clear to Tucker on a Dec. 1 call that they would only be friends, and he seemed to agree.
Then, after the spring game, Tucker called her four times, phone records show.
Tracy said he repeatedly asked her to meet him alone, without her assistant, and even suggested slipping into her hotel through a back door so no one would see him.
She said no.
Twelve days later came the call.
Tracy was in her home office in Oregon.
Tucker, who was in a hotel in Florida, called her at 12:39 a.m. EST, phone records show.
The call lasted 36 minutes.
According to Tucker, he became aroused when Tracy made a comment about needing to hit the gym more to look better without clothes on.
“Unequivocally, there’s no doubt about it,” Tucker told the investigator, case documents show.
“She was the one who said we’ll do it.”
Tracy denies all of that.
The call started off normal, she said.
But when she sent Tucker a photo of them together from the spring game, she said he responded by commenting on her buttocks and calling himself an “ass man.”
She remembered Tucker’s voice getting deeper and weirder as he continued talking about her buttocks.
She asked him what he was doing, and he said he had a “hard dick” and was touching himself.
“You’re touching yourself?” Tracy asked, according to the investigation report.
Tucker responded, “Yes.”
Tracy said she thought to herself, "Oh my god, this is happening, and I can’t stop it."
Eventually she said something along the lines of, “If you do this, I don’t ever want to hear about it, we are only friends, that’s it.”
When he finished, Tracy said, Tucker told her, “Thank you, good night, sweetheart.” She responded, “Yeah,” and he hung up.
Then she sat at her desk for a while, staring at her phone and crying.
Three months passed between the call and the next time Tracy and Tucker spoke.
At first, Tracy tried to pretend to herself that nothing had happened.
Tucker, however, was not responding to her text messages.
And he abruptly canceled her in-person training, planned for July 25, three days before it was supposed to take place.
A team staffer told her they had double-booked, but Tracy believed she knew the real reason.
When Tracy finally got Tucker on the phone about a week later, he was angry, she said, accusing her and her assistant of gossiping about his marital problems.
Tracy recalled that Tucker made comments such as, “I can’t trust you,” “If you say anything about this, I’ll hear about it,” and “I’ll be fine, it’s you that I am worried about.” She viewed it as a threat to destroy her reputation if she spoke out about him.
Tucker at one point told her he had done nothing wrong.
According to Tracy, she started to say, “Well, something…” referring to his masturbation, and Tucker interrupted, saying, “But nothing happened.”
Tucker recalled the Aug. 2 phone call much differently.
He told the investigator that Tracy apologized to him for discussing his marriage with her assistant, and he accepted.
Although they ended the call on good terms and discussed postponing her visit until next year, Tucker said he had lost trust in Tracy.
The training was never rescheduled, and they never spoke again.
Tracy initially stayed quiet about Tucker for the sake of her career, she said.
Ultimately, she decided that if she let it slide, she wouldn’t be the person she claimed to be – the one who encourages people to speak up about sexual misconduct and hold others accountable.
She filed her complaint in December – eight months after the call.
In dry and bureaucratic language, the record of that complaint begins: “The specific allegations of prohibited conduct against Respondent are as follows …” A notification was delivered to Tucker the following day.
Tucker was “absolutely shocked,” he would tell the university’s investigator.
In subsequent correspondence, he and his attorney suggested Tracy’s motive: She held a vendetta against Spartans athletics because of its history of sexual misconduct scandals and falsely accused him for financial gain.
“To say that I have learned from this situation is an understatement,” Tucker wrote in a letter to the investigator on March 22.
“I will never again allow myself to be duped by kindness.”
A former Indiana sex crimes prosecutor who now heads a private practice, she also previously worked in the Title IX offices at Michigan State and the University of Michigan.
Jacqueline Swanson, Tracy’s attorney who is also her friend, turned over a copy of the notes she took from their conversation on a yellow legal pad.
She shared a screenshot of a Dec. 2 text message in which Tracy told her she had just spoken with Tucker, who had agreed they could only be friends.
“I’m glad it didn’t get weird,” Tracy wrote.
Tracy provided phone bills and emails that corroborated her timeline of events and showed Tucker had been calling her from his personal cellphone.
Tracy said no.
In January, they sent a 12-page letter to the school arguing it lacked jurisdiction to investigate Tucker's “purely personal” relationship with Tracy.
“How far does MSU intend to go in policing the private conduct of its employees, and how does it expect its 20,000+ employees to react when they find out that they no longer have private lives outside the reach of their employer?”
Michigan State was not persuaded.
The alleged conduct would be covered by school policy, it concluded, because it took place in the context of Tracy’s work as a vendor for the school and affected their ongoing business relationship.
The case would go forward.
Tucker sat down for his interview on March 22.
He said he wanted to be transparent and set the record straight.
For instance, Tucker claimed he had made the phone sex call from home in East Lansing – not in a Florida hotel.
He had just returned from a trip to Florida, he said, where he had been doing charity work unrelated to his employment with the school.
An expense report Tucker submitted to Michigan State for his hotel and meal costs showed the trip's purpose was “administrative” and did not involve any personal travel.
The costs were paid by the Spartan Fund, the athletic department’s fundraising arm; he had flown to Florida on a donor’s private plane.
The information, Tucker said, made him question how Tracy “goes about her business.”
“I’m perplexed that Mel Tucker would respond to a complaint of sexual harassment by involving me or ESPN.”
Tucker did not identify any witnesses who could support his version of events, including his associate, whom he said he had promised anonymity.
That same associate, Tucker said, told him that Alvarado, Tracy’s assistant, had been gossiping about his marriage – a claim Alvarado denied.
Along the way, she had learned that one potentially rich source of evidence was missing: Both Tracy and Tucker had deleted their text messages with each other.
Tucker would tell her that he deletes his messages regularly because he receives so many; Tracy said she did so in a panic after their last phone call, feeling she needed to cut all ties with him.
At the hearing, planned for October, both sides will have the opportunity to present evidence and make arguments.
Another outside Title IX attorney hired by the school will then decide whether the evidence shows that Tucker likely violated school rules.
Among the witnesses who will be missing from Tracy’s witness list is her assistant and best friend, Alvarado.
She died in a car accident in June.
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
It was a private event thrown by the school to promote its migrant student services program, which provides financial aid and support to farmworkers seeking college degrees.
After the April 28, 2022, tour, disclosed in records obtained by USA TODAY this week, Tucker met with community leaders and alumni.
That night, Tucker would make the now-infamous phone call from his hotel room in nearby Naples, during which he is accused of masturbating and making unwanted sexual comments to Brenda Tracy, a prominent rape survivor and activist he had hired to speak to his team about sexual violence.
Yet, when Tucker met with the university’s outside investigator in March for his interview in the sexual harassment case against him, he insisted the trip was not work-related – a claim the investigator would disprove in her report.
It’s just one example of Tucker failing to keep his story straight at the most consequential moment of his career.
With his job, reputation and the roughly $80 million left on his contract at stake, Tucker repeatedly made false statements to the investigator and misled her about basic facts, such as his location during the phone call and the date it occurred, a USA TODAY review of more than 1,200 pages of case documents found.
Michigan State suspended Tucker without pay on Sept. 10, hours after Tracy went public for the first time with her story in USA TODAY.
On Monday, the school informed Tucker it plans to fire him for cause based on the conduct he had admitted to and the embarrassment he had caused the school.
Investigation:Michigan State football coach Mel Tucker accused of sexually harassing rape survivor
Although Tucker denied sexually harassing Tracy, he acknowledged masturbating on the call, saying he and Tracy had been in a romantic relationship and had consensual “phone sex.” Tracy said Tucker’s romantic interest in her was completely one-sided and that she had tried to set boundaries multiple times during their yearlong business partnership.
Per his contract, Tucker has until Tuesday to make a case for keeping his job.
Regardless, a formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated school policies against sexual harassment and exploitation is expected to proceed on Oct. 5 and 6.
He accused the school of conducting a “sham” hearing and having “ulterior motives.” Yet even in these written statements, the central details of his story changed entirely.
Tucker, who previously hung up on a reporter who called him on his cellphone asking about the case, did not respond to a message seeking comment for this story.
Tracy declined to comment for this story.
“Very often you’re weighing credibility based on little bits and pieces of information.”
“I believe a fact finder could assess these pieces of evidence about credibility and make a determination that Brenda is more credible than Mel,” she said.
“In my experience, a clear sign of a lack of credibility is generally taken very seriously.”
The school had informed him of Tracy’s complaint on Dec. 22, the day after she filed it.
Tucker was the only holdout.
Rather than tell his side of the story right away, Tucker and his attorney spent three months trying to stop the investigation, case documents show.
They wrote legal arguments urging Michigan State to drop the case and twice approached Tracy’s attorney proposing a settlement agreement.
Tracy said no, and the school pressed forward.
Only a handful of text messages remained; he and Tracy both told the investigator they had deleted their texts with each other in the months after the April 2022 phone call.
In his interview, which lasted 3 ½ hours, Tucker questioned whether Tracy had mixed up the date of the call.
He said he recalled being at his home in East Lansing when it occurred, but his own records showed that he had been in Florida on April 28, attending a charity function that was “absolutely not a University-sponsored event.”
His seven-page account told a different story – that he had called her while he was “alone in a hotel room.”
But by then she knew what he told her in the interview was untrue: she had already obtained records proving he had not been home in East Lansing.
An expense report he had submitted to the university for reimbursement of his hotel and meals shows Tucker flew to Naples, Florida, to attend a golf fundraiser hosted by The Greg H. Montgomery Jr. Foundation for Ultimate Growth, which raises awareness for suicide prevention.
It showed he stayed at the Hilton from April 27 to 29, that the trip’s purpose was “administrative” and that it did not involve personal travel.
He had flown there on a donor’s private plane.
The event was titled “Working to make dreams a reality,” according to an agenda obtained from the university by USA TODAY through a public records request.
The agenda features Tucker’s name prominently.
Tucker posted photos from the tour on his Twitter account.
That Tucker was on a university-sponsored work trip during the incident was a contributing factor in the university’s determination that it had jurisdiction to investigate, the investigation report shows.
Tucker’s lists of calls and text messages also were missing an important detail: They did not show any communication with Tracy on April 28.
He acknowledged in the interview, however, that he had not reviewed the lists before submitting them and that they may have been incomplete.
Tucker and Tracy did not speak in the three months after the April 28 call.
Meanwhile, their assistants were planning Tracy’s third visit to campus – an in-person training with coaches and players scheduled for July 25.
Tucker canceled that training three days before, the investigation report shows.
When Tracy spoke to him by phone on Aug. 2 seeking to find out why, she would tell the investigator in her interview that Tucker insinuated he would harm her career if she spoke about his conduct.
He never rescheduled her visit, and they never spoke again.
The cancellation became a key focus of the investigator – one of a series of alleged incidents that taken together would meet the definition of sexual harassment, which can include pressuring someone into engaging in sexual behavior for an employment benefit and threatening that rejecting such behavior will carry a negative consequence.
Tucker tried to distance himself from the cancellation in a public statement on Sept. 11, the day after Michigan State suspended him without pay.
“I never cancelled any presentation,” he wrote.
But that statement contradicts what he told the investigator.
Such timing would not make sense, he added, because most of his new players would not yet be on campus.
Tucker also told the investigator why he canceled the visit, blaming it on a scheduling conflict.
He said he had recently hired a mental conditioning coach, Ben Newman, who needed to implement his new program on short notice.
There was limited time in fall camp, Tucker said, and he didn’t want to “overwhelm” the players.
He said he decided to yield the time to Newman.
He had been meeting with them weekly since June 6, the records showed but held no meetings between July 15 and July 28.
One of Tucker’s assistants, who is a witness in the case, also told the investigator that Tucker asked him via text message to cancel it.
He said he was never instructed to reschedule.
Tucker confronted Tracy about the alleged gossiping during the Aug. 2 phone call, they both told the investigator.
Tracy said he berated and bullied her, repeatedly saying he could not trust her.
She said she told him she did not know what he was talking about.
During the Aug. 2 call, Tracy said she pressed Tucker to identify his source – the associate.
In her report, she wrote that he said he had “given (his) word that (he) wouldn’t divulge their name.”
Tucker never revealed the associate’s name to the investigator, nor did he identify anyone who could support his version of events.
In his Sept. 11 public statement, however, he lamented that the hearing would not afford him the opportunity to “offer any substantive evidence of innocence.”
It was not the only claim he attributed to his anonymous associate.
It turned out to be yet another falsehood.
“Neither the organization nor Tracy is or has been the target of any investigative reporting.”
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
Contributing: USA TODAY reporter Steve Berkowitz.
The bullets came in plywood crates.
Any given box was about the size of a small microwave oven.
The printed label stuck to each one demonstrated a militaristic brevity.
“CARTRIDGES FOR WEAPONS, INERT PROJECTILE,” next to a bright yellow hazmat sticker, “EXPLOSIVES.”
Inside the boxes: drab green steel cans of .50-caliber ammunition.
Each round was giant, more than 5 inches long, built to be fired from a gun so big it is typically bolted to a truck.
The bullets were clipped together in long strands for rapid, machine-gun fire.
By the time Bill Brown got to the boxes, they sat double-stacked eight high atop wooden pallets inside a Missouri warehouse.
The pallets went on, row after row.
Three million bullets in all.
It was enough ammunition to feed a single machine gun – if fired nonstop at its rated speed eight hours a day, seven days a week – for almost six months.
Brown’s job was to get it out of there and toward the Ukrainian front lines.
The faster, the better.
“War is bad,” Brown said.
There would be virtually no public record of this Ukrainian arms shipment.
As a weapons dealer, Brown’s company would deliver the bullets under a system known as a direct commercial sale.
Instead, it was part of a shadowy system of brokers, exporters, arms dealers and country-to-country transfers that has become one part of the race to meet demand on distant battlefields.
President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said the effort was delayed in part by the wait for more arms.
Most of America’s $44 billion in documented support to Ukraine came in the form of old U.S. military stock, donated directly by the federal government.
In general, commercial sales over $14 million, and sales of military-grade weaponry like mortars or missiles, require State Department approval and congressional notification.
But other aid comes via private sales.
More than 14,000 U.S. entities are registered to conduct defense trade activities.
Their deals are monitored by an alphabet soup of agencies including Departments of Homeland Security, Commerce, Defense and the Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
Trade secrecy clauses in federal law mean this flow of gear, weapons and ammunition is almost never revealed to the public.
Brown, who works for a small Nevada-based logistics company called Battle Born Munitions, provided USA TODAY with a rare look behind the curtain of these private sales.
Details about the shipment were verified by his employer and the European government that made the purchase.
State Department officials declined to answer questions about the specific shipment Brown described.
This March sale and the secret number of other shipments like it fuel Ukraine’s fight against a Russian invasion.
Those sales also release an unknown amount of weaponry into the world.
What becomes of that weaponry after it’s sold – and especially after it’s delivered – is difficult to track.
As Brown surveyed the warehouse in Missouri, a crew steered forklifts and skid lifts among the stacks of plain wooden boxes.
From high in the trusses, suspended lamp fixtures bathed the boxes in artificial daylight.
Brown lifted his camera and started snapping photos.
In just a few hours, he and his cargo would be boarding a jumbo jet.
From Ukraine:War crimes in Ukraine may be unprecedented.
So is the country's push for swift justice.
The bullets had once been bound for Saudi Arabia.
Lot number SMQ19K401L026 had rolled off the assembly line in 2019 at Lake City Army Ammunition Plant near Kansas City.
Lake City, owned by the government and run by a contractor, sprawls across nearly 4,000 acres of green Missouri farmland.
Roads curve past World War II-era bunkers known as igloos, spaced out amid the countryside – far enough apart that an explosion in one won’t trigger a chain reaction in the others.
Lake City has been pumping out ammunition almost without pause since 1941.
It is the largest small-arms manufacturing plant in the world.
And in 2019, Saudi Arabia was stocking up on weapons during the Trump administration, fueling the war in Yemen and other conflicts that drew criticism from congressional Democrats.
The plant manufactures .50-caliber ammunition on a rolling basis, for both military and commercial buyers.
That’s a testament to just what a legend the bullet – and the gun that shoots it – has become.
In 2019, the technology was already a century old.
The .50 caliber was the brainchild of American gunsmith John Browning during World War I.
Built to respond to German anti-tank rifles, the M2 was first tested in 1918, and it entered widespread service in 1923.
It earned the nickname “Ma Deuce” and has served in combat ever since, bolted to trucks, ships, planes and handheld stands on the battlefield.
The .50-caliber rounds – named for their diameter, about half an inch – can easily hit targets more than a mile away.
At closer ranges, they will blast through solid concrete or armored vehicles.
The gun can fire at a sustained rate of about 40 shots per minute.
Military setups use strings of “linked” ammunition to feed into machine guns.
Spaced out after every fourth bullet, so-called tracer rounds have small pyrotechnic charges that illuminate the line of fire, aiding in targeting.
The gun’s longevity and versatility made it popular for militaries the world over.
But this particular batch of bullets wouldn’t end up being sold to Saudi Arabia.
The Biden administration put a temporary freeze on sales to the Saudi government in 2021 as it reviewed weapons deals approved under Donald Trump.
Instead, Brown said, the bullets were sold to a U.S. ammunition provider, only to be held up again.
Ultimately, they were mothballed.
Then, in spring 2023, the bullets found a buyer, or actually two: first Battle Born; ultimately, the Netherlands.
The European country, a NATO ally, needed a big supply of ammunition.
It wouldn’t be keeping the bullets but giving them to Ukraine.
Its purchase, essentially a donation, would count toward the country’s required NATO contribution.
Brown had a line on exactly what they needed.
It was sitting in the warehouse in Missouri.
He arrived in March to personally oversee the shipment.
As he prepped for delivery, Brown dropped tiny black tracking devices onto several of the pallets.
Just $55 apiece, the units use GPS and cell signals to keep tabs on the load.
The idea was to ensure it wouldn’t fall into the wrong hands.
But packing up the bullets was just the beginning.
As with anything that’s deadly and made of metal, the shipping costs can be extreme.
Forty-five to 60 days on a ship?
Brown – or Chief Bill, as he prefers – is a no-nonsense 35-year veteran of the U.S. Army and former helicopter pilot.
He retired as a chief warrant officer and lives in Orlando.
Now 59, he still spends a lot of time on the road – 10 international trips this year.
He says his arms logistics work takes him to places most Americans would rather avoid – near the Syrian border or to unstable regions of Iraq.
He’ll travel halfway around the world, he quips, “have some soup, and go back to Warsaw to head home.” The trips aren’t really about the destinations.
They’re about the cargo.
On that spring day in Missouri, forklifts carefully loaded 107 pallets of the ammo onto 18 flatbed semitrailers.
They’d all make the eight-hour drive to O’Hare International Airport.
In Chicago, two Boeing 747-400s operated by National Airlines would be ready for the freight.
Four pallets each were stacked and shrink-wrapped to create “air pallets” or “cookie sheets” weighing 12,800 pounds.
Each plane could carry up to 17 of the pallets that ran the length of each plane secured by white cargo netting.
Flight records Brown provided show the two planes departed about seven hours apart, one in early afternoon, one after dark.
The flight would take nine hours.
Brown wasn’t going to the Netherlands, even though it was the buyer.
The planes were bound for Rzeszów, Poland.
The ancient city sits at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains in southeastern Poland.
It has a gleaming modern airport next to a major east-west freeway.
From there, it’s barely 60 miles to the border with Ukraine.
It was an expensive journey.
The trucking company’s bill for those 18 semis?
Chartering the two 747s?
But this shipment of .50-cal rounds was profitable for Battle Born Munitions, according to Brown.
The company purchased the 3 million rounds from Northrop Grumman at a bargain and resold them for more than double the price.
(In subsequent interviews, representatives at BBM disputed the specific totals Brown mentioned, saying the accurate figures were protected by “various commercial and government non-disclosure agreements.” They did not dispute the other specifics of the deal he provided.)
Retail prices for .50-caliber ammunition run roughly $5 per bullet.
At that rate, the whole shipment would have been worth $15 million.
The pricing might also be elastic.
The Dutch mark up the price of the bullets and count it toward their NATO contribution, pegged to a percentage of gross domestic product, Brown said.
The Netherlands has contributed about $15 billion to NATO this year, or about 1.7% of its GDP and just under the NATO mandate of 2%.
Representatives of the Dutch military confirmed the shipment to USA TODAY but declined to comment further about the pricing or details.
The war in Ukraine has only increased the demand for private deals.
The State Department signed off on more than $154 billion in commercial arms deals directly to foreign countries in 2022, a 48% increase from the previous year.
Direct commercial sales represent a modest portion of the contribution to Ukraine compared with the $44 billion donated by the U.S., but they still amounted to more than $600 million in sales from U.S. companies to the Ukrainian government last year alone.
That doesn’t include sales to other countries that also support Ukraine – sales like the one Brown described.
Jim Bartlett, an attorney with expertise in the specialized international arms transactions, said private U.S. businesses are playing a small but important role in the conflict.
“American companies are happy to export defense articles to foreign buyers approved by the U.S. State Department,” Bartlett said.
Those sales also come with risks.
Direct sales face fewer regulatory controls, oversight and enforcement, said Robert Nichols, an international military sales expert and attorney at the law firm Nichols Liu.
“You can imagine the range of characters involved in supplying a war effort,” Nichols said.
So far, the Department of Justice has indicted just a handful of arms brokers over deals related to the war in Ukraine.
They allegedly lied to Commerce Department agents and told them the parts were bound for Turkey.
Both pleaded not guilty to the charges this summer.
A State Department spokesman declined to provide details of enforcement actions but said, “The United States takes seriously our responsibility to protect American military and dual-use technologies and prevent their diversion, including through strong enforcement actions.”
NATO said it oversees allied arms deliveries, and that those arms generally reach Ukraine.
NATO itself technically only provides non-non-lethal aid, like fuel, medical supplies and generators.
Brown, of Battle Born, says he fields calls weekly from “clowns” without the proper licensing, whom he reports to the State Department for potential violations.
Some raise red flags when they approach him about transactions that include payment via diamonds or gold.
He prefers traditional wire transfers with approved sales partners since he knows government officials are watching.
He validates the contracts and checks certificates for the final users.
That’s part of why he traveled with the ammunition.
He would be meeting a Dutch military official for the official handoff.
“My job is to keep us all out of jail,” Brown said.
The two 747s touched down in Poland, one before the sun, the other in late morning.
Brown exchanged paperwork with a young Dutch military staffer who signed for the delivery, he said.
They traded military patches as souvenirs.
They snapped a photo together.
The bullets bought by the Netherlands would never touch Dutch soil.
U.S. aid:Billions from the US flows to Ukraine.
Here's where it comes from, and how it adds up
Despite playing a small role proportionately in the war, $600 million in direct commercial sales can buy a lot of small weaponry.
Put another way: It’s hard to sneak away an F-16 or a missile launcher the size of a tractor-trailer.
But a bunch of guns or a pallet of ammo?
Much easier to resell.
After Russia invaded Ukraine in 2014, the Small Arms Survey, a Swiss arms research project, estimated that within a year, battlefield seizures and other forms of diversion led to 300,000 small arms and light weapons going missing, including 100,000 in Crimea alone.
When small arms go missing, they can go missing into another country, maybe one led by a despot or even a terrorist organization.
The U.S. government says diversion of American donations has been widely absent so far in Ukraine.
That could be a combination of intensive “end-use-monitoring” programs and the reality of the battlefield, where supplies are rapidly put to use.
But even if not now, unused ammo could be resold someday.
“These are commodities with very long shelf lives.”
Florida-based Global Ordnance, another State Department-licensed exporter, is a competitor in the direct weapons sales business.
General counsel Bryan Van Brunt said the company has extensive protocols in place to track shipments and make sure the end-users are federally approved, though he declined to provide specifics about those systems.
Brown, with Battle Born Munitions, says the company employs a mix of simple and sophisticated tracking technology to ensure his shipments are tracked to end users.
The black GPS devices he dropped onto his cargo tracked the ammo all the way across the globe.
But that system only works as long as Brown is actually tracking.
“Technically, my role ends when I deliver it to NATO,” he said.
Sometime after the 747s touched down in Poland, along with signing the paperwork and snapping a selfie with the Dutch official, Brown found the tiny black GPS trackers and lifted them off the pallets.
Ukrainian trucks would arrive at the airport to pick up the ammunition.
They would point toward the border, and onward to Lviv, and some distant battlefield.
Brown would point in the opposite direction.
Just like one of his quips: Fly in, have soup, get home.
He headed toward Warsaw, with the GPS trackers in his bag.
Contact him at npenz@usatoday.com or @npenzenstadler, or on Signal at (720) 507-5273.
The geography professor didn’t hide his clown fetish or the fact that he sometimes indulged his urges by recruiting students as subjects.
He posted regularly about it on social media.
He submitted his resignation the same day their story was published.
His interactions with students and open discussion of his fetish happened in both mainstream and tailored digital spaces.
He popped into Facebook groups geared toward new students and niche forums on websites like Reddit.
He posted videos on YouTube.
Over the years, two students reported him to campus police; others complained online.
He left Kent State University after pleading no contest to something different: a theft charge that involved entering his peers’ offices without permission and taking a USB drive.
Nicholls State, for example, told USA TODAY Network reporters it does not routinely check social media for new hires.
The money was appealing but the interactions soured.
“I thought maybe they could prevent anything bad from happening since other girls would go with him.”
She said there was never any followup from campus police – or anyone else.
The two who expressed public concerns on social media told USA TODAY they never heard from their campus officials either.
She said she would pass along that reporters were trying to reach him.
He said his contract was not renewed because he was the target of a “grade inflation task force.”
She has seen the pattern often in her work maintaining a database of publicly documented sexual misconduct by faculty and staff.
As for grad students?
“I don’t on purpose,” she said, “because that’s information that almost never comes out.”
He was working toward his doctorate and researched fading businesses.
His work about shopping malls in the Rust Belt won several awards.
Like many graduate students, he also taught classes.
“I will literally pay you!”
What’s more, she figured out that he was a graduate student, a fact she said he didn’t disclose in his posts.
It arrived at midnight and contained no message, although writing on his shirt read: “I'm not a failure.”
“It’s definitely burned into my mind.”
He would send “get to know you” messages, the police report said, and then ask the student if she was “interested in having her face painted for one of his class projects.”
“She does not have any concerns for her safety, but just wanted this documented,” the police report read.
In July 2017, another student had retweeted a message from Kent State’s Twitter account that asked for Kent State love stories.
She said she tweeted to draw officials’ attention to it and moved on but now wishes she had reported it officially.
College campuses are supposed to offer students special protections from sexual harassment even when it falls short of criminal behavior.
Title IX, often associated with equity in women’s sports, also addresses “sex-based harassment, which encompasses sexual assault and other forms of sexual violence” at schools that receive federal funding.
Colleges infrequently and unevenly enforce the rule, however.
A 2022 USA TODAY investigation found just one of every 12,400 students was suspended in connection with sexual misconduct.
The student who shared her story online said the only response she received was from a graduate student in the geography department, who contacted her on Oct. 1, 2018.
In an email, he wrote that he had seen her post and suspected he knew which faculty member had asked her about face painting.
“I brought it to the attention of some of our faculty because I was pretty sure I knew who it was, but they were certain it wasn’t that individual and that you probably just meant geology,” he wrote.
He went on to reference another student being “approached in (at least by just looking at your tweet) a much more aggressive way.” The grad student asked the undergraduate for more information, but, she told USA TODAY, she didn’t respond.
She said she started drafting a reply, but a year had passed.
She wanted to move on.
Kent State would not say whether any actions were taken after the students’ reports, but Eric Mansfield, a spokesman for the university, said the police department confirmed that the students who filed police reports were provided with “university resources, which would include other non-criminal avenues to pursue (Counseling Services, Title IX, Center for Sexual and Relationship Violence Services, etc.)
Mansfield also said that the university monitors social media but that colleges “can’t always see or track every mention on social media.”
A blotter item in the local newspaper shows police obtained an arrest warrant in connection with a third-degree felony burglary charge.
“Also, we do not comment on personnel matters.”
In more recent years, Buckley has become critical of the law and how schools interpret it.
He told the Columbus Dispatch in 2010 that “the law needs to be revamped.”
Survivors of sexual violence and students accuse universities of using the law to avoid negative media coverage.
Students with a history of bad behavior may jump from one school to another without the public ever knowing about their histories.
One case involved Brandon Austin, who was accused of sexual assault at Providence College in 2013 while on the school’s basketball team.
But Providence College initially said Austin was suspended for violating the school’s code of student conduct and declined to share further details with the Providence Journal, citing federal privacy laws.
Austin denied wrongdoing and was not charged with a crime.
Austin was able to transfer to the University of Oregon, where he was again accused of sexual assault, along with other players.
Police investigated the claims, and the local district attorney declined to press charges.
And it doesn’t apply when a student is “seeking or intending to enroll” at another college.
He blamed the overuse of the law on fear of being sued.
While most U.S. employers conduct background screening, according to trade group data, those inquiries typically focus on criminal history.
Social media receives far less attention even though that is where people are most likely to share their unguarded thoughts.
Undertaking a full review of a person’s social media presence is more difficult than just checking an applicant’s Facebook page.
Does an applicant have an account on X, formerly Twitter?
How about an account with Discord, an online platform frequented by gamers, where leaked Pentagon documents were recently shared?
Or what about a Telegram account, a messaging platform popular among white nationalists?
Further complicating things, it’s common on sites like Reddit for users to adopt usernames and describe experiences with little to no ties to reality.
A little digging, however, can turn up a lot of dirt.
His time as a student and instructor at Kent State is absent.
That is the same handle used on Reddit by someone with a special interest in face paint.
Other posts mention a “clown fetish.” In a forum titled “Creepy,” he wrote, “I convince pretty girls to let me paint their faces,” along with a photo with multiple women in white face paint.
That and other similar posts remained live for years until they were taken down after the Nicholls students published their story in late March.
USA TODAY Network reporters captured screenshots before they disappeared.
With dates in 2019, the posts feature a young woman wearing a Kent State T-shirt.
The material would have been available to administrators at Northern Illinois before the start of the fall 2019 semester.
Joe King, a spokesman for Northern Illinois, said departments hiring new graduate students are “not required to check social media or investigate a disciplinary history.” He added some departments may reach out to the graduate students’ former advisers.
But there are signs the behavior continued.
She said she declined to do it but was aware that other Northern Illinois students had participated.
She asked, had anyone complained?
Many students would find a reason to complain, as Nicholls State student journalist Sally-Anne Torres learned firsthand.
It started in January when one of her fellow reporters picked up an odd rumor: a professor was offering extra credit for students willing to paint their faces like clowns.
Initially, Torres dismissed it because it seemed too unusual and there weren’t a lot of leads to follow.
He blamed his departure on giving too many A’s.
That seemed suspicious to Torres.
“It wasn’t just this innocent thing that a lot of these girls thought it was,” Torres said.
Some, she said, were followed on Twitter by him while others opted into an extra credit assignment he offered.
The women told Torres he sometimes giggled and laughed as they painted their faces in his office.
It seemed unusual at the time, Price said, because his friend wasn’t in the class.
It became more concerning to him on reading the student newspaper’s report.
“I feel frankly disgusted and disappointed that Nicholls couldn’t do a proper background check on this professor, because this is unacceptable,” Price said.
Ramos learned that the person behind the account was likely a professor at the university.
She posted about the behavior in January 2022, but nothing came of it.
On March 27, the same day the student newspaper published its piece, Ramos posted screenshots of her discoveries on Twitter with the message, “Found a Nicholls state university professor on Reddit.”
“I wish the university had acted sooner because all this information was public on the internet,” she told USA TODAY.
No one from the university, she said, has ever reached out.
He can be reached at CCampo@gannett.com.
Ron DeSantis was able to transport hundreds of people from Israel to Florida just days after announcing an evacuation initiative by tapping into an existing rescue program, Project Dynamo, that likely would have gone forward with the effort regardless of the state’s support.
Florida has paid for five flights to evacuate people out of Israel between Friday and Sunday, including one that landed in Tampa Sunday night with 270 people, but Project Dynamo coordinated everything else, according to the group’s CEO and founder Bryan Stern.
Project Dynamo was founded in 2021 to help rescue people from Afghanistan after American troops withdrew from the country and has conducted missions everywhere from Ukraine to Sudan.
The flight to Tampa Sunday was the group’s 602nd evacuation mission.
Stern spoke about the rescue missions during a news conference Monday and said he was raising money to pay for the Tampa flight when the state of Florida stepped in to offer assistance.
Many commercial flights out of Israel were canceled following a surprise attack by Hamas and subsequent retaliatory measures by Israel.
That has left many Americans struggling to find a way out of Israel.
DeSantis declared a state of emergency last week and directed the Florida Division of Emergency Management to coordinate evacuation efforts.
Stern said he was grateful for Florida's financial support, the first time a government agency has funded one of his evacuation efforts, but also made it clear that he would've done everything to get people home safely, regardless of whether Florida funded the effort.
DeSantis' trip to Tampa on Sunday was “the first time an American politician has ever met us home,” Stern said.
The evacuation flight to Tampa involved gathering people from more than 12 different areas across Israel, Stern said.
On the flight were Ron and Linda Neumann, who are trying to become dual citizens of Israel and the United States, and their dog.
Ron Neumann said after two flights out of Israel were canceled he tried to find a way out of the country by contacting U.S. State Department officials and state officials in Florida.
Stern didn't know the exact cost of the most recent flight from Israel to Florida, but said the average cost to charter a plane from Tampa to Israel right now is around $2 million.
The governor's office and the Florida Division of Emergency Management provided no answers to questions from the USA TODAY Network - Florida on costs of the trips.
DeSantis has slammed the White House for "dragging its feet" on the charters and said its flights "dump people in Europe."
The flights from Israel occurred the same weekend CBS News' 60 Minutes aired a segment Sunday critical of DeSantis' actions in September 2022, when his administration lured about 50 mostly Venezuelan asylum-seekers from Texas to Martha's Vineyard, off the Massachusetts' coast, with the false promise of jobs and housing.
Money for that trip came from a $12 million fund established within the state's Division of Emergency Management for relocating undocumented migrants from within Florida to other locations.
The program has since been expanded and rewritten by the Florida Legislature to authorize DeSantis' action, after its legality was challenged in a handful of lawsuits.
DeSantis while campaigning in Iowa, home of the first Republican presidential nomination contest, has cited the Martha's Vineyard trip as proof of his commitment to combating illegal immigration and to underscore the failures of the Biden administration.
DeSantis' White House bid probably lives or dies based on how he performs in Iowa.
Those evacuated from Israel by the state-financed effort focused their praise on Project Dynamo, touting the team's skills and efficiency.
"I'm humbled," said Linda Neumann.
John Kennedy of the USA Today Network-Florida's capital bureau contributed to this report.
On today's episode of the 5 Things podcast: U.S. troops have been told to prepare to deploy in response to the Israel-Hamas war.
Authorities open a hate crime investigation over the stabbing death of a 6-year-old Muslim boy.
USA TODAY Justice Department Correspondent Bart Jansen breaks down the latest from former President Donald Trump's election conspiracy case.
What were the big issues at last week's presidential town halls?
Timeshares are getting more popular with younger Americans.
Podcasts: True crime, in-depth interviews and more USA TODAY podcasts right here
Hit play on the player above to hear the podcast and follow along with the transcript below.
This transcript was automatically generated, and then edited for clarity in its current form.
There may be some differences between the audio and the text.
Today, Palestinians in the West Bank lived through tensions from the Israel-Hamas war.
Plus authorities open a hate crime investigation into the death of a Muslim boy in Illinois.
And a ruling has been issued in one of former president Donald Trump's legal battles.
As the Israeli defense forces continue to amass on Gaza's border, the US told 2,000 troops yesterday to prepare to deploy to other regions in the Middle East in response to the escalating conflict.
And while Palestinians in Gaza continue to flee south after Israel evacuation orders, Palestinians in the West Bank are collectively holding their breath, hoping for the best, but fearing the worst.
Thanks for taking the time to come on.
I know you're busy.
So Kim, what are the latest developments?
So this is a multifaceted story.
For the last 24, 48 hours, Israel has been gathering and marshaling its forces on the border with Gaza.
And people are starting to wonder when is this ground invasion actually going to happen?
The Israeli government has been a bit coy on that.
They were suggesting that while the military is ready, it's now a political decision.
And then at the same time, US Secretary Blinken has been in the region, he's been doing this diplomatic blitz of different countries.
There are some rumors, completely unconfirmed that President Biden might be coming to Israel.
I will say that I think much of the focus of this story for now at least, is probably around the unfolding humanitarian situation.
In Gaza hospitals, they are running out of blood.
The reports are from Gaza that they're running out of space to bury bodies.
About 600,000 people have been displaced and are moving south to an area that's closer to Egypt, crossing between southern Israel and Egypt that has been closed by the Egyptian authorities.
And so Blinken and other diplomats are trying to negotiate some way for that gate to get open.
So there's two or 3,000 dual nationals, including five to 600 Palestinian Americans who are gathering at that gate and hoping that it opens so that they can leave.
This is a fast moving story with lots of different facets to it, and it's an evolving situation.
We spent some time in the West Bank, a Palestinian area under a civilian rule by the PLO or Palestinian Authority governing body recognized by the US, EU and others.
What are they saying about the attacks led by Hamas?
I think the thing that is chiefly occupying a lot of people in the areas of the West Bank where I was over the weekend, is that their concern for Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, the humanitarian situation there is just awful.
Really, there's no other way to put it.
And so they're staring at their phones, they're getting messages from family members and friends, and they're just trying to make sense of the humanitarian toll of these bombing campaign that Israel is doing as it tries to root out Hamas militants.
I will say though in terms of the Palestinians that I encountered, there is also I guess I'd call it a reluctance to fully denounce Hamas or fully condemn the attacks on Israelis.
Bear in mind that these are people who don't condone violence against civilians, but they look at this issue through just a completely different lens.
They look at the attacks on the southern border in Israel as a consequence of this long and winding violent history that Israelis and Palestinians have together.
And so Palestinians civilians are not bloodthirsty monsters, nothing like that.
But they also have seen thousands of Palestinian civilians who have died in Gaza, not just over the last week, but stretching back to 2005, 2007.
So it's a complicated reaction they're having.
Has the PLO condemned Hamas for its violent attacks against innocent Israelis?
How are they navigating this crisis?
Well, again, that is also tricky.
The Palestinian President Abbas, a couple of days ago, he issued a statement that said that, of course he didn't approve the killing of Israeli civilians.
Hamas was mentioned in that statement.
But within a matter of a couple of hours, the word Hamas was actually taken off of that.
Abbas issued a statement saying essentially that both sides need to show restraint.
Both sides need to recognize that killing innocent civilians was not the way to do this.
But again, the word Hamas was not mentioned in that statement.
When violence against Palestinians in the West Bank is also up, what's happening there?
Well, confrontations, clashes between Israeli security services and Palestinians, and indeed also Jewish settlers who live in communities illegally under international law in the West Bank.
That is nothing new.
There are Palestinians that get killed every day in the West Bank stretching back many years.
Over the last week, some of that violence has escalated as the IDF, the Israeli Defense Forces has been conducting raids into the West Bank, looking for people they think might be connected to this attack in Israel.
And so there's also been a lot more activity in terms of protests and demonstrations.
And so over the last week, I think there's been just north of 55 or 56 Palestinians that have been killed in this violence.
And this is not just people who are taking part in demonstrations.
There's been other civilians, including children who've been caught up in this violence.
And they feel that rightly or wrongly, that the violence that is perpetrated against them by Israel's military, by Jewish settlers in the West Bank doesn't get the same attention.
Kim, thank you so much for taking the time to speak with me.
Thanks for having me.
Back here in the US, authorities have opened an investigation into the death of a six-year-old Muslim boy in Illinois on Sunday.
Garland warned that the incident would raise fears among Muslim communities about hate-filled violence.
But he said the department would "use every legal authority at our disposal to bring justice to those who perpetrate illegal acts of hate."
The man charged was reportedly the family's landlord.
The case centered on allegations that Trump conspired to overturn the 2020 election as one of four he's now facing.
Dana Taylor spoke with USA Today Justice Department correspondent, Bart Jansen, for the story.
Bart, thanks for joining me.
Thanks for having me.
Well, Bart, can you start with what the judge was ruling on?
What were prosecutors asking for and what was the defense's argument?
Basically, prosecutors were asking the judge to restrict what Trump could say or post on social media about figures associated with the case.
They were concerned that he could use his substantial platform to criticize the judge, the prosecutors, potential witnesses, and potentially alienate the jury as well.
And so they were trying to get the judge to put some basically guardrails around his comments so that they could have a fair trial.
Of course, the defense said that the government was trying to muzzle Trump as he campaigns for president in 2024.
They said restrictions on his speech, his comments, his social media posts would inhibit his campaigning and that it was basically the Biden administration through the Justice Department trying to censor him in his campaign.
She offered a limited ruling from the bench, and legal experts are on the edge of their seats waiting to see what the written order will say.
But what she said was that she ordered that Trump could not criticize members of her court staff, prosecutors, or potential witnesses in the case.
There was a limited gag order issued in Mr. Trump's New York fraud trial in which the judge said he prohibited him from posting anything about his court staff.
That came after Trump posted on social media a picture of the judge's clerk with Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, and raised the prospect that the clerk was a girlfriend of the Senate majority leader.
And so that resulted in a gag order in New York City court.
And now there is a similar order, don't criticize the court's staff or prosecutors.
Why are prosecutors so concerned here?
Trump has issued a number of statements, mostly through social media about the judge, about prosecutors.
He's called Justice Department special counsel, Jack Smith, deranged and a psycho who looks like a crack head.
And the concern is that those sorts of comments might at least alienate people from him getting a fair trial, but potentially worse, inspire some of his supporters to commit violence against court staff or prosecutors.
Now, Trump's lawyers say he can't be held accountable for third parties who react to his statements in that way.
But that incident is what raised concerns among the prosecutors, and that's why they filed their request to have this gag order.
Bart, could this ruling have any ramifications for Trump's other trials?
We'll have to see if requests are made in the other criminal cases that he faces.
He faces criminal cases in southern Florida, in Georgia, and in New York City.
And the question would be whether prosecutors ask those judges for similar gag orders and then whether the judges in those courts make a similar decision.
All right, thanks so much for your insights, Bart.
Thanks for having me.
Many who attended the forum said they felt former President Donald Trump had the primary wrapped up, an issue centered in particular on climate change and social security.
While candidates also repeatedly emphasized that voters who are not paying attention yet, want a solutions-oriented leader seeking common ground in 2024 not a bombastic style, likely a shot at Trump himself.
You can read a full recap with a link in today's show notes.
Timeshares are making a comeback with younger Americans.
Today over half of timeshare owners are Gen Z and millennial, and the average age of a timeshare owner is 39, according to a 2022 report from the American Resort Development Association.
What's the appeal?
Many younger Americans work remotely these days, opening the door to more flexible travel schedules, and timeshares now include more than just a week in the same destination.
They offer cruises, guided tours, houseboat rentals and more.
But it's important to remember that while timeshares offer an affordable way to travel every year, they don't appreciate in value, unlike investing in a vacation home.
And before we go, a message of hope and giving.
Today is the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty.
If you're able to, it's a good chance to pause and think about ways we can help.
Thanks for listening to 5 Things.
You can find us seven mornings a week on Google Podcasts, Apple Podcasts, Amazon Music, Spotify, or wherever you get your audio.
If you like the show, please subscribe and leave us a rating and review on Apple Podcasts.
I'm Taylor Wilson, back tomorrow with more of 5 Things from USA Today.
Time is precious, and we're all busy, impatient or occasionally even lazy.
That's why we often look for shortcuts and quick fixes when we want something done.
If you're like me, you often use Google Docs and love to find ways to work smarter, not harder.
If that's the case, you're in the right place, as I'm here to share several time-saving and productivity tips that will help you work more efficiently in Google Docs, whether you're using a computer, a phone, or a tablet.
Watch this video to learn four useful tips and tricks for using Google Docs.
Working offline allows you to access and update your document wherever you are, including when you're not connected to the internet.
The changes will be synced and accessible wherever you access Google Docs once your device is online again.
There are two ways to make a document accessible offline:
You can easily collaborate with friends, family, or coworkers just by sharing a link.
You'll be able to see if someone else is in the document, where they are in the document and whether they're typing.
Multiple people can be actively working and typing in the document at the same time.
Google Docs has a feature that automatically creates an outline of your document.
All you have to do is change the text style.
To create an outline:
If you don't see the outline, click the icon that looks like three lowercase 'i's' placed sideways.
They're on the left of the document.
Now, it's easy to jump anywhere in the document just by clicking in the outline.
If it populates a line you don't want to include, hover your mouse over it and click the X that appears.
This only removes it from the outline, not the document.
The work you're doing gets saved regularly and repeatedly.
To find previous versions, click the icon that looks like a clock with a backward arrow near your icon in the top right of the page.
This pulls up all of your previous versions and shows the changes that were made.
You can restore an old version or copy what you need and paste it into the most recent version.
Purchases you make through our links may earn us and our publishing partners a commission.
Reviewed helps you find the best stuff and get the most out of what you already own.
Our team of experts test everything from tablets to e-readers help you shop for the best of the best.
Tuesday would have been Raoul A. Cortez's 118th birthday, and to celebrate the occasion he's being honored in today's Google Doodle.
Cortez was a Mexican-American broadcaster and activist who pioneered Spanish-language media in the United States by founding the first full-time Spanish language radio and television stations in the country, Google notes.
The design was illustrated by Mexican American artist Rafael Lopez and depicts the various roles Cortez played in Latino culture and civil rights in the U.S.
He was born in Veracruz, Mexico in 1905 and his family eventually immigrated to San Antonio, Texas.
He entered the media scene in San Antonio as a reporter for "La Prensa," a San Antonio-based, Spanish-language daily newspaper.
Google's 25th birthday:See special Google Doodle, plus other Easter eggs
The success of his radio show led to Cortez adding television to his broadcasting operation, becoming the first Latino-run American TV station in Spanish.
In addition to his contributions to media, Cortez was also a civil rights advocate for Latinos in the U.S. throughout his life.
He oversaw the court case Delgado v. Bastrop Independent School District, which ended the segregation of Mexican Americans in Texas public schools.
He died in 1971 in San Antonio.
Cortez and his media programs were included in the American Enterprise exhibit at the Smithsonian National Museum of American History in 2015.
"Like Raoul, you can make a positive change in life," Lopez told Google.
"No matter how big or small your contribution is, the changes will be lasting and remembered."
A family's outing to a wildlife center in Glen Rose, Texas came to a screeching halt last week when a giraffe slipped and fell onto their car's windshield, smashing it in the process.
Kari Hill was visiting the Fossil Rim Wildlife Center on Thursday with her teenage sons and infant granddaughter when the accident happened, FOX4NEWS reported.
Hill told the local news outlet that as they were touring the center, they stopped at the giraffe enclosure where a giraffe came and stuck his head in the sunroof as they fed him.
"We were laughing and loving it, until all of a sudden the giraffe appeared to lose his footing and fell onto the windshield of the car, and in the sunroof," Hill told Fox News.
"Glass shot everywhere, all over us."
The visitor said that the entire family was covered in glass when the giraffe fell, and she feared that things were about to turn worse when the giraffe thankfully regained his footing and took off.
Hill quickly alerted the park's emergency hotline about the incident and pulled off to ensure that the children got the glass off them.
"What turned into a great family day, just cost me a huge car repair, and PTSD for us," Hill told Fox News.
However, she was grateful that things did not turn tragic.
Here's what it means.
Watch:Mama bear, cub raid Krispy Kreme delivery van in Alaska, scarf dozens of doughnuts
Fossil Rim Wildlife Center is non-profit that specializes in captive breeding programs for indigenous and exotic endangered and threatened species.
However, visitors can only feed giraffes by hand.
For other animals, the center recommends simply tossing the pellets onto the ground.
The Center did not respond to USA TODAY's request for a comment and update on the giraffe or the visitors.
However, they told Fox News that the giraffe was not injured in the accident.
Glen Rose is approximately 85 miles southwest of Dallas.
Reach her at sshafiq@gannett.com and follow her on X, the platform formerly known as Twitter @saman_shafiq7.
However, fortunately for Ezekiel, his loving dad, Michael, understood his impatience.
So, when the opportunity arose to give his son a taster of what's to come, he took it.
Chancing on an empty private lot, he drove in and invited Ezekiel to take the wheel for his first driving lesson.
And his son's reaction was a joy to behold.
Watch the video below to see a heartwarming father-son moment behind the wheel
Humankind is your go-to spot for good news!
Click here to submit your uplifting, cute, or inspiring video moments for us to feature.
Also, click here to subscribe to our newsletter, bringing our top stories of the week straight to your inbox.
He dropped some fashion pointers.
The teen was struggling to secure his tie, so Bryant stepped in to help.
Family members stood around smiling and laughing as he hyped the teenager up and made sure his tie was tidy and in place.
“You’re killing the game, young man,” Bryant said to the high school senior in a video shared online.
He reminded me of myself when I was coming up.
Bryant, a father of three sons and five girls, said he was passing along knowledge he had learned as a youngster himself.
An avid churchgoer since his youth, he often dressed up in nice suits and attended with his mother, father and godparents.
So Bryant learned to tie a tie at the early age of 10.
Bryant’s story made it to the local news Monday and was covered by FOX 32 Chicago.
His older sister called him to tell him about it.
“It made me feel good.”
'Life-changing':California dad who biked 16 miles roundtrip to work surprised with car
“We live here in Chicago where racial tension is so high, especially in our neighborhood, which is known to be super racist,” she said.
“It was just great to see two people reacting to each other regardless of color and that's the part that just really makes me happy.”
Bryant’s an awesome person for what he did, he said.
“It shows a lot about him,” Luke said.
“It shows that he will go out his way to do something for someone else.”
Bryant said he was taught to love everybody and sees everyone as equal.
In addition to the suit the teen wore for homecoming, Luke also put on a flashy watch and Burberry cologne, which Bryant loved.
When he saw the teen in his homecoming gear, Bryant had nothing but good things to say.
“You got it,” he said.
Lake Erie is now a world record holder!
The lake broke a world record over the weekend for the most waterspouts in a 24-hour period.
According to the research center, one observer saw 72 waterspouts.
Users on X, formerly Twitter, shared photos and videos of the record-breaking waterspouts spotted over Lake Erie on Oct. 7.
Under busy Florida street:a 19th-century boat discovered where once was water
Yes, cruise prices are up:Here's why cheap sailings may be harder to find
A waterspout is a whirling column of air and water mist, according to the National Ocean Service.
The National Weather Service issues a tornado warning if a waterspout moves on shore, as they could cause significant damage and injuries.
Fair weather waterspouts typically dissipate rapidly once they reach land, rarely moving far inland.
The National Weather Service office in Buffalo, New York issued a special marine warning Oct. 7, warning of favorable conditions for waterspouts to form and later posted that waterspouts had been observed.
Italy ranks second, at 10.2%.
As of Monday, the research center reported have been 1,615 waterspouts observed around the world this year.
For Anne Patterson, who is studying to become a psychotherapist at age 55, the several thousand dollars in stimulus checks the government doled out to most Americans during the depths of the pandemic was a godsend.
The government aid in 2020 and 2021 “was extremely helpful,” she says.
But the stimulus money is long gone and the resumption of student loan repayments this fall will saddle her with another $500 monthly expense, she estimates.
“I will certainly have to find places to cut back my spending,” she says, noting that she won’t be able to afford the final stage of a dental crown.
The pandemic-related savings and government aid that have helped prop up the U.S. economy over the past three years are dwindling, posing new strains for low- and moderate-income households and hazards for a nation at risk of slipping into recession by early 2024.
In interviews and a Harris Poll survey for USA TODAY, Americans whose COVID cash reserves are running low say they’re putting off home projects, eating out less, canceling subscriptions and taking out loans to make ends meet.
Those kinds of strategies are likely to toss some cold water on U.S. consumer spending, which makes up 70% of economic activity.
Other households say they still have a good chunk of their COVID savings or never relied on it to pay expenses.
Overall, though, the shrinking trove – along with rising credit card interest rates, high inflation and a cooling job market -- could tip the nation into a recession by next year, some forecasters say.
For most people, the stimulus checks alone amounted to $3,200 per individual.
All told the $2.7 trillion cash hoard represents an average $21,000 average per household.
The stash helped people cushion the blow from high inflation and interest rates, or stay afloat while they took a hiatus from work due to health concerns or childcare duties.
It gave others the financial leeway to hunt for a new job after getting laid off during the pandemic.
More than one-third of Americans say the money was “very important” to their financial stability during COVID and about one-quarter say it was “somewhat important,” according to a survey by Suffolk University Sawyer Business School and USA TODAY, conducted in September.
Now, that cache is running dry, by some estimates, at least for the most vulnerable.
Seventy-one percent of Americans built excess reserves during the pandemic and six in 10 of those savers say they’ve depleted most or all of that money, according to the USA TODAY/Harris Poll survey, conducted last month.
Among that group, 90% have pared back their spending or plan to do so, compared with 62% who haven’t depleted their COVID funds.
Of those slashing spending, 65% are dining out less, 61% are cutting back experiences and 56% are buying fewer discretionary goods, the Harris Poll survey shows.
Patterson, the clinical psychology student, majored in cultural anthropology in college but couldn’t find a position in her field and spent decades in administrative jobs in industries such as mortgage servicing and title insurance.
She decided to seek a more fulfilling career a few years ago and looks forward to a six-figure salary in 2024 but is still earning just $50,000 as part of an internship.
Besides putting off the dental crown, she says she’ll offset the student loan payments by shelving veterinary appointments for her three dogs, turning down the air conditioning in the summer and cutting back on twice-weekly DoorDash restaurant deliveries for her and her partner, who is disabled.
Fortunately, she says, she inherited her three-bedroom house from her mother and so doesn’t have a mortgage.
Across the U.S., exactly how much of the pandemic savings remains is something of an open question
Those estimates are based on recent government revisions that added $500 billion to $800 billion to estimated COVID savings totals.
By contrast, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco recently figured that a paltry $190 billion or so was left as of June and that sum likely would be exhausted by the July-September quarter.
Agency officials are reworking the number based on the government revisions and wouldn’t comment.
Even so, the cash buffer could run out in a few months, according to their most recent analysis.
Low- and middle-income people “have spent nearly all of their excess pandemic savings,” he says.
Yet that doesn’t mean they’ll spend it.
She used her COVID savings to cope with high inflation, including a $500 surge in the price of propane to heat her house for the winter.
She also stocked up on toilet paper and other items that were in short supply early in the health crisis.
“It did take a lot of the pressure off,” she says of the government aid.
“If I do it now, I’ll get ripped off,” she says.
Others burned through their COVID savings long ago.
Michael, 62, a former construction worker, is on disability because of a work-related accident.
Colleen, an administrative assistant for the medical department of a jail, couldn’t work for three weeks due to pandemic restrictions.
In 2020 and 2021, the couple used the stimulus checks to pay the mortgage on their two-bedroom house, the electric bill and other monthly expenses.
“They kept us afloat,” Michael says.
“It’s not fun,” Michael says.
“You don’t know how you’re going to get the money.”
Some Americans are plagued by second thoughts about how they spent their windfall.
They needed the cash.
Terrie, 60, had to shut down her horse training and riding lessons business when sales plunged because of COVID.
And while Alan earns a healthy six-figure salary as a mechanical engineer, she says the couple has struggled with large tax, insurance and debt payments for their 30-acre farm, tractor and pickup truck.
They used their COVID savings to whittle down credit card bills and pay off a $3,000 loan for the tractor, wiping out a $580 monthly payment.
“It helped,” she says, “but it wasn’t significant enough.”
Now, she says she wishes they hadn’t paid off the tractor loan because the cash would be providing more breathing room.
The value of remote work:Americans will part with pay to work from home
Others welcomed the pandemic cash bonanza but didn’t depend on it.
They also received the stimulus checks.
“It padded our savings account,” he says.
Before Oct. 7, my brother, his girlfriend and his kids were just parts of my greater identity and what I love and hold dear in this world.
Now, as I live through a waking nightmare in which they have been taken hostage by Hamas − this part of my identity consumes me.
And it's what drives and will drive my every action and thought, until my family comes home.
My heart is heavy with sorrow, anger and, most of all, a profound sense of helplessness after an act so horrific and brutal that we never could have imagined it.
My brother reassured my wife that they were in their shelter/safe room.
His two sons were staying at their mother’s house, and my brother, no matter how much he may have wished he could race to the rest of his family and bring them all together to protect them, couldn’t leave the safe room in his house at the kibbutz.
They were strictly instructed to stay in place, and they heard gunshots outside the house.
Everyone was frozen as they faced the approaching fear and horror of Hamas terrorists closing in.
Her voice was shaking as she told us that terrorists had entered their home.
But in the end, he did not prevail.
This was the last time we had contact with them.
Our family was thrown into darkness.
We searched every minute of that day for any sign of them.
We tried using Apple’s “Find my iPhone” feature to no avail.
We fought fear and panic all day to remain focused on locating our family.
Later that afternoon, the mother of my nephews shared with us through tears that she had confirmation that her two sons had been kidnapped.
Our world collapsed around us.
For nearly 30 agonizing hours, we had no idea where any of them were.
The silence that returned became overwhelming as we learned that we were going to face this nightmare primarily on our own.
We turned to social media, sharing pictures and heartfelt pleas, hoping someone in our connected web would come forward with information.
This wasn't just a crime; it was an inversion of humanity.
Innocent people, including children and women, were forcibly taken from their homes where they should feel safe and torn away from their lives, their families and their communities.
They are now pawns in a war.
'Take a lesson from the dead':Fatal stabbing of 6-year-old in Illinois serves as warning to divided US
The days since have been dark with just one glimmer of light.
As a family, we appeal to the world for one thing: the safe return of our loved ones.
We were brought up to believe that everyone has a family and deserves to be treated humanely.
Hamas operates in stark contrast to these principles.
Our only plea is to bring our kidnapped family members back home safely.
We don’t know if they are being fed.
We don’t know the state of their health.
We don’t know where they are.
The uncertainty about their fate is what our lives are defined by now, and we are desperate for the day that we can receive good news about their well-being.
Until then, I am a brother and an uncle who refuses to give up.
Ron DeSantis was able to transport hundreds of people from Israel to Florida just days after announcing an evacuation initiative by tapping into an existing rescue program, Project Dynamo, that likely would have gone forward with the effort regardless of the state’s support.
Florida has paid for five flights to evacuate people out of Israel between Friday and Sunday, including one that landed in Tampa Sunday night with 270 people, but Project Dynamo coordinated everything else, according to the group’s CEO and founder Bryan Stern.
Project Dynamo was founded in 2021 to help rescue people from Afghanistan after American troops withdrew from the country and has conducted missions everywhere from Ukraine to Sudan.
The flight to Tampa Sunday was the group’s 602nd evacuation mission.
Stern spoke about the rescue missions during a news conference Monday and said he was raising money to pay for the Tampa flight when the state of Florida stepped in to offer assistance.
Many commercial flights out of Israel were canceled following a surprise attack by Hamas and subsequent retaliatory measures by Israel.
That has left many Americans struggling to find a way out of Israel.
DeSantis declared a state of emergency last week and directed the Florida Division of Emergency Management to coordinate evacuation efforts.
Stern said he was grateful for Florida's financial support, the first time a government agency has funded one of his evacuation efforts, but also made it clear that he would've done everything to get people home safely, regardless of whether Florida funded the effort.
DeSantis' trip to Tampa on Sunday was “the first time an American politician has ever met us home,” Stern said.
The evacuation flight to Tampa involved gathering people from more than 12 different areas across Israel, Stern said.
On the flight were Ron and Linda Neumann, who are trying to become dual citizens of Israel and the United States, and their dog.
Ron Neumann said after two flights out of Israel were canceled he tried to find a way out of the country by contacting U.S. State Department officials and state officials in Florida.
Stern didn't know the exact cost of the most recent flight from Israel to Florida, but said the average cost to charter a plane from Tampa to Israel right now is around $2 million.
The governor's office and the Florida Division of Emergency Management provided no answers to questions from the USA TODAY Network - Florida on costs of the trips.
DeSantis has slammed the White House for "dragging its feet" on the charters and said its flights "dump people in Europe."
The flights from Israel occurred the same weekend CBS News' 60 Minutes aired a segment Sunday critical of DeSantis' actions in September 2022, when his administration lured about 50 mostly Venezuelan asylum-seekers from Texas to Martha's Vineyard, off the Massachusetts' coast, with the false promise of jobs and housing.
Money for that trip came from a $12 million fund established within the state's Division of Emergency Management for relocating undocumented migrants from within Florida to other locations.
The program has since been expanded and rewritten by the Florida Legislature to authorize DeSantis' action, after its legality was challenged in a handful of lawsuits.
DeSantis while campaigning in Iowa, home of the first Republican presidential nomination contest, has cited the Martha's Vineyard trip as proof of his commitment to combating illegal immigration and to underscore the failures of the Biden administration.
DeSantis' White House bid probably lives or dies based on how he performs in Iowa.
Those evacuated from Israel by the state-financed effort focused their praise on Project Dynamo, touting the team's skills and efficiency.
"I'm humbled," said Linda Neumann.
John Kennedy of the USA Today Network-Florida's capital bureau contributed to this report.
WASHINGTON — The militant group Hamas launched a shocking attack against Israel less than two weeks ago on the Jewish holiday of Simchat Torah, leading to thousands of deaths and retaliation by Israeli forces in an area known as the Gaza Strip.
The death toll of Americans in the country has risen to 30, and more than a dozen Americans remain missing.
The chaos embroiling the Middle East has also stirred confusion among people in the U.S. seeking to understand the devastation in the area.
Here’s a closer look at some lingering questions about the conflict.
The Israel-Hamas war explained: Understanding the conflict in Gaza amid rush to evacuate
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict dates back to the early 20th century, according to the Council on Foreign Relations.
The tension began after the creation of the State of Israel in 1948, following the Holocaust, in which six million Jews were murdered by the Nazi regime.
For decades, Palestinians have fought for self-determination and self-governance, while Israeli forces sought to expand territory.
Hamas' offensive is connected not only to specific Israeli military activity but to what the group views as a campaign to rob Palestinians of their land and displace them by force.
For years, the group has vowed to annihilate the state of Israel and claimed responsibility for deadly attacks.
It is very difficult for Palestinians to leave Gaza.
Gaza is surrounded by blockades imposed by Israel and Egypt, which restrict movement.
Israel prevents access to and from Gaza by sea and air.
The U.N. has said that mass evacuation orders in the area will affect more than a million people.
A total evacuation would mean the entire 2.23 million population of Gaza would have to squeeze into the southern half of the strip.
Gaza, which is only 25 miles long in its entirety and just over twice the size of Washington, D.C., is the 63rd-most densely inhabited urban region in the world.
Many are voicing uncertainty about safety anywhere in the strip if they leave their homes.
The West Bank is east of Israel, and about three million Palestinians live there, most of them Muslim Arabs.
The West Bank also contains a number of Jewish holy sites.
Israel occupies the West Bank, though the Palestinian Authority, controlled by the Fatah movement, administers semi-autonomous areas of the region.
Small Israeli communities called kibbutzim have been affected by the conflict.
A kibbutz, which means gathering in Hebrew, is a kind-of communal body traditionally focused around farming or other environmental goals.
The first kibbutz was established 90 years ago.
Today, approximately 125,000 people live on about 250 kibbutzim, CNN reported.
David Leach, author of the book "Chasing Utopia: The Future of the Kibbutz in a Divided Israel," told NPR that historically, early kibbutzim “were exercises in radical democracy.”
Former President Donald Trump had criticized Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu at an event in Florida last week, saying that the countries’ intelligence failed and that its enemies were “very smart.” He also said Netanyahu was not prepared in a Fox News Radio interview.
However, Trump walked back his comments on Monday to Iowa voters, saying that he supported Israel in its war with Hamas.
The incumbent, Democratic President Joe Biden, has expressed strong support for Israel since the beginning of the conflict and will visit the country Wednesday.
Many organizations are collecting donations to help families living in Israel and Gaza.
Other organizations include:
Contributing: Anna Kaufman
Arizona State University police say they are investigating an incident in which a queer faculty member was confronted and injured on the school's campus.
An official with the conservative group Turning Point USA said late Thursday night that two of their "crew members" were involved in the altercation.
The incident occurred Wednesday afternoon in Tempe, according to police spokesperson Adam Wolfe.
A Monday Night Football matchup between the Dallas Cowboys and the Los Angeles Chargers led to two men being hospitalized after stabbing each other.
The men lived close to each other, said police, and got into an argument over noise while watching the game.
Police say at some point during the altercation, both men drew knifes and stabbed each other multiple times.
Both were soon after transported to local hospitals and are expected to make full recoveries.
The names of the men involved in the altercation have not yet been released.
Fan dies after fight at Dolphins game:Police look to charge 3 men after Patriots fan died following fight at Dolphins game
We always want what we don’t have, whether it’s a different hair color or longer lashes.
Now, in what appears to be the rebirth of a beauty trend with a storied history, people are giving themselves pseudo dimples — and not the surgical kind, which yes, is a thing.
Behold the “dimple maker”: a cherry-shaped device with a curved wire sporting marble-like balls on each end.
All you have to do, according to people on TikTok, is pry the device open and slip it onto your cheek as the balls clamp the inner and outer sides together.
Over time, the device may leave impressions on the muscles and fat pads in your cheek, although plastic surgeons who spoke to USA TODAY aren’t convinced they’ll last long.
Doctors came to the same conclusion nearly 90 years ago after a woman named Isabelle Gilbert invented a similar product.
Today, interest persists and is growing.
The hashtag #dimplemaker has over 60 million views on TikTok, with the devices springing up on Etsy and other shops for about $15.
“You especially have to be careful with anything on the face that's not reversible.”
Dimple makers compress the skin and underlying fat in the cheek, squeezing fluid out of surrounding tissue and creating a temporary inward dent, according to Dr. Jonathan Kaplan, a plastic surgeon with Pacific Heights Plastic Surgery in San Francisco, California, who likens the device to a waist trainer.
It’s unclear how long it takes to work, but results will vary depending on how tight the clamp is, how long it’s worn and the amount of fat in the cheek, experts say.
Dimple makers that are too tight and worn for too long could potentially restrict blood flow to the spot on the cheek that’s being compressed, leading to the death of fat tissue (necrosis), Kaplan said.
A hard lump could develop in your cheek as a result, but it’s unlikely to be noticeable from the outside and can go away with time, Kaplan said.
If enough blood supply is cut off, your skin cells in the area could die, which can leave a scab and scar.
“Think of it as a wet match — sometimes it'll dry off, but if you soak that match enough, it's never going to strike a fire.”
Dimple makers, on the other hand, may pose greater risks of nerve damage because you’re compressing a larger surface area of the cheek, he added.
However, Kaplan speculates that most people wouldn’t be able to tolerate the pain associated with these kinds of injuries for long enough to sustain any kind of permanent damage.
“I’ve always adored people who had dimples, so I got the surgery because I wanted to,” Fernandes said.
“I’m not doing anything for the opinions of others, I just think it’s valuable to be as transparent as possible.”
I realize this may be asking a lot, but wouldn’t it be great if so many of our politicians weren’t unscrupulous creeps?
These days, after scanning the headlines about the folks “running” the government, I often feel like I need a shower.
It seems like an almost daily occurrence that a current or former elected official lands in court for one shady misdeed or another.
Government corruption almost seems normal.
It shouldn’t be.
Between the alarming attack on Israel this month and the Republicans bungling their House leadership, some of the latest scandals have gotten the amount of attention they deserve.
Republicans fiddle while world burns:Listen up, Republicans.
The world is in chaos, so why are you playing stupid games?
Let me refresh you on what’s been happening.
His seniority earned him the powerful position of chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which he is now charged with abusing for his personal gain.
That is on top of last month's indictment on bribery charges.
Stop and think about that: The (now former) chair of Foreign Relations, a committee that reviews treaties with other nations and votes on all diplomatic nominations, is accused of acting as a foreign agent for hire.
What he’s accused of is extremely serious.
In 2017, a federal jury deadlocked on whether to convict the senator, which led to a mistrial.
See a pattern here?
Now, if you’re a liberal, I can bet what you’re thinking: “Well, look at former President Donald Trump!” or “How about Rep. George Santos?”
Trump has been indicted in four criminal cases, as well as a civil fraud case, all of which are unprecedented for a former president (who also is, of course, the leading Republican candidate for president in 2024).
Time for change:Sure, Trump is awful.
But that doesn't mean Biden is a good choice for president.
Then there's curious George.
Last week, a new indictment alleges Santos stole the identities of campaign donors and used donors’ credit cards as his own personal piggy bank.
That comes five months after he was charged with other financial crimes.
It’s really no wonder that his campaign coffers are in arrears.
There’s also the fact that Santos made up his entire résumé.
He’s a first-class sleazebag.
The question remains: What to do with these bad actors?
It’s easy for Democrats to scream and yell that Santos is a disgrace and must go.
And Republicans like to do the same to Democrats.
For instance, Republicans have called for Rep. Jamaal Bowman, a Democrat from New York, to be expelled from the House after he pulled a fire alarm before a key vote to keep the government open.
Bowman says it was a "mistake," and his office released a memo in his defense that labeled Republicans as "Nazis."
Regardless, it’s an odd “mistake” for a former school principal to make and a bizarre incident, even if it doesn’t rise to the level of expulsion.
But I digress.
The bar for expelling a House member is high, and it has only happened a few times in our country’s history.
Of the 15 times the Senate has expelled a member, 14 occurred during the Civil War for supporting the Confederacy.
Unfortunately, partisanship often comes before principle.
The fact remains that with thin margins of control in the House and Senate, both sides need as many warm bodies as they can get, regardless of how repugnant.
Some New York Republicans have called for the House to expel Santos, although that’s not likely to happen.
The same goes for the Senate.
These men deserve their day in court, but I'm less certain they should be roaming the halls of Congress.
The surest way to rid the government of (alleged) weasels is for voters to make sure they don’t get the chance again.
Ingrid Jacques is a columnist at USA TODAY.
You can contact her at ijacques@usatoday.com or on X, formerly Twitter: @Ingrid_Jacques
We recognize that mistakes may happen – or that new information can emerge after a story is published – and we pledge to address all concerns quickly, fairly and transparently.
If a correction or clarification is warranted, we will highlight that in the original file and explain to readers why the change was made.
Any correction or clarification would also be published on our corrections log.
To report corrections & clarifications, contact:
Please indicate whether you're responding to content online or in the newspaper.
The following corrections & clarifications have been published on stories produced by USA TODAY's newsroom:
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated who is affected by this rule.
The story has been updated to reflect the proposed rule affects satellite and cable providers.
Money: A previous version of this story misstated the number of people 62 and older who have student debt loans.
Sports: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed the locations for Big Ten games.
"5 Things" podcast: On the Oct. 5 show in our segment about school psychologists, we misstated the ratio of counselors to students at a school in Hershey, Pennsylvania.
At 1 to 1000, it is half of the recommended ratio.
Money: An earlier version of this story mischaracterized the competitiveness of Capital One's savings-account interest rates.
The reference has been removed.
Jarrett Payton covers the Chicago Bears.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the amount of Fox Corp.'s settlement with Dominion Voting Systems in a defamation lawsuit.
Money: The UAW strike affects 38 locations across 20 states.
An earlier alert undercounted the number of states affected.
See the list.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly identified an organization.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified the Higher Education Advisory Group.
Sports: A headline on the story incorrectly described Christian Coleman's winning time in the men's 100 meters.
He won with a time of 9.83 seconds, tied for the world's fastest time this season.
News: This article was updated to remove incorrect details about math courses and departments at the University of California, Santa Cruz.
News: A previous version of this video misstated the Longwood Garden's distance from the prison.
His personal security guard ran onto the field to restrain the person.
A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the name of the home team.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified Chester County Prison.
It's the University of Pennsylvania.
News: A previous version of this video misstated how many co-defendants had been booked.
Money: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed among states with no Social Security tax Minnesota, which expanded in May 2023 a state tax exemption for benefits without eliminating the tax.
News: An earlier version of this story contained inaccurate or incomplete facts about the history of language.
Social media: A previous version of this post graphic contained a name misspelling of Scooter Braun.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the extent of the standing water around Dodger Stadium.
Sports: The USA TODAY Sports’ MLB power rankings in the Aug. 15 edition misstated the leader of the American League Central Division.
The Minnesota Twins lead the division.
News: A previous version of this video misidentified USA TODAY’s National Political correspondent, David Jackson.
Entertainment: The location of the bookstore in an earlier version of this story was incorrect.
Wild Geese Bookshop is located in Franklin, Indiana.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the next opponent for the U.S. women should they advance from their Round of 16 game vs. Sweden.
The Americans would then play the winner of Japan vs. Norway in the quarterfinals.
Money: Due to a typo, an earlier version of this story misstated total U.S. sales of the Kia Stinger.
The automaker has sold more than 65,000 Stinger sedans in the U.S. since the model's launch.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees between Madrid, Spain, and a mountainous area in Spain.
It also misstated a temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees in reference to average temperatures in Tunisia.
News: An earlier version incorrectly identified Victoria McQueen's title at her high school.
She is student body president.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified the Norwegian Gem.
It is a Jewel-class cruise ship.
News: A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the origins of Blue Moon.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the Iowa State teams being investigated by the Iowa Racing and Gaming Commission.
The school does not have a baseball program.
News: This article has been updated to include additional nonpartisan sources of data and research.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated 10-year-old J'Adore's diagnosis date.
News: In a 1A story on July 5 about primary care doctors, the relationship between physicians and health professionals such as nurse practitioners and physician assistants was unclear.
Paraprofessionals generally work under the supervision of a licensed physician.
Entertainment: A photo included in an earlier version of this report was misidentified as The Beatles.
The new record featuring John Lennon’s vocals will be a song.
Graphics: A previous version of this story misstated the number of competing teams in the Tour de France.
News: This story has been updated to clarify how many people died on the Titanic.
Money: This story has been updated to clarify details about local liquor laws.
News: A June 19 article on Page 2A misstated the year the 13th Amendment was passed.
Life: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated when the rescue was made.
Travel: A previous version of this story incorrectly described the Airbus A321 with new livery.
The aircraft is part of JetBlue’s existing fleet.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the number of states under red flag warnings.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly named ISR courses.
The courses are called Infant Swimming Resource courses.
News: This story has been updated to correct how far away the body was found from where the missing doctor was last seen.
News: An earlier version of this story did not make clear which versions of the AP African American Studies course framework excluded the word "queer."
It has been updated to clarify that versions in May 2022 and February 2023 did not include the word.
Travel: An earlier version of the story incorrectly listed how police resolved the case.
News: A previous version of this article incorrectly referred to the tornado data provided by the Storm Prediction Center of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Sports: A story on the documentary movie “It Ain’t Over” in the May 12 edition misstated the number of league MVP titles won by Yogi Berra.
The Yankees legend won three.
The information has been updated.
Those portions have been removed.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the Australian Open women's singles champion.
News: In some editions, the March 30 1A story about attackers targeting schools misstated the partners in the mass killing database.
They are USA TODAY, The Associated Press and Northeastern University.
News: This story originally included an inaccurate detail related to one woman's application for a domestic violence restraining order.
The information on Alison Kessler has been updated.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the comparative price between electric vehicles and gas-powered vehicles.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the year of Paul Walker's death.
News: A previous version of this article misstated Terry Wilson's employment status.
He remains a Fresno State employee but was granted leave from the position to serve as a staff-wide union representative.
News: An earlier version of this podcast incorrectly stated that USA TODAY ran the Dilbert comic strip.
It was the USA TODAY Network, not USA TODAY.
News: USA TODAY did not publish the Dilbert comic strip.
A previous version of this article was incorrect.
Facebook: A previous version of this post contained photos from other events earlier this month in Florida.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated salary figures of bartenders and pharmacists.
News: A story on Page 1A Feb. 16 about corporate diversity gave the incorrect date of Southern Co.’s annual meeting.
It takes place later this year.
News: A previous version of this graphic misstated the title of a movie.
News: A previous version of this article misstated the number of Maryland’s Eastern Shore counties.
Social media: An earlier version of this video had an incorrect description.
News: An earlier version misstated the requirements in the Biden administration’s proposed Title IX rule for determining the outcome of sexual assault cases.
The proposed regulation would require schools to use the “preponderance of evidence” standard most of the time.
News: An earlier version of this video misstated the status of a House Ethics Committee investigation.
Social media: A previous post misidentified the award Beyoncé won.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the home state of Sen. Chris Coons.
He is from Delaware.
Social media: A previous version of this post included an incorrect year of death.
News: An earlier version misstated the name of Hillsdale College's spokesperson, Emily Stack Davis.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated the new price of the Tesla Model Y.
It is $52,990.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this gallery included a photo incorrectly identifying Paige Butcher.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified who created Seven Principles of Leave No Trace.
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2016
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2017
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2018
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2019
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2020
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2021
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2022
The USA TODAY Opinion section publishes analysis, argument and essays on a wide variety of subjects.
We're looking for timeliness (pegged to news), persuasion pitched to the other side, new information, novel arguments, revelatory insights, passion without partisanship, first-person experience, original reporting that reveals fresh angles and makes news, expert knowledge, and/or a topic that will drive conversation on social media and in the real world.
We accept only pieces that are submitted exclusively to USA TODAY.
We do not accept material that has been published on blogs, social media or anywhere else.
Columns typically run 550 to 750 words.
They should be pasted directly into an email and sent to theforum@usatoday.com.
Pieces should include links (URLs, not headlines or footnotes) to back up quotes and factual material.
People featured in columns must be identified by their real, full names.
We do not publish open letters, class projects or material that has been submitted to multiple outlets.
Rebuttals to editorials and columns published in USA TODAY should be submitted as letters to the editor, not as full-length op-eds.
Due to the volume of submissions, we can’t respond to all columns sent to us.
If our Opinion team is interested in yours, you will hear from us within three business days.
Submissions may be edited for accuracy, clarity, style, standards and length.
Please include with your submission a short biography, two sentences at most, to run at the end of your column, as well as a current photograph, to which you own publishing rights.
If you or a business, trade group or other institution with which you are associated stands to gain financially or in any other way from your column, you should disclose that information in detail.
In most cases, it should also be included in the body of the piece or in the author's biographical information.
Columns are accepted for online publication; print publication is not guaranteed.
All columns published by USA TODAY are available for use online and in print by the more than 250 properties in the USA TODAY Network.
They include Austin; Bergen County, New Jersey; Burlington, Vermont; Cincinnati; Columbus, Ohio; Des Moines; Detroit; El Paso, Texas; Indianapolis; Louisville, Kentucky; Memphis, Tennessee; Milwaukee; Nashville, Tennessee; Phoenix, Reno, Nevada; Palm Beach, Florida; and Wilmington, Delaware.
Authors may post their columns elsewhere 48 hours after they are published at USA TODAY.
By submitting a column to USA TODAY and agreeing to its publication, authors are granting exclusive rights to the piece to the USA TODAY Network for 48 hours and non-exclusive rights thereafter.
To get a sense of our range, preferences and requirements, check out our op-ed section, follow us on Twitter and Facebook, or sign up for our daily Opinion newsletter.
If you're interested in joining conversations about topics in USA TODAY, email letters@usatoday.com, comment on Facebook or use #tellusatoday on Twitter.
Letters are edited for accuracy, clarity and length and to conform to our editorial style and standards.
Submissions of 200 words or fewer have the best chance of being published.
Letters must include a name, address and phone number.
Corrections to published letters or columns follow USA TODAY guidelines.
WASHINGTON — The nation in its 16th day without a speaker of the House, and Republican lawmakers have made seemingly no progress towards electing a new, permanent leader.
Instead, on Thursday Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, appeared to support a plan empowering Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-N.C., as speaker up until January to get the House moving again.
McHenry has already been serving as an interim speaker with limited powers.
On Wednesday, Jordan, lost a second speaker election.
The push to grant McHenry additional powers came after Republican holdouts vowed not to support Jordan.
Steve Womack, R-Ark., one of the holdouts, told reporters Wednesday evening he did not see a path forward for Jordan to become speaker.
Follow along for live updates from USA TODAY on the speaker fight.
Meanwhile, just a one-minute walk away from a closed-door meeting where House Republicans are debating a resolution to empower McHenry, House Democrats are huddling to discuss next steps.
The move to empower McHenry as a temporary speaker will almost certainly require a heavy lift from Democrats.
Hard-right lawmakers have been leaving the GOP meeting furious and lambasting the resolution.– Ken Tran
A roll call vote to determine attendance in the House, scheduled for noon, has been postponed as lawmakers continue to debate a resolution that would empower McHenry as an interim speaker.
– Ken Tran
Jordan will back empowering McHenry as temporary speaker up until January, according to a source familiar.
In the meantime, Jordan will continue to run for speaker and work to shore up support over the next few months.
– Ken Tran
Rep. Scott Perry, R-Pa., chair of the House Freedom Caucus, a loose coalition of hard-right lawmakers, told reporters he would oppose empowering McHenry with temporary powers.
The resolution to make McHenry effectively an interim speaker "sets a bad precedent," Perry said.
– Ken Tran
House Republicans are currently meeting behind closed doors to discuss a resolution from Rep. Dave Joyce, R-Ohio, to temporarily empower McHenry as acting speaker.− Ken Tran
Sen. Patty Murray, a Democrat representing Washington state, currently serves as president pro tempore of the Senate.
Without an official speaker of the House, Murray was next in line for the presidency after Vice President Kamala Harris in the case of an emergency.
House Republicans will huddle in a closed-door conference meeting at 11 a.m. Thursday to discuss next steps.
The meeting comes as Jordan faces growing opposition to his bid for speaker and talks increase about giving temporary speaker Patrick McHenry more power.
− Ken Tran
Jordan, R-Ohio, told reporters Wednesday he intends to stay in the race and expected a vote at noon Thursday.
But as it remains clear Jordan has no path towards the 217 votes he needs to become speaker, the timing of the third speaker election is up in the air.
− Ken Tran
Lawmakers were originally expected to begin proceedings at noon Thursday in Washington, but timing could change if Republicans meet in conference first.
When the House reconvenes, you can follow along here.
Rep. Mike Lawler, R-N.Y., one of the moderate GOP lawmakers opposing Jordan, told USA TODAY the House is in its state of paralysis by the fault of the conservative hardliners who have overturned "precedent."
Hard-right lawmakers, Lawler told USA TODAY, "set a new precedent within this congress."
The New York Republican referenced multiple times ultraconservatives tanked rule votes, traditionally procedural votes that until this year, never failed.
− Ken Tran
Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-N.C., was chosen to be acting House speaker from a succession list that McCarthy provided to a House clerk in January in case his seat became vacant.
McHenry is serving his 10th term in Congress and represents the 10th congressional district in North Carolina.
He is a McCarthy ally and chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, a role that helped him negotiate the debt limit deal earlier this year.
The vote drew some applause from House Democrats.
– Ken Tran
Technically, Rep. Hakeem Jeffries could be elected, as there are no requirements for the speaker to be from the majority party (or even a member of Congress).
In both rounds of voting this week, Jeffries has received 212 votes, the full backing of House Democrats and more than Rep. Jim Jordan both times.
However, the New York Democrat would still need five more votes to hit the necessary 217.
Despite infighting among Republicans, it's very doubtful any lawmaker on the right, let alone five, will cast a vote across the aisle.
The number of votes needed is determined by a majority of House lawmakers present and voting.
On Tuesday, that number was 217.
Because no lawmaker received 217 votes in the first election, the speaker race continues today.
When the vote for speaker begins Wednesday, members will have a roll call vote to determine how many are present and voting − and how many votes are needed to win.
Then they will be called on individually to cast their vote for a speaker.
Voting could last several rounds Wednesday or be postponed until another day if a speaker isn't elected during the second try.
– Candy Woodall
He simply doesn’t have the votes — we need to have a frank discussion as a conference about a path forward.
20 House Republicans voted against Jordan in the first House speaker election while 22 Republicans voted against him in the second election.
Bergman supported Jordan in both rounds.
Bergman said on X, formerly known as Twitter, on Monday that “We need a leader to step up to unite the Republican conference, actually pass critical legislation, and move our Nation forward.”
The second ballot was another setback for Jordan’s bid for speaker.
Twenty-two GOP lawmakers voted against Jordan, an increase from the 20 that opposed him on Tuesday.
– Ken Tran
She had fun learning the chants that fans perform at football games.
“I knew that I was in a safe space.”
This has in the past two years become an important consideration for college-bound students from all backgrounds and beliefs.
The digital tables also list, for every four-year institution in the country, such things as racial and gender diversity among students and faculty, the number of student veterans enrolled, the incidence of on-campus race-motivated hate crimes, free-speech rankings and if the university or college serves many students from rural places.
Test our new College Welcome Guide:These tools offer a new lens on campus life.
Students have long picked schools based on their academic reputations and social life.
But with campuses in the crosshairs of the culture wars, many students are now also taking stock of attacks on diversity, course content and speech and speakers from both ends of the political spectrum.
They’re monitoring hate crimes, anti-LGBTQ+ legislation, state abortion laws and whether students like them ‒ Black, rural, military veterans, LGBTQ+ or from other backgrounds ‒ are represented and supported on campus.
When they look at colleges in various states now, she said, “There are students who are asking, ‘Am I really wanted here?’”
For some students on both sides of the political divide, the answer is no.
In the chaotic new world of American colleges and universities, many say they feel unwelcome at certain schools, while others are prepared to shut down speakers and report faculty with whose opinions they disagree.
It’s too early to know how much this trend will affect where and whether prospective students end up going to college since publicly available enrollment data lags real time.
But there are early clues that it’s having a significant impact.
One in 4 prospective students has already ruled out a college or university for consideration because of the political climate in its state, according to a survey by the higher education consulting firm Art & Science Group.
Among students who describe themselves as liberal, the most common reason to rule out colleges and universities in a particular state, that survey found, is because it’s “too Republican” or has what they consider lax gun regulations, anti-LGBTQ+ legislation, restrictive abortion laws and a lack of concern about racism.
Students who describe themselves as conservative are rejecting states they believe to be “too Democrat” and that have liberal abortion and gay rights laws.
Of these, 8 in 10 say they would prefer to go to a state with greater access to reproductive health services.
“We have many young women who will not look at certain states,” said Levine.
One of her own clients backed out of going to a university in St. Louis after Missouri banned almost all abortions following the Supreme Court’s Dobbs decision, she said.
Institutions in Alabama, Florida, Louisiana and Texas are the most likely to be knocked off the lists of liberal students, according to the Art & Science Group survey.
They’re generally most likely to steer clear of the South and Midwest, while conservative students avoid California and New York.
One in 8 high school students in Florida say they won’t go to a public university in their own state because of its education policies, a separate poll, by the college ranking and information website Intelligent.com, found.
“You are attacking kids who are already vulnerable,” said Javier Gomez, an LGBTQ+ student in his first year at Miami Dade College.
It’s not yet evident whether the new laws are affecting where LGBTQ+ young people are choosing to go to college, said Casey Pick, director of law and policy at The Trevor Project, which supports LGBTQ+ young people in crisis.
But LGBTQ+ adults are moving away from states passing anti-LGBTQ+ laws, she said.
And “if adult employees are taking this into account when they decide where they want to live, you can bet that college students are making the same decisions.”
“The real attack here is on the feeling of belonging,” said Jeremy Young, who directs the Freedom to Learn program at PEN America, which tracks laws that restrict college and university diversity efforts and teaching about race.
“What it really does is hoist a flag to say to the most marginalized students, ‘We don’t want you here.’”
More than 40% of university and college administrators say the Supreme Court ruling curbing the use of affirmative action in admissions will affect diversity on their campuses, a Princeton Review poll found as the school year was beginning.
College students of all races and political persuasions report feeling uncomfortable on campuses that have become political battlegrounds.
It found that those who answer in these ways are more likely to frequently experience stress and more likely to drop out.
Nearly two-thirds say that faculty and administrators don’t understand the challenges they face, and 70% say the same thing about their non-veteran classmates.
Colleges should be “safe and affirming spaces,” said Pick, of the Trevor Project ‒ not places of isolation and alienation.
Of those, 72% say they worry their opinions would be considered unacceptable by classmates and 45%, by their professors.
Conservative students are less likely than their liberal classmates to believe that all points of view are welcome and less willing to share theirs.
“Is that really an intellectually diverse environment?” asked Sean Stevens, director of polling and analytics at the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression, or FIRE, which has launched a campus free-speech ranking based on students’ perceptions of comfort expressing ideas, tolerance for speakers and other measures.
“Anecdotally and from personal experience, there’s certainly a pocket of students who are weighing these factors in terms of where to go to college,” Stevens said.
Eighty-one percent of liberal students and 53% of conservative ones say they support reporting faculty who make comments that they find offensive, the same survey found.
It used sample comments such as, “There is no evidence of anti-Black bias in police shootings,” “Requiring vaccination for COVID is an assault on individual freedom” and “Biological sex is a scientific fact.”
A professor at Texas A&M University became the subject of an investigation when a student accused her of criticizing the state’s lieutenant governor during a lecture, though she was ultimately exonerated.
An anthropology lecturer at the University of Chicago who taught an undergraduate course called “The Problem of Whiteness” said she was deluged with hateful messages when a conservative student posted her photo and email address on social media.
More than half of all freshmen say that colleges have the right to ban extreme speakers, according to an annual survey by an institute at the University of California, Los Angeles; the College Pulse poll says that sentiment is held by twice the proportion of liberal students as conservative ones.
A group of Stanford students in March disrupted an on-campus speech by a federal judge whose judicial record they said was anti-LGBTQ+.
When he asked for an administrator to intervene, an associate dean for diversity, equity and inclusion confronted him and asked: “Is it worth the pain that this causes and the division that this causes?” The associate dean was put on leave and later resigned.
“Today it is a sad fact that the greatest threat to free speech comes from within the academy,” pronounced the right-leaning American Council of Trustees and Alumni, which is pushing colleges to sign on to its Campus Freedom Initiative that encourages teaching students about free expression during freshman orientation and disciplining people who disrupt speakers or events, among other measures.
“I have to imagine that universities that have a bad track record on freedom of expression or academic freedom, that it will affect their reputations,” said Steven Maguire, the organization’s campus freedom fellow.
Some colleges are now actively recruiting students on the basis of these kinds of concerns.
Colorado College in September created a program to ease the process for students who want to transfer away from institutions in states that have banned diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives; Hampshire College in Massachusetts has offered admission to any student from New College in Florida, subject of what critics have described as a conservative takeover.
Thirty-five have so far accepted the invitation.
Though many conservative critics of colleges and universities say faculty are indoctrinating students with liberal opinions, incoming freshmen tend to hold left-leaning views before they ever set foot in a classroom, according to that UCLA survey.
Fewer than 1 in 5 consider themselves conservative.
Three-quarters say abortion should be legal and favor stricter gun control laws, 68% say wealthy people should pay more taxes than they do now and 86% that climate change should be a federal priority and that there should be a clear path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants.
Prospective students say they are watching as new laws are passed and controversies erupt on campuses and actively looking into not just the quality of food and available majors at the colleges they might attend, but state politics.
Florida’s anti-LGBTQ+ laws prompted Javier Gomez to leave his native state and move to New York to go to fashion school.
“People ask me, ‘Why the hell are you back in Florida?’” said Gomez.
It’s overwhelming at times.
It can be very mentally depleting.
Sign up for our higher education newsletter.
Thousands of Israelis and Palestinians have been killed and Palestinians have been ordered to evacuate from the northern Gaza Strip ahead of Israel's impending ground invasion, leading to a humanitarian crisis that has brought protests from the United Nations and around the world.
The U.N. said about 1 million Gaza residents have been displaced in just a week, about half of them finding refuge in U.N. schools and other facilities where water supplies are diminishing.
The war has claimed more than 4,000 lives since Hamas launched an unprecedented surprise attack Oct. 7.
Meanwhile, the World Health Organization pleaded with Israel on Sunday to immediately reverse evacuation orders for hospitals in northern Gaza, saying the deadlines are impossible to meet and risk additional loss of life.
"Evacuation orders by Israel to hospitals are practically impossible to implement and are a death sentence for the sick and injured."
Here are several organizations that are providing aid to people caught in the conflict.
How to cope:The videos out of Israel, Gaza are graphic, but some can't look away
"Our members are speaking loudly and clearly about the values that unite our community: Opposition to this horrific violence, and a commitment to Israeli/Palestinian partnership on the path to ending it, and achieving peace and equality," the agency said in a statement.
The organization is asking for donations to improve access to essential services like water and to support livelihood projects.
Doctors Without Borders is a nongovernmental organization that describes itself as an "independent, impartial and neutral" charity that provides humanitarian aid to people affected by conflict, disease outbreaks and natural and human-made disasters.
The agency is seeking donations to continue to provide medical care in the area.
The agency has reported overcrowding in hospitals, a lack of medical supplies, and dangerous working conditions as it tries to support the thousands injured by the fighting.
UNRWA has designated shelters to host the estimated 127,000 people displaced in Gaza.
The agency is seeking donations to support its work.
The Jewish Agency for Israel North American Council, an American charity organization, is accepting donations to help victims of terrorism.
Save the Children issued an emergency alert in response to the conflict, noting that escalating violence has left 1.2 million children in need of humanitarian aid.
The agency is accepting donations.
National and international organizations that aid victims in the conflict include the Palestine Children's Relief Fund (PCRF), which works to provide lifesaving medical relief and humanitarian aid.
Founded by former President Jimmy Carter and his wife, Rosalynn Carter, in partnership with Emory University, The Carter Center is a humanitarian aid organization that has been promoting peace and a viable two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict for decades.
After Israel declared war, The Carter Center released a statement condemning the targeting of Israeli and Palestinian civilians and called for international action to end the violence.
A second co-defendant with Donald Trump in the Georgia election conspiracy case, Sidney Powell, pleaded guilty Thursday to a half-dozen misdemeanors dealing with a conspiracy to interfere in the 2020 election.
“Miss Powell is at the vortex, the center, the hub of the alleged conspiracy,” said Gene Rossi, who handled Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations cases in his three decades as a former federal prosecutor and Justice Department official.
She was charged with tampering with election equipment in Coffee County, Georgia.
She pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit theft by taking and five counts of conspiracy to commit intentional interference with performance of election duties.
Powell agreed to testify in future trials in exchange for serving six years of probation, a $6,000 fine and paying restitution of $2,700.
Powell is one of 19 co-defendants charged in the case, which alleged a broad racketeering conspiracy.
Other portions of the conspiracy included the recruitment of fake presidential electors to vote for Trump despite President Joe Biden winning Georgia, lying about election results to state officials and in court records, and soliciting public officials to violate their oaths of office.
Legal experts said Powell's agreement to testify against others in the case is "very significant" because she dealt at length with Trump, lawyer Rudy Giuliani and others charged in the conspiracy.
Powell worked closely with major figures in the chase.
She participated in a news conference with Giuliani and co-defendant Jenna Ellis at the Republican National Committee portraying baseless allegations of election in November 2020.
Powell met with Trump at the White House, including on Dec. 18, 2020, to discuss having the military seize voting machines, which Trump didn't order.
“Rudy Giuliani, as if he doesn't have enough to worry about, should be very worried,” O’Brien said.
Powell is the second co-defendant to plead guilty in the case, after bail bondsman Scott Hall.
The other 17 co-defendants have all pleaded not guilty.
Powell’s guilty plea came days before her trial was scheduled to begin Monday.
No place was safe for more than 2 million Palestinians on Thursday as Israeli bombs slammed across the Gaza Strip, including parts of the Palestinian territory that Israel had declared "safe zones."
The intensified shelling came one day after Israel agreed to allow limited shipments of humanitarian aid into southern Gaza from Egypt.
"Israeli Air Forces continued to strike southern areas despite the directive for people in #Gaza to move south," the UN Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) tweeted.
The agency said at least 14 of its own staff had been killed and nine more wounded − adding that the "actual number is likely to be much higher" − in less than two weeks since a stunning, bloody incursion of Hamas militants killed more than 1,000 Israeli citizens and fueled military reprisals from Israel.
Israel Defense Forces says it is attacking Hamas militants wherever they hide in Gaza and has accused the militants of taking shelter among the civilian population.
The death toll of Israelis and Palestinians surpassed 5,000, making the conflict the deadliest of five wars involving the narrow, densely populated strip of land bordering Israel, Egypt and the Mediterranean Sea.
Israel-Hamas War newsletter:Sign up to get the latest news and analysis from USA TODAY into your inbox.
The aid deal struck Wednesday had included a stipulation that roads essential to the flow of aid would first be repaired.
South Korean officials, two experts on North Korean arms and an Associated Press analysis of weapons captured on the battlefield by Israel point toward Hamas using Pyongyang’s F-7 rocket-propelled grenade, a shoulder-fired weapon that fighters typically use against armored vehicles.
∎ The death toll in Gaza climbed to at least 3,785 people Thursday, the Gaza Health Ministry said.
Over 1,500 children and 1,000 women were among those killed; at least 12,493 people have been injured, the ministry said.
More than 1,400 people in Israel have been killed, mostly civilians slain during Hamas’ bloody incursion on Oct. 7.
The number of known hostages has crept higher almost daily.
A U.S. cargo plane arrived in Israel carrying the initial shipment of armored vehicles designated to replace vehicles damaged during the war, the Israel Ministry of Defense said Thursday.
Armored ambulances, trucks, and mechanical engineering equipment are expected to arrive in coming days, the ministry said.
The first delivery came the day after President Joe Biden's historic trip to Tel Aviv, where he pledged the U.S. would stand by Israel and provide whatever is needed for it to defend itself in its war with Hamas.
Biden also said he would seek congressional approval of an "unprecedented support package" to bolster Israel's defense.
Biden also pledged $100 million in U.S. funding for humanitarian assistance for Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank.
More than a million people have fled their homes in the Gaza Strip ahead of an expected Israel invasion that seeks to eliminate Hamas’ leadership after its deadly incursion.
Aid groups warn an Israeli ground offensive could hasten a humanitarian crisis.
About 300,000 Israelis have been internally displaced since the start of the war, the Times of Israel reports, citing Israel Democracy Institute research.
Most are from southern Israel in the Gaza border towns where Hamas carried out its murderous rampage.
President Joe Biden has made a sudden transformation from a political figure whose commitment to Israel was often questioned by conservative critics inside and outside the Jewish state to arguably the world's leading champion of Israel outside the Middle East.
Biden's actions and words since the Oct. 7 Hamas attack, capped by a dramatic visit to Israel on Wednesday, have been lauded even by many of Biden's biggest skeptics in Israel as he stands in solidarity with Israel and pledges "unprecedented" military assistance.
Read more here.
− Joey Garrison
Palestinian Americans are seeing two fronts in the Israel-Hamas war: one is the bloodshed in the Middle East.
The other is emotional backlash from bigotry and hate in the U.S. A U.S. Department of Justice hate crime investigation into the fatal stabbing of a 6-year-old Palestinian American Muslim boy in Illinois is one of several incidents of alleged hate being directed at Palestinian Americans, allies and people who look like them since the war began.
But at the same time, wants to show support and express grief in the war crisis.
Read more here.
Battle against hate:Violence, bigotry toward Palestinian Americans spiking across U.S.
The Israel Defense Forces, also known as the IDF, is the national military of Israel.
It has three branches: the army, navy and air force.
It was established in 1948, two weeks after Israel became an independent country.
Before the war began, the IDF had 169,500 active troops and was the 28th largest military in the world by active personnel, according to the International Institute for Strategic Studies' Military Balance 2023.
There were also 465,000 reserve personnel to supplement active military forces if deemed necessary.
Read more here.
More:Biden: Gaza to get aid by Friday; US says Israel not to blame for hospital blast.
The State Department designated Hamas a terrorist group in 1997, and several other nations also consider Hamas a terrorist organization.
In 2006, Hamas won parliamentary elections, and in 2007 the group violently seized control of Gaza from the Palestinian Authority, which was controlled by the rival Fatah movement that still governs the West Bank.
There have been no elections since.
The group calls for the establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel and believes in the use of violence to carry out the destruction of Israel.
Hamas receives financial, material, and logistical support from Iran.
So far, however, the U.S. and other nations have said there is no evidence that Iran was directly involved in Hamas’ attack.
Contributing: The Associated Press
Week 7 of the 2023 NFL schedule comes in light, six teams (Bengals, Cowboys, Jets, Panthers, Texans and Titans) breaking for byes.
But a decent slate of games kicks off Thursday with the New Orleans Saints hosting the AFC South-leading Jacksonville Jaguars.
No international games this week, so Sunday starts at 1 p.m.
ET with a juicy matchup in Baltimore, the Ravens facing the Detroit Lions in a battle of first-place squads.
The "Sunday Night Football" nightcap is the biggie, the Miami Dolphins (5-1) visiting the Philadelphia Eagles (5-1) – decked out anew in Kelly Green – in the latest candidate for game of the year.
Who's 6-1 on Monday?
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Gannett may earn revenue from sports betting operators for audience referrals to betting services.
Sports betting operators have no influence over nor are any such revenues in any way dependent on or linked to the newsrooms or news coverage.
Terms apply, see operator site for Terms and Conditions.
If you or someone you know has a gambling problem, help is available.
Call the National Council on Problem Gambling 24/7 at 1-800-GAMBLER (NJ, OH), 1-800-522-4700 (CO), 1-800-BETS-OFF (IA), 1-800-9-WITH-IT (IN).
Must be 21 or older to gamble.
Sports betting and gambling are not legal in all locations.
Be sure to comply with laws applicable where you reside.
WASHINGTON — The nation in its 16th day without a speaker of the House, and Republican lawmakers have made seemingly no progress towards electing a new, permanent leader.
Instead, on Thursday Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, appeared to support a plan empowering Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-N.C., as speaker up until January to get the House moving again.
McHenry has already been serving as an interim speaker with limited powers.
On Wednesday, Jordan, lost a second speaker election.
The push to grant McHenry additional powers came after Republican holdouts vowed not to support Jordan.
Steve Womack, R-Ark., one of the holdouts, told reporters Wednesday evening he did not see a path forward for Jordan to become speaker.
Follow along for live updates from USA TODAY on the speaker fight.
Meanwhile, just a one-minute walk away from a closed-door meeting where House Republicans are debating a resolution to empower McHenry, House Democrats are huddling to discuss next steps.
The move to empower McHenry as a temporary speaker will almost certainly require a heavy lift from Democrats.
Hard-right lawmakers have been leaving the GOP meeting furious and lambasting the resolution.– Ken Tran
A roll call vote to determine attendance in the House, scheduled for noon, has been postponed as lawmakers continue to debate a resolution that would empower McHenry as an interim speaker.
– Ken Tran
Jordan will back empowering McHenry as temporary speaker up until January, according to a source familiar.
In the meantime, Jordan will continue to run for speaker and work to shore up support over the next few months.
– Ken Tran
Rep. Scott Perry, R-Pa., chair of the House Freedom Caucus, a loose coalition of hard-right lawmakers, told reporters he would oppose empowering McHenry with temporary powers.
The resolution to make McHenry effectively an interim speaker "sets a bad precedent," Perry said.
– Ken Tran
House Republicans are currently meeting behind closed doors to discuss a resolution from Rep. Dave Joyce, R-Ohio, to temporarily empower McHenry as acting speaker.− Ken Tran
Sen. Patty Murray, a Democrat representing Washington state, currently serves as president pro tempore of the Senate.
Without an official speaker of the House, Murray was next in line for the presidency after Vice President Kamala Harris in the case of an emergency.
House Republicans will huddle in a closed-door conference meeting at 11 a.m. Thursday to discuss next steps.
The meeting comes as Jordan faces growing opposition to his bid for speaker and talks increase about giving temporary speaker Patrick McHenry more power.
− Ken Tran
Jordan, R-Ohio, told reporters Wednesday he intends to stay in the race and expected a vote at noon Thursday.
But as it remains clear Jordan has no path towards the 217 votes he needs to become speaker, the timing of the third speaker election is up in the air.
− Ken Tran
Lawmakers were originally expected to begin proceedings at noon Thursday in Washington, but timing could change if Republicans meet in conference first.
When the House reconvenes, you can follow along here.
Rep. Mike Lawler, R-N.Y., one of the moderate GOP lawmakers opposing Jordan, told USA TODAY the House is in its state of paralysis by the fault of the conservative hardliners who have overturned "precedent."
Hard-right lawmakers, Lawler told USA TODAY, "set a new precedent within this congress."
The New York Republican referenced multiple times ultraconservatives tanked rule votes, traditionally procedural votes that until this year, never failed.
− Ken Tran
Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-N.C., was chosen to be acting House speaker from a succession list that McCarthy provided to a House clerk in January in case his seat became vacant.
McHenry is serving his 10th term in Congress and represents the 10th congressional district in North Carolina.
He is a McCarthy ally and chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, a role that helped him negotiate the debt limit deal earlier this year.
The vote drew some applause from House Democrats.
– Ken Tran
Technically, Rep. Hakeem Jeffries could be elected, as there are no requirements for the speaker to be from the majority party (or even a member of Congress).
In both rounds of voting this week, Jeffries has received 212 votes, the full backing of House Democrats and more than Rep. Jim Jordan both times.
However, the New York Democrat would still need five more votes to hit the necessary 217.
Despite infighting among Republicans, it's very doubtful any lawmaker on the right, let alone five, will cast a vote across the aisle.
The number of votes needed is determined by a majority of House lawmakers present and voting.
On Tuesday, that number was 217.
Because no lawmaker received 217 votes in the first election, the speaker race continues today.
When the vote for speaker begins Wednesday, members will have a roll call vote to determine how many are present and voting − and how many votes are needed to win.
Then they will be called on individually to cast their vote for a speaker.
Voting could last several rounds Wednesday or be postponed until another day if a speaker isn't elected during the second try.
– Candy Woodall
He simply doesn’t have the votes — we need to have a frank discussion as a conference about a path forward.
20 House Republicans voted against Jordan in the first House speaker election while 22 Republicans voted against him in the second election.
Bergman supported Jordan in both rounds.
Bergman said on X, formerly known as Twitter, on Monday that “We need a leader to step up to unite the Republican conference, actually pass critical legislation, and move our Nation forward.”
The second ballot was another setback for Jordan’s bid for speaker.
Twenty-two GOP lawmakers voted against Jordan, an increase from the 20 that opposed him on Tuesday.
– Ken Tran
Ready or not, winter is coming — But how bad is it going to be?
Federal forecasters from NOAA's Climate Prediction Center gave us their answer Thursday morning in an annual winter outlook.
NOAA said the U.S. winter of 2023-24 will likely be dominated by the effects of what could be a powerful El Niño.
That means a mild, dry winter is likely on tap for much of the northern tier of the U.S., while the southeastern U.S. should see a wetter-than-average winter.
The center's forecast covers the months of December, January and February, which is known as meteorological winter.
Warmer-than-average temperatures are favored across the northern tier of the U.S. and much of the far West, NOAA said.
The greatest odds for warmer-than-average conditions are in Alaska, the Pacific Northwest and northern New England.
As for precipitation, wetter-than-average conditions are most likely in northern Alaska, portions of the West from California to the south-central Rockies, the southern Plains, Gulf Coast, Southeast and lower mid-Atlantic, NOAA predicts.
As for where a dry winter is likely, the greatest odds for drier-than-average conditions are forecast in portions of the northern Rockies and central Great Lakes region, especially for Michigan and northern Ohio and Indiana.
The main factor that federal climate scientists use to forecast winter weather is the strength of El Niño or La Niña, climate patterns that affect weather in the U.S. and around the world.
The entire natural climate cycle is officially known as the El Niño – Southern Oscillation (ENSO), which swings between warmer and cooler seawater in the tropical Pacific Ocean.
(El Niño is unusually warm water in the tropical Pacific Ocean, while La Niña means cooler-than-average water in the Pacific.)
This El Niño, which began in June, is predicted to last through the winter.
It could be a "historically strong" one, the Climate Prediction Center said, potentially rivaling those from 2015-16 and 1997-98.
Let it snow?
Here's what forecasters say.
The forecast released Thursday only predicts where above or below normal temperatures – and above or below normal precipitation – are most likely.
This winter forecast does not specify how much precipitation will fall as rain, snow or ice, only that more or less is likely overall.
Snow forecasts depend upon the strength and track of winter storms, which generally cannot be predicted more than a week in advance, the center has said in the past.
As for the 50 million Americans that live in the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic, where big snowstorms typically bring the most angst, the climate center does not give a specific forecast for how much snow will fall.
How cold and snowy will US winter be?
Other large-scale climate patterns in the atmosphere that can influence winter weather include the Madden-Julian Oscillation, which can affect the number of heavy rain events along the West Coast.
It can also contribute to other extreme events in the U.S., including Arctic air outbreaks during the winter months across the central and eastern portions of the nation, the CPC says.
The forecast does also not factor in Siberian snow cover, which other forecasters use as the basis for their winter weather forecasts.
This is the third story in a series exploring grief, how people face it, cope with it and heal from it.
Click here to read the first installment: This family went through an unimaginable tragedy.
How YouTube helped.
And here for the second: At 25 she found out she had the breast cancer gene.
Now, she's grieving motherhood.
Lisa Bowman had everything going for her − until she didn't.
The now 56-year-old was the global chief marketing officer for United Way.
United Way, an education, economic mobility and health-focused nonprofit, recruited her.
What should've been a dream job spiraled into a nightmare: she alleged she was sexually harassed at work, and more than 20 former employees of the company said "sexual harassment, discrimination and retaliation is commonplace," at the company, according to a 2021 HuffPost report.
The nonprofit fired Bowman in January 2020, months after she reported the harassment.
Multiple claims have been filed with the EEOC; United Way told USA TODAY it doesn't comment on matters of employment.
The CEO of United Way resigned as the chaos swirled.
But Bowman didn't just lose her job.
She lost much more.
"The loss of my job was really that loss of my identity," she says.
Grief doesn't apply to death alone.
And all can coexist.
(You can share yours with us at the bottom of this article).
"There's room enough in the world for all these losses, and one doesn't take away from the other," says David Kessler, grief expert and founder of Grief.com.
Bowman says her grief affected her as a woman: "When I talk about the grief over the loss of a job, I think for women, as we fight so hard sometimes to get to executive levels, and those C-suite positions, when we get there, that job becomes an integral part of our identity," she says.
"And so we identify very closely with our role."
She attempted to push through her grief – a "fake it 'til you make it" mentality – the same way she dealt with it at 26 following the death of her mother.
I'm missing out on all of those things, because of this loss of a job.
And that in and of itself – it's grief.
Bowman confided in friends and family in lieu of professional help.
While none could relate to her quandary, they listened to her.
Heard her cry.
Bowman previously had a 15-year stint in executive-level marketing roles at UPS but now freelances.
"It's made it very, very difficult for me to find employment," she says.
Another kind of grief: missed opportunities.
Bowman's grief is not more or less than any other type of grief.
"There's a context to think about it, as sometimes we approach grief like it's a pie," Kessler says.
But I need a lot of it because my spouse died.
Plus, "the emotions can be the same, regarding all kinds of loss," says Amy Morin, psychotherapist and the host of a podcast.
"Someone who lost their job may feel sad, anxious, and a bit disoriented, which might be the same feelings someone experiences when they lose a friend or relative."
Read next:At 25 she found out she had the breast cancer gene.
Now, she's grieving motherhood.
Today, Bowman's grief hasn't dissipated.
It's just that you get used to carrying it.
Sad:Her son died, and she felt alone.
In her grief, she found YouTube.
Republican Rep. Jim Jordan lost votes on his second attempt to become House speaker, an embarrassing setback for a party that seems to specialize in embarrassing itself.
It’s clearly time for the Republican Party to consider an outsider for the role of speaker of the House, so in the interest of bipartisan helpfulness, I’ve prepared the following LinkedIn-inspired job posting they can use to identify potential candidates.
You’re welcome, Republicans, and good luck filling the position!
Who would vote for that mess?
The Republican Party is seeking an enthusiastic, qualified (or unqualified) conservative interested in leading a not-particularly-dedicated team of politicians in the U.S. House of Representatives through a time of ideological uncertainty.
The ideal background would be a person who can unite people with varying views on the importance of democracy and rally them to accomplish as little as possible while still yelling into television cameras in a manner that sounds serious.
Base salary: $223,500 a year
Perks include free flights on donor jets and a complimentary copy of Donald Trump Jr.’s book “Triggered.”
The suspect was taken into custody at about 10:15 p.m. Wednesday night, according to a statement from the base, after an incident in an on-base barracks room earlier in the evening.
The statement referred to the Marine's death as a homicide, but did not provide any additional information, including the cause of death.
The statement said more information would be provided as it becomes available.
'A real tight-knit group':Military unit mourns after 2 soldiers killed in Alaska vehicle crash
The incident comes two days before the base was scheduled to conduct its annual emergency response exercise.
The exercise "provides an opportunity for tenant commands to develop and exercise emergency security procedures," according to a news release from the base.
The release says the exercise also provides "realistic training opportunities meant to increase the installation's emergency response efforts, command and control, and security capabilities."
Palestinian Americans are seeing two fronts in the Israel-Hamas war: one is the bloodshed in the Middle East.
The other is emotional backlash from bigotry and hate in the U.S.
A U.S. Department of Justice hate crime investigation into the fatal stabbing of a 6-year-old Palestinian American Muslim boy in Illinois is one of several incidents of alleged hate being directed at Palestinian Americans, allies and people who look like them since the war began.
They’re not there to delegitimize another narrative.
He also noted a lack of action from elected officials to protect Palestinian Americans and adjacent communities.
Presidential candidate and Florida Gov.
Ron DeSantis said at a campaign event the United States should not take in any refugees from the Gaza Strip.
“If you look at how they behave, not all of them are Hamas, but they are all antisemitic,” he said.
In a social media post on X, New York Gov.
Kathy Hochul condemned a Palestinian rally in Times Square, calling it “abhorrent and morally repugnant.”
I am with Israel.
Do whatever the hell you have to do to defend yourself.
In statements released since the beginning of the war, President Joe Biden continued to offer unequivocal support for Israel and condemned violence against Israelis but did not do the same for Palestinians.
"The United States and the State of Israel are inseparable partners, and I affirmed to Prime Minister Netanyahu again when we spoke yesterday that the United States will continue to make sure Israel has what it needs to defend itself and its people," Biden said on Oct. 9.
Following the stabbings on Saturday, Biden released a statement on the "horrific act of hate."
I have said repeatedly that I will not be silent in the face of hate.
We must be unequivocal.
In a private call with State Department officials Monday, Arab American and Muslim leaders expressed outrage over the Biden administration’s rhetoric in recent days, POLITICO first reported.
Leaders said the demonization of Palestinians, and of Arabs in general, had given way for rise in hatred against them in the US.
They also noted calls for a ceasefire or restraint were absent from Biden's remarks.
Experts said statements that only acknowledge violence against one side imply the other side is either not facing violence or does not matter.
“Jewish people should be protected and respected, and so should Muslims and Arabs and South Asians and everyone else.”
This is not the first instance Muslims have reported increased surveillance from the FBI.
Passwords might be one of the biggest tech frustrations.
Make them too hard, and they're impossible to remember.
Too easy, and your accounts are practically wide open.
You could use a password manager or your browser's built-in option to remember your logins.
Here's how to find saved passwords in your browser.
Those solutions aren't perfect, of course.
Password managers get hacked, and anyone with the know-how can access your saved browser options.
No wonder tech companies are working to welcome us to a future sans passwords.
I write about the latest tech gear, security alerts and digital life hacks in my daily emails.
Join 600K+ who get the Current each day.
It starts with the FIDO Alliance
Big tech companies launched the industry association in 2013 to build a better system than passwords we have to keep track of and type in.
Now we're seeing more start to roll it out, and Google's beta testing worked so well that the company just made it the standard way to protect your account.
Before we get to how to use passkeys, let's do a deep dive into how they work.
What is a passkey, and how does it work?
A passkey is a personalized FIDO credential (like your fingerprint or face scan) that lives securely on your device.
You use that instead of a username and password to unlock your accounts.
Another bonus: No more sticky notes with passwords on your monitor.
Passkeys also eliminate the daily "Which password did I use here?"
Naturally, it'll be faster and easier to log in.
But is it safe to use?
Glad you're asking.
The unique structure of passkeys makes them near-impenetrable, unlike passwords – which are notoriously easy to crack.
Since they're stored on your local device, passkeys can't be hacked or guessed like passwords.
And there's no concern of a hacker getting their hands on one of your passwords and opening the keys to the castle since each device has its unique passkey.
That's a far cry from passwords, and studies show most people rely on only a handful of passwords for all their accounts.
Is paid social media the future?
If you want privacy, probably.
Want to try it out?
If you're sick of typing in credentials all day, you can set up passkeys with your Google account.
Note: Passkeys are automatically created for Google devices, but you must set them up for any other gadgets you use to access your account(s).
You need to do this individually on each device you want to give access to.
◾ Go to g.co/passkeys.
◾ Tap Get passkeys and sign in.
◾ Select Use passkeys, then follow the onscreen prompts.
You'll be prompted to log in without your password in certain situations.
My advice: Use biometric authentication (your fingerprint or face) anywhere you can.
It's much more secure than a PIN.
Fear not, Apple folks
You can use passkeys with your iPhone too.
These work through the iCloud Keychain.
Make sure you have that turned on and two-factor authentication enabled to use passkeys.
Note: To use passkeys, iOS 16, iPadOS 16, macOS 13, or tvOS 16 (or later) is required.
Depending on the website, browser, or app you're using, saving a passkey to your iPhone and iCloud Keychain usually consists of these steps:
◾ On your iPhone, go to the sign-in screen for a supported website or app and do one of the following: If setting up a new account: Tap the button or link for setting up new accounts, then follow the onscreen instructions.
◾ When you see the option to save a passkey for the account, tap Continue.
Your passkey is saved.
Note: If you don't see a passkey option, the app or website doesn't currently support passkeys.
To sign in to an account on your iPhone with a passkey:
◾ On your iPhone, go to the website or app and tap the account name field on the sign-in screen.
◾ Tap the suggested account name that appears at the bottom of the screen or near the top of the keyboard.
If the account name doesn't appear, or you want to use a different one, enter it.
◾ Use Face ID or Touch ID to complete sign-in.
If you didn't set up Face ID or Touch ID on your iPhone, enter your device passcode (the code you use to unlock your iPhone).
The passkey you saved completes the sign-in automatically.
When using a device not associated with your Apple ID, you can still sign in to an account using the passkey stored on your iPhone.
◾ Select Other options, Passkey from nearby device, or similar, then follow the onscreen instructions to display a QR code on the screen.
◾ Use your iPhone camera to scan the QR code.
The passkey that's saved to iCloud Keychain completes the sign-in automatically.
Now, onward, with your safe new logins.
Keep your tech-know going
It's a solid 30 minutes of tech news, tips, and callers with tech questions like you from all over the country.
Search for it wherever you get your podcasts.
For your convenience, hit the link below for a recent episode.
PODCAST PICK: Block war videos online, home swapping in NYC & goodbye to passwords
Plus, a website that makes it easy to find any movie on streaming.
The health features your watch can track and how to keep your location off Google Maps.
Kim takes calls and dispenses advice on today's digital lifestyle, from smartphones and tablets to online privacy and data hacks.
For her daily tips, free newsletters and more, visit her website.
Julia Fox is opening up about her "overwhelming" relationship with Ye, formerly Kanye West.
Fox appeared on "The Drew Barrymore Show" Wednesday where she discussed her memoir "Down the Drain," including her whirlwind two-month romance with a man she dubs "the artist."
"Ultimately I think he needed a full-time person and I just couldn’t be full-time."
In Fox's memoir, which came out on Oct. 10, she gave readers a behind-the-scenes look at her high-profile relationships.
Truth is, I’m not a celebrity and I don’t claim that title.
I’m an artist in the role of a lifetime, playing Me.
In the climax of "Down the Drain," Fox offers several details of what it was like to date Ye, whom she doesn't reference by name.
From context clues, including a detail about the artist being on "Keeping Up with the Kardashians" and having an estranged wife, it's clear that she is talking about the rapper.
Fox also notes that she never signed a nondisclosure agreement, despite his multiple requests that she do so.
She recounts feeling uncomfortable after he casually offers to "get you a boob job" as she tries on a slinky top that doesn't fit right.
Julia Fox on Ye's antisemitic remarks:'I just feel so bad for everyone involved'
Russian authorities detained a Russian-American journalist Wednesday on charges of failing to register as a foreign agent, her employer said in a statement.
She is the second U.S. journalist detained in Russia this year.
While awaiting her return flight on June 2, she was temporarily detained and her dual U.S. and Russian passports were confiscated, RFE/RL said.
She's not been able to leave the country since.
She is now being accused of "failing to register herself as a foreign agent in her capacity as a person collecting information on Russian military activities that 'could be used against the security of the Russian Federation,'" according to the Committee to Protect Journalists.
She faces up to five years in prison if found guilty, the nonprofit said, citing the Russian Criminal Code.
He has appeared in court multiple times and remains imprisoned in Moscow.
Contributing: The Associated Press
The latest storm of the Atlantic hurricane season has officially formed into Tropical Storm Tammy, bringing weather watches to several islands in the Caribbean Sea.
Tammy formed late Wednesday afternoon and is expected to gradually strengthen over the next few days as it approaches the Leeward Islands.
The National Hurricane Center predicts that Tammy could possibly bring tropical storm conditions starting Friday and reach near hurricane intensity early Saturday.
The NHC says Tammy is expected to turn west-northwest Thursday and northwest Friday, sucking up the warm waters to grow to near-hurricane strength by the time it reaches the islands.
The NHC predicts more watches and warnings will be necessary Thursday evening, as heavy rainfall could produce flash floods or mudslides.
Here is what else to know about Hurricane Tammy, according to Thursday's 8 a.m.
ET NHC advisory:
2023 hurricane season:Tammy is born and storm season odds shift in our favor; but a spooky pattern may emerge
A Tropical Storm Watch, meaning tropical storm conditions are possible within 48 hours, are in effect for the following places:
Special note about spaghetti models: Illustrations include an array of forecast tools and models, and not all are created equal.
The hurricane center uses only the top four or five highest performing models to help make its forecasts.
With Tropical Storm Tammy named, that leaves two names remaining on the 2023 list of storms: Vince and Whitney.
Hurricane season doesn't end until Nov. 30, although storms can and do form any time.
This season has been above the historical average when it comes to named storms.
During an average hurricane season, 14 named storms form in the Atlantic basin, which covers the Atlantic Ocean, Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico.
The peak of the season is Sept. 10, with the most activity happening between mid-August and mid-October, according to the hurricane center.
(The radio version, of course.)
The rhythm and energy of this song may match the excitement some feel for this beloved fruit.
People around the globe go bananas, for, well, bananas.
Most people are familiar with the sweet flavor and soft texture of the banana – but some may wonder about its nutritional value – like its upsides, its downsides, and if we can actually eat them every day.
Although bananas have many benefits, there are three main nutritional benefits that we want to focus on.
The main drawback of bananas is the sugar content.
Even though it is natural, too much sugar can lead to issues, particularly if you’re a diabetic or if you have weight loss goals.
It's a good idea to eat the banana before it gets all spotted like a leopard.
“Keep the portions small, have them with fibrous foods like vegetables, and/or pair them with a healthy protein or plant-based fat to increase satiety and dilute sugar concentration.” She gives some examples of what she does at her practice, “Some great pairings would be Greek yogurt with a banana or a handful of nuts with a banana.”
TAMPA, Fla. — Jared Goff iced up back in June.
Or, more accurately, he let his teammates do it for him.
Then let’s start with the quarterback.
Not that jewels make a quarterback.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
A fun outing at a pecan festival in Texas took a scary turn when a gust of wind launched a carnival ride car into the air and left its operator dangling 30 feet above the ground.
A strong gust of wind suddenly propelled the car into the air with Juliana inside as the ride operator held onto the door to keep it shut and protect her, the station reported.
He managed to do that all while the compartment turned 180 degrees and stalled 30 feet from the ground.
Now he's being hailed as a hero.
Video:Day of adventure turns into nightmare for Canadian amusement park riders
As he went to close the door he just kind of flew up with it.
It "felt like the longest time of my life," before employees were able to get the ride's motor going and lower the ride, bringing both the operator and Juliana to safety.
Just before that the employees quickly removed a handful of children who were in a ground-level compartment of the ride.
The Bullet was shut down for the rest of the event.
A spokesperson for the festival organizer, the Groves Chamber of Commerce, told USA TODAY on Wednesday that the ride operator was fine and that they are not aware of any injuries.
Organized by the Groves Chamber of Commerce since 1969, the Groves Pecan Festival is a community-wide celebration that coincides with the yearly pecan harvest.
Pecans are an integral part of the Groves landscape and have been a focal point for community growth, the chamber of commerce says.
A spate of recent incidents related to amusement rides and attraction has left riders stuck or injured.
On Sept. 29, an 8-year-old boy sustained significant injuries when he was "sucked out" of his seat on a ride called The Storm at the State Fair of Virginia.
In August, guests were forced to walk down a 200-plus-foot roller coaster at Cedar Point in Sandusky, Ohio after the ride known as the Magnum XL experienced a mechanical issue.
Just two days before that, a North Carolina amusement park closed one of its rollercoasters after guests noticed a crack in a support pillars and video showed pieces moving out of place as cars moved along the tracks.
Reach her at sshafiq@gannett.com and follow her on X, formerly Twitter, @saman_shafiq7.
Hamas and Israel have been blaming each other for a deadly blast at a Gaza hospital complex.
President Joe Biden backed up Israel’s statements on Wednesday as he visited Tel Aviv.
Biden said he was “outraged and saddened” by the loss of life in Gaza City.
But he said U.S. intelligence indicated that Israel was not behind the explosion.
Here's a look at what happened, and what the different parties are saying:
Palestinians have been seeking refuge in and around hospitals from the Israeli bombardment of Gaza prompted by the Oct. 7 Hamas rampage that killed 1,400 people in Israeli territory.
More than 3,000 people have been killed and more than 12,500 have been injured in Gaza, according to its health ministry.
Keep up with developments from Gaza:Sign up for our Israel-Hamas War newsletter
The U.S. said Wednesday that its intelligence assessments indicated Israel was not behind the hospital explosion.
“While we continue to collect information, our current assessment, based on analysis of overhead imagery, intercepts and open source information, is that Israel is not responsible for the explosion at the hospital in Gaza yesterday,” National Security Council spokeswoman Adrienne Watson said in a statement.
Air Force Gen. Pat Ryder, the Pentagon press secretary, said separately that the Defense Department’s intelligence assessment is that Israel was not responsible for the explosion.
The Israeli military denied involvement and released video, audio and other information to support its claim that the explosion resulted from a misfired missile from the Islamic Jihad, a militant group that sometimes cooperates with Hamas and is considered a terrorist organization by the U.S.
In a video posted to X, formerly Twitter, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) compares examples of craters caused by IDF ordnance to the damage near the hospital.
Israel Defense Forces posted a video claiming the rocket originated from Gaza.
The footage was posted on X with text that reads: "RAW FOOTAGE: A rocket aimed at Israel misfired and exploded at 18:59 − the same moment a hospital was hit in Gaza."
Hamas has blamed Israel for Tuesday's explosion, and its health ministry says the blast killed at least 500 people.
And they, the Israeli spokesperson of the army about a week ago made a statement in which he said evacuate the hospitals, the hospitals are target and in fact they hit one hospital a week ago.
Is there any kind of independent investigative team that can resolve the matter by cutting through the politics and examining the forensic evidence to find out who is responsible?
The short answer is yes, but with some caveats.
"You would need a 'dream team' of forensic scientists skilled enough to look at the evidence on the ground and that which has been put forward by all sides, including Israel, the Biden administration and Hamas."
Options might include the International Criminal Court, the U.N.-affiliated Commission of Inquiry, the International Commission of Jurists, and the Commission for International Justice and Accountability, but all have their challenges.
Learn more here: Could an independent inquiry help assess blame for Gaza strike?
Yes, but it's tricky.
That left a lot of explaining for his media session before Wednesday’s practice.
Survive long enough as an NFL quarterback and there will be weeks like this.
Heat like this, with hot-take analysts suggesting the quarterback take a seat on the bench.
The Falcons (3-3) lost an eight-point game against Washington after two of their final three drives ended with picks by the second-year quarterback.
The other possession was rather ugly, too; the ball was turned over on downs that included a sack and two incompletions.
Was it accuracy or the play design?
Bad decisions or bad routes?
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
So, there’s little parts in that entire game – not only with myself but with the whole offense.
In rolling with a young quarterback, the Falcons knew there would be some turbulence along the way with this learning curve.
And the defense has improved, allowing them to stay in games.
Arthur Smith, the Falcons coach and play-caller, has fingerprints on this, too.
The Falcons’ operational process during the final minutes was a mess.
Atlanta probably uses as many personnel packages as any team in the league, which can help create matchup advantages but also requires frequent substitutions.
In any event, this stuck out as the issues piled up on Sunday.
Asked about the operational issues, Smith fired back with arithmetic.
"Two-thousand plays the last two years," Smith said.
They are all different.
I wouldn’t call that some catastrophic trend.
Now they shouldn’t happen.
But they’re all different, why they happened.
You identify the problem.
It’s what happened lately.
The mishaps on Sunday came with the game on the line.
"We can play this game all day," defended Smith, in his third season at the helm.
What about New York?"
"We’ve won a lot of games handling those situations," Smith added.
We’ve got to get it fixed.
This isn’t a trend, a runaway story.
Acknowledge what happened.
Smith pointed to the turnovers, maintaining that NFL teams this season have won just 6% of the games when committing three turnovers.
"Go back to Houston, and those guys executed pretty damn good," Smith said.
Ryan, the previous quarterback, was sometimes frustrated with the process during his one season working with Smith.
He summed it up as a matter of paying better attention to detail, yet he also acknowledged the challenges with communication….especially as the play-clock winds down.
It goes back to communication.
"He’s even-keeled," Pitts said.
Editor's note: Part one of a five-part USA TODAY series revealing why America hasn't solved its long struggle with Type 2 diabetes.
For chef Robin Ray, newly married with young stepchildren, the turning point came when a stabbing chest pain sent her rushing to the emergency room.
“I didn’t think you’d make it,” the doctor said.
The moments were turning points for all three to get serious about addressing their diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes, in which the body can’t properly regulate blood sugar, has become so common it’s almost considered inconsequential.
More than 1 in 10 Americans have the disease (though many don't know) and another nearly 4 in 10 are at risk for it.
In total, half of all adults and a quarter of teenagers have diabetes or pre-diabetes.
Its financial costs are astronomical.
The country spends more than $300 billion a year to address diabetes, accounting for $1 out of every $4 spent on health care.
And its personal tolls are even worse: heart attacks, amputations, blindness, kidney disease, double the risk of premature death.
It also causes what’s known as “diabetes distress,” the daily burdens and emotional toll of living with and managing a chronic ailment that can lead to regular dips in energy, foggy thinking and depression, and a sense of isolation.
The most frustrating aspect of Type 2 diabetes, experts say, is that it has long been largely preventable and controllable.
“We have made tremendous gains in understanding diabetes,” said Dr. Donald Berwick, a pediatrician and former administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Roughly 40% of people who died early in the coronavirus pandemic had Type 2 diabetes, a rate four times higher than people without the disease.
Even when elevated blood sugar levels are below the threshold for type 2 diabetes, the risk for heart disease jumps 30% to 50% compared with people with normal blood sugar levels.
(Type 1 diabetes, which accounts for 5% to 10% of diabetes, is caused by the immune system and is unrelated to diet or lifestyle.)
America’s failure to address Type 2 diabetes highlights larger problems with our food and medical systems, Berwick and other experts said.
A soda costs less than a bottle of water, a double cheeseburger and fries less than a carton of blueberries.
Patients wait months for medical appointments only to see the back of a white coat for the short time they’re allotted.
Treating disease costs society far more than preventing it but typically provides more profit for insurance companies, hospitals and the pharmaceutical industry.
The USA TODAY Health team spoke with scores of health care providers, researchers, community leaders and patients for this five-part series to understand why Type 2 diabetes continues to worsen in America despite known solutions.
The answer isn't simple.
It involves systemic problems facing everyone in society, not just those with diabetes: a food system designed to sell products; a medical system in which cutting off a leg is less expensive than saving it; the high cost of healthy living and the fact that breaking habits takes a lot more than just personal willpower.
This first story looks at what it takes for people to cope with or overcome the disease.
Then, we explore one community in a David vs. Goliath battle against a food system that fails to prioritize people's health.
More in series:Diabetes runs deep in rural Mississippi.
Locals have taken to growing their own solutions.
We next travel to Colorado, which has the lowest level of diabetes in the nation.
Yet even in this state, where hiking trails and gorgeous views abound, economic and other disparities make it easier for some people to avoid diabetes than others.
More in series:A diabetes disparity: Why Colorado's healthy lifestyle brand isn't shared by all
It's tough to manage a chronic illness in the face of high medical costs, scattered care and caregiver frustration and burnout, so we highlight that next.
More in series:The steep cost of Type 2: When diabetes dragged her down, she chose to fight
Finally, we explore solutions, addressing why it will take a combination of education, medication, medical devices and improved food access to solve this national problem.
More in series:Solutions exist to end the Type 2 diabetes dilemma but too few get the help they need
But it will take "sensible action" from across many sectors, including health care, science, nutrition, business, public health and politics to change the financial and other incentives that drive so many Americans toward sickness instead of health.
"If we do it incrementally or don't do it at all, we're all going to be toast in 50 years from diet-related illnesses and a depleted environment."
There’s no question personal responsibility plays a role in fighting diabetes.
They’ve reduced their dependence on daily medication and hope to have saved themselves the horrors of more amputations, blindness and dialysis.
They’ve extended their lives and improved the quality of that time.
But like many medical problems, the challenges of diabetes go well beyond individual responsibility and blame.
Agarwal recently led a series of studies in the journal The Lancet that looked at diabetes rates around the world.
Poverty, the studies showed, was a major driver of diabetes, along with racism and unequal access to healthy food and high-quality medical care.
Personal stories illustrate how these structural issues play out in the lives of so many Americans.
 “I’m healthy because of privilege – not diet, not exercise, not determination,” he said.
“It’s going to be all right after a while, as long as I keep this spirit,” he said.
Ray’s love for food began when she was 8 years old, watching Julia Child on TV.
During family gatherings, she would run around taking everyone’s dinner order.
Then she’d scurry back to the kitchen with a notepad full of scribbles.
Throughout her life, she made fried chicken, pork chops, baked mac and cheese, collard greens, and even a whole roasted chicken filled with wild rice and two sticks of butter – everything that made her soul sing.
In her world, food was home.
Food was family.
Food was love.
But that was some pretty tough love.
In 2002, Ray was diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes.
Her father, grandmother, aunts and uncles all had diabetes.
She knew what it meant.
“For you to tell me I can’t have ice blue raspberry Kool-Aid was like you shut down my world,” Ray said.
She didn't dwell on the diagnosis and continued with life.
Her culinary career took her to Italy, where she learned and fell even more in love with food.
She returned to St. Louis, got married and became a mom to her husband’s two children ‒ “beautiful bonus babies,” as she described them.
Through the years, she continued to express love through cooking and eating.
In 2015, a stabbing chest pain sent her to the emergency room.
Doctors assured Ray she hadn’t had a heart attack, but they warned that her life was on the line.
At 5-foot-2, she weighed 334 pounds and had an A1C, a measure of average blood sugar of 11%, well above the 6.5% cutoff to be considered diabetic.
Her diabetes – and her diet – were out of control.
She and her primary care doctor decided she would pursue weight loss surgery.
But she also decided to use her culinary prowess to transform her diet.
She reconfigured favorite foods, substituting healthier ingredients: Collard greens cooked in smoked fats or ham hocks turned into a kale, turnip and rutabaga recipe flavored with natural chicken broth fat, oils and seasonings.
She fostered her feelings into new recipes and brought them to North Sarah Food Hub, which partnered with Barnes-Jewish Hospital to make packaged, pre-made meals for St. Louis residents with diabetes and limited access to fresh food.
“I became excited about food again, and food became a joy.”
It isn’t always easy, of course.
Ray admits to an occasional cookie craving.
But now she takes the time to think about how her body processes that cookie and whether it’s worthwhile.
She hopes her cooking can help other people make the same transformation she did.
Her staff at North Sarah helps her create new recipes for others.
She wants to provide nourishment that allows people to avoid illness and medicine.
The lifetime risk of developing Type 2 diabetes if a parent has it is 40%.
If both parents have it, the risk jumps to 70%.
He knew he was at risk, but he pushed his luck, he said, by eating poorly during the pandemic and falling out of his exercise routine.
With the luxury of working from home, walking to the kitchen and bathroom was often the extent of his daily activity.
On Feb. 14, 2022 – Valentine’s Day – he went to an urgent care clinic, concerned his breathing trouble meant he had bronchitis.
His blood pressure measured 210 over 110, well above normal levels that top out at 120 over 80.
A chest X-ray showed fluid filling his lungs, leading to congestive heart failure.
The clinic sent him straight to a local emergency room, where he was diagnosed with a blockage of the left descending artery – a clogged artery made worse by diabetes.
If he had waited any longer, he would have had a massive heart attack, his doctor later told him.
After his release from the hospital, he went to the drugstore to fill his new prescriptions.
The pharmacist told him she couldn’t fill one because it would cost $1,000.
He’d have to wait until his insurance approved it.
“Please fill it,” he said.
She stressed the cost.
“Fill it,” he pleaded, putting the charge on his credit card.
Medication helped him lose 70 pounds in three months.
When his local drugstore ran out of the weight-loss drug, he easily drove to another pharmacy and then another to find what he needed.
His 100 hours of high-quality cardiac rehabilitation were fully covered by insurance.
He could devote all his energy to getting well because he didn’t have to focus on how to afford his care.
When they finally show up in the emergency room, “because they will,” they will cost the system far more, he said.
On the day Haynes stepped on a rusty nail in 2019, he walked all day as the nail pierced the sole of his sneaker and then his foot.
By the time he took off his shoe that night, his foot was infected.
He landed in the hospital for two months as doctors and nurses tried, mostly unsuccessfully, to get the infection and Haynes’ blood sugar under control.
By the time he was released, he knew enough about Type 2 diabetes to realize his daily blood sugar levels – typically in the mid-400s – were four times above what he had been told to shoot for.
But nothing he did or ate seemed to make a difference.
He had long since traded ribs for salads, beer for water.
His wife, Angela, barely noticed when James started wearing multiple pairs of socks, pouring powder on his feet and buying bigger shoes.
His feet tingled a lot, he said, but he was coping with it.
James ended up in the emergency room again, dehydrated and in need of antibiotics.
The doctor amputated the baby toe on his right foot, leaving a large open wound.
“I didn't like that we're not going to try to save anything, we're just going to start cutting.”
James was fading.
Antibiotics left him looking sickly, his voice so weak Angela could barely hear him.
“I felt like I was watching my husband slowly dying,” she said.
She thought it would take months to get James in to see the heart disease specialist, but the office called and asked if they could come the next day.
“We started looking forward to these visits because there was always hope,” Angela Haynes said, though she felt guilty they were taking up so much of the important doctor’s time.
Haynes had blockages in blood vessels on both legs.
Once he got the blood flowing again, Haynes began to feel better.
His flesh returned to its normal color.
The wound started healing at last.
Walking became easier.
Then disaster struck again.
On July 2, 2022, Haynes caught COVID-19.
"Everything went downhill after that," he said.
During his 13-day illness, the bacteria in his foot raged out of control.
Every week, a surgeon would come to the door of his hospital room and before even stepping all the way in ask Haynes whether he had decided to get his leg amputated.
I was born with this.
He was worried about how he’d get around, how he’d be able to work to support his family if he had only one leg.
No one took the time to explain why they thought the leg needed to come off or how he’d cope without it, Haynes said.
In late November, he was finally sent home in a wheelchair.
Back at the hospital, Haynes was told his foot was broken, essentially beyond repair.
He agreed to a below-the-knee amputation.
Released right before Christmas, he spent the next three weeks in bed wondering how he’d manage the rest of his life.
Finally, it looked as if his luck might be turning around.
With the leg gone, his diabetes improved.
His blood sugar dropped into the 120s or one-teens.
His blurry vision cleared up.
During his long hospital stay, he befriended nurses and learned about a program for people who needed prostheses.
The man who ran it called early in the year and said he had received a donated leg.
If it fit Haynes, he could have it while waiting for insurance to pay for a personalized one.
Miraculously, it did.
Haynes spent the next six months teaching himself to walk again.
The donor leg was heavy and uncomfortable.
He wasn't mobile enough to hold down a job.
One late spring night, picking up dinner at a nearby restaurant, he headed to the bathroom for a pit stop.
A sink had been leaking all day and Haynes slipped in the puddle, falling backward.
He's still recovering from the resulting wrist surgery.
He and Angela are living – barely – off her part-time salary as a secretary and a church organist.
Haynes has tried "at least three or four times" to receive government assistance, but they keep losing his paperwork, or not believing he's disabled, though he once checked himself out of the hospital and arrived at an appointment in his wheelchair to prove he didn't have a leg.
Still, he clings to his faith and the positive attitude he has long used to cheer up himself and others.
These are his secret weapons against diabetes and everything else life throws his way.
"I try to put a smile on other people's faces," he said.
"It keeps my day going."
This story is part of a reporting fellowship sponsored by the Association of Health Care Journalists and supported by the Commonwealth Fund.
Our goal remains the same: Provide book lovers with the best, most accurate snapshot of what people are reading by showing which titles are selling.
It is a master list, unbound by genre and format, of what’s selling broadly across the U.S.
Her novel "It Starts With Us" claimed the No.
1 spot in its first week, her highest debut ever, selling more than 800,000 copies on its first day of sales.
It was her fourth book to hit No.
1 in 2022.
The USA TODAY list is a ranking of the top-selling titles each week from a broad range of businesses including major chains, independent bookstores and online retailers.
It reflects combined sales of titles in print and electronic format, if available.
Our data team weighs and compiles those numbers to generate the week's 150 top-selling titles.
The rankings reflect sales from the previous Monday through Sunday.
The full list will publish online at 6 a.m. Wednesdays, with the top 50 titles publishing in print Thursdays.
The list, which began in 1993, went on hiatus in December.
It is the longest-running USA TODAY data journalism project.
In our continued commitment to bring readers more books coverage, USA TODAY is also excited to announce a new content partnership with The Novel Neighbor, an independently owned and operated bookstore in St. Louis.
They are expert booksellers and passionate readers who are deeply connected to what their community is reading.
With the partnership will come regular profiles of independent bookstores across the country, highlighting the important role of these businesses in their local communities.
Novel Neighbor will also be sharing expert book recommendations and fun takes on book trends.
We can't wait to see what you've been reading!
U.S. household wealth ballooned at a record pace during the pandemic as the government doled out unprecedented aid, Americans hunkered down amid widespread lockdowns and stock and home values soared, according to a Federal Reserve survey.
From 2019 to 2022, the median net worth of U.S. families surged 37% to $192,900, adjusted for inflation – the largest rise in the history of the Fed's Survey of Consumer Finances, which is conducted every three years.
Median income, meanwhile, grew a relatively modest 3%, and debt was fairly stable, the Fed said in the report.
During the pandemic, many households received financial windfalls from the government in an effort to tide families over amid widespread business shutdowns and 22 million layoffs.
That included three rounds of stimulus checks, enhanced unemployment benefits and a pause in student loan repayments.
From 2019 to 2022, the share of families owning stocks increased from 15% to 21%, the largest on record.
Median stock holdings fell to $15,000 from $29,000, but that’s because new stock owners held smaller portfolios than longstanding stockholders.
The share of families owning homes rose to 66.1% from 64.9%, and the median home value increased 24% to $323,200.
During the pandemic, millions of Americans left cities and bought homes in suburbs or rural areas, often purchasing larger houses to accommodate the increased time they spent at home and their remote work set-ups.
The large wealth gains during the pandemic likely have been pared back since last year, a trend that wasn't captured in the survey.
Stock prices have declined as the Fed has raised interest rates sharply to fight inflation and home values have fallen in many regions amid soaring mortgage rates.
During the pandemic, however, the gains were substantial and broad-based, lifting all racial, income, age and education and other groups.
Families that didn’t finish high school notched the largest median gain in net worth at 60%.
The net worth of Black families also rose 60%, the largest among racial groups, but their median wealth totaled $44,900 in 2022, still far below $285,000 for white people.
The bottom one-fourth of households by wealth experienced the largest jump, with their median net worth rising to $3,500 from $400.
The pace of the increase was progressively smaller for richer households with the top tenth posting a 26% rise to $3.8 million.
However, that still amounted to the biggest increase in dollar terms.
Among income groups, the wealth gain was largest (69%) for the top 80% to 90% of income earners and smallest (24%) for those in the bottom one-fifth.
Meanwhile, from 2018 to 2021, median income rose a relatively modest 3% to $70,300.
The gain captured government assistance such as enhanced unemployment and food stamp benefits but not stimulus payments, the Fed said.
A hefty 28% of families said their income was unusual in 2021, “reflecting the large imprint that COVID-19 and myriad pandemic-related policies left on the U.S. economy.” More families, however, reported lower-than-usual than higher-than-usual income, underscoring the pain inflicted by layoffs and a decline in working hours during the depths of the crisis.
Median income gains were concentrated among families with a college degree.
For those without a high school diploma, income fell 10%.
Income inequality widened as the bottom fifth of earners saw median income rise 5% while the top tenth notched a 15% gain.
Among racial groups, white families had the largest income gain at 16%.
Black and Hispanic families posted slight decreases.
As Americans moved to more sparsely populated areas to escape the pandemic, the income gap between those living in cities and rural areas narrowed.
Median income surged 14% for families outside metro areas, compared to 4% for those in metro areas.
Median net worth similarly increased more sharply for residents outside metro areas.
U.S. Capitol Police said Thursday that they arrested more than 300 protesters who held a demonstration inside a U.S. House office building in Washington D.C., over the Israel-Hamas war.
Police reported that the protest broke out at the Cannon House Office Building just before 1:40 p.m. Wednesday and shut down roads outside the building due to the demonstration.
Video shows demonstrators wearing black T-shirts reading "Jews Say Ceasefire Now" in white lettering shouting "Ceasefire now!"
Other footage shows the group sitting on the Cannon Rotunda floor clapping in unison.
Arrests took place in the Cannon Rotunda, police reported.
They were ticketed and released.
The rotunda was cleared by 5 p.m., police said.
The war:As war in Israel, Gaza rages on, President Biden is having a moment
On Oct. 7, a major Jewish holiday, Hamas militants stormed from the blockaded Gaza Strip into nearby Israeli towns.
The attack, which killed hundreds of civilians, stunned Israel and caught its military and intelligence apparatus completely off guard.
Israel immediately launched airstrikes on Gaza, destroying entire neighborhoods and killing hundreds of Palestinian civilians in the days that have followed.
As of Thursday, the war's death toll surpassed 5,000, making the conflict the deadliest of five Gaza wars for both sides.
At least 199 people, including children, were captured by Hamas and taken into Gaza, according to Israel.
The Hamas incursion came on Simchat Torah, a normally joyous day when Jews complete the annual cycle of reading the Torah scroll.
Israel declared war the next day.
Previous Israel-Hamas wars were in 2008, 2012, 2014 and 2021.
Israel-Hamas war updates:Biden says Gaza to get aid by Friday; US says Israel not to blame for hospital blast.
Reach her at nalund@usatoday.com and follow her on X @nataliealund.
On today's episode of the 5 Things podcast: USA TODAY Domestic Security Correspondent Josh Meyer looks at how an independent probe could help assess blame for the Gaza hospital strike.
USA TODAY Congress, Campaigns and Democracy Reporter Ken Tran gives an update from Capitol Hill, where Republicans are still struggling to agree on a new speaker of the House.
It's LGBTQ Center Awareness Day.
But some college LGBTQ centers are disappearing.
The Las Vegas Aces are WNBA champions again.
Podcasts: True crime, in-depth interviews and more USA TODAY podcasts right here
Hit play on the player above to hear the podcast and follow along with the transcript below.
This transcript was automatically generated, and then edited for clarity in its current form.
There may be some differences between the audio and the text.
I'm Taylor Wilson, and this is 5 Things you need to know Thursday the 19th of October 2023.
Today, a look at what an independent investigation into the Gaza hospital strike could look like.
And the House is still frozen without a speaker.
President Joe Biden has secured an agreement with Israel to allow humanitarian aid into Gaza.
That's as he returns home following a meeting with Israeli Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, in the wake of a strike on a hospital in Gaza City that killed hundreds of people.
Protests have erupted across the Middle East after the blast, with thousands taking to the streets in many Arab countries to condemn Israel's airstrikes on Gaza.
Many questions remain about the strike on the hospital, including who's at fault.
I spoke with USA Today Domestic Security Correspondent Josh Meyer about whether an independent investigation could help bring answers.
Josh, thanks for making the time.
My pleasure, Taylor.
So just starting here, Josh, what exactly happened in this Gaza hospital strike?
What do we know as of now?
Well, that's a good question.
We don't really know.
We know that a missile or some kind of ordinance landed on the hospital or at the hospital parking lot, killed several hundred people that were either injured and at the hospital or people seeking shelter there.
But Israel is saying that it was an errant rocket fired by Palestinian Islamic Jihad, which is another militant group in the Palestinian territories, along with Hamas.
Hamas and the Palestinians are saying that Israel did it and said that they did it on purpose, and that they had been warning people to evacuate hospitals and that this was part of that effort.
So the problem is both sides insist they're right.
Israel offered a lot more forensic evidence to back up its assessment that it was not responsible for the missile strike, including intercepts and public source information and satellite imagery, suggesting that the rocket was fired northbound from south in the Gaza Strip.
But this may be one of those circumstances where you need some kind of independent investigation to determine really what happened in a way that people believe.
And this is exactly what it would be if it was an intentional strike, it would be a war crime.
And he said that you need a dream team of forensic scientists skilled enough to look at the evidence on the ground and also that evidence that's been put forward by all sides, including Hamas, Israel and the Biden administration.
The problem is they need to be on the ground almost right away because the evidence will dissipate.
It's something that's not going to stay very long.
One option is the International Criminal Court.
Another option is the United Nations Affiliated Commission of Inquiry.
A third one is the International Commission of Jurists, which is based in Geneva, Switzerland.
And then there's also a Commission for International Justice and Accountability.
Well, it's going to be tricky, especially, Taylor, because of the politics involved.
Anybody Palestine, the Gaza authorities or Hamas or Palestinian Islamic Jihad recommends would be vetoed by Israel.
But Israel would likely contest that too because Israel is not a party to the ICC, nor is the United States.
And actually, in 2021, when the top ICC prosecutor confirmed the opening of an investigation into potential atrocities committed in the territories, Anthony Blinken, who was the Secretary of State at the time and still is, said that the US government firmly opposes that decision too.
Basically the Biden administration said that the ICC has no jurisdiction over the matter, in part because Israel is not a party to the ICC, but he also said that the Palestinian territories were not technically covered by the International Criminal Court.
And President Joe Biden has been visiting Israel this week.
We know he's said to give an address tonight about this hospital strike and there have also been mass protests surrounding this hospital attack and the conflicting answers after it.
Do we have any sense of what to expect from Biden's remarks on this?
Yeah, I mean, I think the sense we're getting is that Biden's going to talk about two things.
One, he's going to try to lower the temperature.
It's become so politicized.
You're seeing protests and threats and anger across the United States and across the world, so he's going to be trying to sort of talk to people and hope that level heads prevail.
But I think he's also going to talk about US funding for Israel and providing the Israeli government with whatever money they need to protect Israeli citizens.
And I think that we may expect that he will also provide some money for the Palestinian Territories, for the people there too.
The conditions that they're living in right now, especially with Israel's mounting response to the October 7th attacks, which were horrific.
But the Palestinians, according to reports, are living without food, easy access to water.
There's a lot of sickness going on and so forth.
Josh Meyer, thank you so much for your insight on all of this.
As always, my pleasure.
Federal prosecutors accused him in a 2010 indictment of hatching a plot to sell information about the location of Holloway's remains to her grieving family in exchange for $250,000.
He was extradited to the US in June to stand trial in the extortion case.
He was sentenced to 20 years in prison this week, but as part of his plea agreement, that sentence will run concurrently with his sentence in Peru on the murder case.
As a condition of the plea deal, he agreed to reveal how Holloway died and how her body was disposed of according to a federal sentencing memorandum.
Holloway was 18 when she vanished during a trip to Aruba with high school classmates.
Republican lawmakers again failed to elect a new speaker of the House yesterday after Congressman Jim Jordan lost his second vote for the position.
I caught up with USA Today Congress Campaigns and Democracy reporter Ken Tran for the latest.
Ken, good to have you back on.
Thanks for having me.
Ken, what exactly happened here?
Congressman Jordan, Chair of the [inaudible 00:08:06] for House Judiciary Committee, faced a first ballot on Tuesday at noon.
Here, he'd lost the first ballot, similar to former speaker Kevin McCarthy, who went through multiple rounds of voting.
Jordan lost that first ballot by 20 defections.
And Ken, who are the main holdouts at this point preventing Congressman Jordan from winning the vote?
What part of the party are we talking about here?
They span across a broad spectrum of the Republican Party but most of them are considered the more moderate Republicans who are namely upset with how the process has played out, especially the ousting of former speaker Kevin McCarthy.
These moderate Republicans, such as Congressman Don Bacon from Nebraska, he represents a Biden won district.
Congressman Steve Womack from Arkansas, he's a Senior Appropriator.
So these lawmakers are, one, against Jim Jordan, partly because of his more conservative credentials, but also because Jordan and his allies inadvertently have started a pressure campaign on these lawmakers to vote for Jordan and making them more entrenched in their views and opposition against him.
And who's Jordan's biggest challenger for the position at this point?
That's the problem we're facing right now is that there is no clear challenger.
His opponents are saying that Jordan will never be able to get the 217 votes necessary to become speaker.
At the same time, it's very unclear who else in the Republican Party can do that.
The most viable alternative talks right now is empowering the current acting speaker, speaker pro tempore Congressman Patrick McHenry, Republican from North Carolina, and giving him temporary powers to oversee more time-sensitive issues, such as funding the government by a mid-November deadline or passing a foreign aid package for Israel.
And Ken, what's happening at the house right now?
Is it completely shut down from legislative action while this happens?
House committees can continue doing their work, but otherwise, any legislation cannot go to the floor.
The House can only hold speaker elections.
But also the thing with Patrick McHenry is that we've never been in this situation before.
So anything that Patrick McHenry does as speaker pro tempore would set the precedent for anyone else in his position in the future.
However, McHenry has been resistant to the idea of being empowered.
He's laser focused right now, he says, on electing Jim Jordan to speaker.
So as far as we've seen, he's only overseen speaker elections.
There's a lot of hurry up and wait right now, Ken, what happens next here?
So Jordan will face a third vote at noon today, but we, again, don't know how many votes he's going to lose.
He's expected to also lose this vote, and it's also possible he loses more support.
If that does happen, we could see more GOP lawmakers start to urge him to drop out.
He's shown confidence that he will be elected speaker at some point.
We just don't know when.
So really just more waiting and seeing.
Ken Tran, thank you as always for making time for us on another busy week.
Thanks for having me.
Today is LGBTQ Center Awareness Day, a time to recognize the crucial resources offered by these kinds of community centers around the country and the world.
But some are disappearing on US college campuses.
And as it stands, there are only 250 professionally run LGBTQ centers on campuses across the country today, according to the Post-Secondary National Policy Institute.
That makes up just a fraction of the nearly 4,000 colleges and universities in the US, all while a fifth of college students surveyed in 2020 by the Associated Press said they identified as gay, lesbian, bisexual, asexual, queer, or questioning.
And there are concerns from some that new bills in Texas and Florida aimed at banning offices dedicated to diversity, equity, and inclusion, or DEI, could cut these centers even further.
Research shows that LGBTQ college students face persistent barriers to getting into college and staying there.
And advocates say the safe spaces afforded by these centers can make a big difference.
You can read more with a link in today's show notes.
The Las Vegas Aces are WNBA basketball Champions again.
They won their second championship in a row last night, taking down the New York Liberty.
Coach Becky Hammond, before the series, told her team, "This team over here was put together to take you out."
That was a reference to the Frenzied Free Agency last year in women's basketball, where several teams attempted to gobble up some of the biggest stars and make super teams, while the Aces relied on their continuity from the previous season.
They're now the WNBA's first back-to-back champion since the Los Angeles Sparks won it all back in 2001 and 2002.
And be sure to stay tuned to this feed later today at 4:00 PM Eastern for a special episode from my co-host Dana Taylor on the state of the nation's economy and how people are coping amid uncertainty.
You can find that episode right here, wherever you're listening right now.
Thanks for listening to 5 Things.
You can find us every day of the week, all year, on Google Podcasts, Apple Podcasts, Amazon Music, Spotify, or wherever you get your audio.
I'm Taylor Wilson, back tomorrow with more of 5 Things from USA Today.
No place was safe for more than 2 million Palestinians on Thursday as Israeli bombs slammed across the Gaza Strip, including parts of the Palestinian territory that Israel had declared "safe zones."
The intensified shelling came one day after Israel agreed to allow limited shipments of humanitarian aid into southern Gaza from Egypt.
"Israeli Air Forces continued to strike southern areas despite the directive for people in #Gaza to move south," the UN Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) tweeted.
The agency said at least 14 of its own staff had been killed and nine more wounded − adding that the "actual number is likely to be much higher" − in less than two weeks since a stunning, bloody incursion of Hamas militants killed more than 1,000 Israeli citizens and fueled military reprisals from Israel.
Israel Defense Forces says it is attacking Hamas militants wherever they hide in Gaza and has accused the militants of taking shelter among the civilian population.
The death toll of Israelis and Palestinians surpassed 5,000, making the conflict the deadliest of five wars involving the narrow, densely populated strip of land bordering Israel, Egypt and the Mediterranean Sea.
Israel-Hamas War newsletter:Sign up to get the latest news and analysis from USA TODAY into your inbox.
The aid deal struck Wednesday had included a stipulation that roads essential to the flow of aid would first be repaired.
South Korean officials, two experts on North Korean arms and an Associated Press analysis of weapons captured on the battlefield by Israel point toward Hamas using Pyongyang’s F-7 rocket-propelled grenade, a shoulder-fired weapon that fighters typically use against armored vehicles.
∎ The death toll in Gaza climbed to at least 3,785 people Thursday, the Gaza Health Ministry said.
Over 1,500 children and 1,000 women were among those killed; at least 12,493 people have been injured, the ministry said.
More than 1,400 people in Israel have been killed, mostly civilians slain during Hamas’ bloody incursion on Oct. 7.
The number of known hostages has crept higher almost daily.
A U.S. cargo plane arrived in Israel carrying the initial shipment of armored vehicles designated to replace vehicles damaged during the war, the Israel Ministry of Defense said Thursday.
Armored ambulances, trucks, and mechanical engineering equipment are expected to arrive in coming days, the ministry said.
The first delivery came the day after President Joe Biden's historic trip to Tel Aviv, where he pledged the U.S. would stand by Israel and provide whatever is needed for it to defend itself in its war with Hamas.
Biden also said he would seek congressional approval of an "unprecedented support package" to bolster Israel's defense.
Biden also pledged $100 million in U.S. funding for humanitarian assistance for Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank.
More than a million people have fled their homes in the Gaza Strip ahead of an expected Israel invasion that seeks to eliminate Hamas’ leadership after its deadly incursion.
Aid groups warn an Israeli ground offensive could hasten a humanitarian crisis.
About 300,000 Israelis have been internally displaced since the start of the war, the Times of Israel reports, citing Israel Democracy Institute research.
Most are from southern Israel in the Gaza border towns where Hamas carried out its murderous rampage.
President Joe Biden has made a sudden transformation from a political figure whose commitment to Israel was often questioned by conservative critics inside and outside the Jewish state to arguably the world's leading champion of Israel outside the Middle East.
Biden's actions and words since the Oct. 7 Hamas attack, capped by a dramatic visit to Israel on Wednesday, have been lauded even by many of Biden's biggest skeptics in Israel as he stands in solidarity with Israel and pledges "unprecedented" military assistance.
Read more here.
− Joey Garrison
Palestinian Americans are seeing two fronts in the Israel-Hamas war: one is the bloodshed in the Middle East.
The other is emotional backlash from bigotry and hate in the U.S. A U.S. Department of Justice hate crime investigation into the fatal stabbing of a 6-year-old Palestinian American Muslim boy in Illinois is one of several incidents of alleged hate being directed at Palestinian Americans, allies and people who look like them since the war began.
But at the same time, wants to show support and express grief in the war crisis.
Read more here.
Battle against hate:Violence, bigotry toward Palestinian Americans spiking across U.S.
The Israel Defense Forces, also known as the IDF, is the national military of Israel.
It has three branches: the army, navy and air force.
It was established in 1948, two weeks after Israel became an independent country.
Before the war began, the IDF had 169,500 active troops and was the 28th largest military in the world by active personnel, according to the International Institute for Strategic Studies' Military Balance 2023.
There were also 465,000 reserve personnel to supplement active military forces if deemed necessary.
Read more here.
More:Biden: Gaza to get aid by Friday; US says Israel not to blame for hospital blast.
The State Department designated Hamas a terrorist group in 1997, and several other nations also consider Hamas a terrorist organization.
In 2006, Hamas won parliamentary elections, and in 2007 the group violently seized control of Gaza from the Palestinian Authority, which was controlled by the rival Fatah movement that still governs the West Bank.
There have been no elections since.
The group calls for the establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel and believes in the use of violence to carry out the destruction of Israel.
Hamas receives financial, material, and logistical support from Iran.
So far, however, the U.S. and other nations have said there is no evidence that Iran was directly involved in Hamas’ attack.
Contributing: The Associated Press
WASHINGTON — About 15 minutes into President Joe Biden's Zoom call last Friday with families of Americans taken hostage by Hamas, a White House aide started to end the session.
But Biden wouldn't have it, according to one of the family members on the call.
"He actually wanted to hear from every single one of us."
The moment encapsulated Biden's sudden transformation from a political figure whose commitment to Israel was often questioned by conservative critics inside and outside the Jewish state to – right now – arguably the world's leading champion of Israel outside the Middle East.
Biden's actions and words since the Oct. 7 Hamas attack, capped by a dramatic visit Wednesday to Israel, have been lauded even by many of Biden's biggest skeptics in Israel as he stands in solidarity with Israel and pledges "unprecedented" military assistance.
Israelis last week displayed a billboard off a highway in Tel Aviv stating, "Thank you, Mr. President," next to Biden's image.
A billboard welcomed Biden to Israel during his visit Wednesday.
The praise showering Biden in Israel comes as its own leader, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, has seen his support in his country plummet in the wake of the Hamas attack and Israel's military response.
Although polling on Biden's popularity in Israel since the attack isn't public, a whopping 48% of Israelis watched Biden's White House address last week when he condemned the attack as "pure, unadulterated evil" and committed U.S. military aid to Israel.
"It really resonated in Israel in a rather unique way, especially given the leadership vacuum in Israel right now."
During his whirlwind stop in Israel on Wednesday, Biden met with Netanyahu, family members of hostages and compared the atrocities of the Hamas attack, which killed more than 1,300 Israelis, to the brutality of the Holocaust.
"The world watched then and knew, and the world did nothing," Biden said in a speech from Tel Aviv with American and Israeli flags behind him.
Biden cautioned Israelis "don’t be consumed" by the rage they feel today, warning about "mistakes" the U.S. after the 9/11 attacks in 2001.
Yet his backing of Israel was unmistakable.
"Israel will be a safe, secure Jewish and democratic state today, tomorrow and forever."
Biden, upon landing in Air Force One in Israel, greeted Netanyahu with a big hug.
The Israeli prime minister has faced criticism in Israel for the security failure that allowed the Hamas massacre to unfold.
Netanyahu met Sunday for the first time with family members of kidnapped Israelis amid criticism that he's not done enough to save them.
Former President Donald Trump – who took actions such as relocating the U.S. Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem – was widely popular in Israel during his presidency as well.
Trump and other Republicans aligned themselves with the Israeli right, pushing a wedge between Jews and their historic support for Democrats, while some liberals in Congress sought to reduce foreign aid to Israel.
Yet over the last week, Biden has received glowing reviews from conservatives who once criticized Biden's foreign policy with Israel.
While Friedman remains "deeply critical" of the Biden administration, he said "the moral, tactical, diplomatic and military support that it has provided Israel over the past few days has been exceptional."
Meanwhile, Trump stunned conservative Israelis with his comments last week blaming Netanyahu for the Hamas attack and calling leaders of Hezbollah "very smart."
Many have since blasted Trump's remarks.
Biden's actions have not been without harsh criticism among conservatives in the U.S. Florida Gov.
Ron DeSantis, a Republican candidate for president, slammed Biden for committing $100 million in U.S. humanitarian assistance for Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank.
"They say it's 'humanitarian assistance.'
"How are you funding them when they're holding Americans as well as others hostage?"
And Republicans and Israelis alike criticized the Biden administration over a deal to free five American hostages from Iran that included transferring $6 billion to the nation for humanitarian purposes.
The U.S. and Qatar reportedly agreed to freeze Iran's access to the money last week after the agreement came under fire from Republicans who argued the money freed up funds for Tehran to help Hamas' attack.
The Biden administration has said there is no evidence linking Iran to the massacre.
Still, Israel's support for Biden, at least for now, overshadows the pushback.
Ruby Chen, the father working to free his hostage son from Hamas, said Biden told family members on last week's Zoom call "nothing is more important" to him than seeing the safe return of American hostages.
As each family member spoke, a photo of their loved one flashed on the computer screen for the president to see.
The meeting ended up lasting about an hour and 15 minutes.
"It was a very emotional session where he also shared some of his personal loss and how he copes with it," Ruby Chen said.
Reach Joey Garrison on X, formerly known as Twitter @Joeygarrison.
Hamas invaded my brother's home:Now, my family is held hostage in Gaza.
TAMPA, Fla. — Jared Goff iced up back in June.
Or, more accurately, he let his teammates do it for him.
Then let’s start with the quarterback.
Not that jewels make a quarterback.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Stories forgotten, photos never seen, memories unrecorded: the eternal regrets of children after their parents pass on.
Three dollars and 15 cents, plus 41 cents tax.
With Halloween around the corner, it's a good time to look back at how a people used to capture family memories.
The Kodak Instamatic camera was called "revolutionary" when it hit the market in a huge way in March 1963.
The public and industry analysts alike loved the Instamatic for its simple-yet-sophisticated features.
Arizona State University police say they are investigating an incident in which a queer faculty member was confronted and injured on the school's campus.
An official with the conservative group Turning Point USA said late Thursday night that two of their "crew members" were involved in the altercation.
The incident occurred Wednesday afternoon in Tempe, according to police spokesperson Adam Wolfe.
Week 7 of the 2023 NFL schedule comes in light, six teams (Bengals, Cowboys, Jets, Panthers, Texans and Titans) breaking for byes.
But a decent slate of games kicks off Thursday with the New Orleans Saints hosting the AFC South-leading Jacksonville Jaguars.
No international games this week, so Sunday starts at 1 p.m.
ET with a juicy matchup in Baltimore, the Ravens facing the Detroit Lions in a battle of first-place squads.
The "Sunday Night Football" nightcap is the biggie, the Miami Dolphins (5-1) visiting the Philadelphia Eagles (5-1) – decked out anew in Kelly Green – in the latest candidate for game of the year.
Who's 6-1 on Monday?
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Gannett may earn revenue from sports betting operators for audience referrals to betting services.
Sports betting operators have no influence over nor are any such revenues in any way dependent on or linked to the newsrooms or news coverage.
Terms apply, see operator site for Terms and Conditions.
If you or someone you know has a gambling problem, help is available.
Call the National Council on Problem Gambling 24/7 at 1-800-GAMBLER (NJ, OH), 1-800-522-4700 (CO), 1-800-BETS-OFF (IA), 1-800-9-WITH-IT (IN).
Must be 21 or older to gamble.
Sports betting and gambling are not legal in all locations.
Be sure to comply with laws applicable where you reside.
That left a lot of explaining for his media session before Wednesday’s practice.
Survive long enough as an NFL quarterback and there will be weeks like this.
Heat like this, with hot-take analysts suggesting the quarterback take a seat on the bench.
The Falcons (3-3) lost an eight-point game against Washington after two of their final three drives ended with picks by the second-year quarterback.
The other possession was rather ugly, too; the ball was turned over on downs that included a sack and two incompletions.
Was it accuracy or the play design?
Bad decisions or bad routes?
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
So, there’s little parts in that entire game – not only with myself but with the whole offense.
In rolling with a young quarterback, the Falcons knew there would be some turbulence along the way with this learning curve.
And the defense has improved, allowing them to stay in games.
Arthur Smith, the Falcons coach and play-caller, has fingerprints on this, too.
The Falcons’ operational process during the final minutes was a mess.
Atlanta probably uses as many personnel packages as any team in the league, which can help create matchup advantages but also requires frequent substitutions.
In any event, this stuck out as the issues piled up on Sunday.
Asked about the operational issues, Smith fired back with arithmetic.
"Two-thousand plays the last two years," Smith said.
They are all different.
I wouldn’t call that some catastrophic trend.
Now they shouldn’t happen.
But they’re all different, why they happened.
You identify the problem.
It’s what happened lately.
The mishaps on Sunday came with the game on the line.
"We can play this game all day," defended Smith, in his third season at the helm.
What about New York?"
"We’ve won a lot of games handling those situations," Smith added.
We’ve got to get it fixed.
This isn’t a trend, a runaway story.
Acknowledge what happened.
Smith pointed to the turnovers, maintaining that NFL teams this season have won just 6% of the games when committing three turnovers.
"Go back to Houston, and those guys executed pretty damn good," Smith said.
Ryan, the previous quarterback, was sometimes frustrated with the process during his one season working with Smith.
He summed it up as a matter of paying better attention to detail, yet he also acknowledged the challenges with communication….especially as the play-clock winds down.
It goes back to communication.
"He’s even-keeled," Pitts said.
It's possible the NFL has never looked cooler.
That was perfectly evident Sunday, when the Tampa Bay Buccaneers became the most recent team to throw it back, breaking out their beloved – beloved?
But that throwback comeback will hardly be the last – and if you don’t already know what’s coming in Weeks 7 and 8, you’ll be thrilled to see other classic uniforms coming out of mothballs.
Even better, some fresh fashion-forward alternates are also coming down the pike.
Naturally, not every team is successfully leveraging the new opportunities the league has afforded with the use of secondary helmets and alternate and/or retro color schemes.
So let’s take this haberdashery interlude to do a deep dive on NFL couture and rank the alternate uniforms from best to worst:
But Kelly should always be an option in Philly’s palette, and its 13-year absence has been far too lengthy.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Of heroes come and gone.
On this bridge between eras, it’s up to all of us to pass the torch.
This is not a throwback.
It’s our heart and soul.
It’s a very nice offset to the attention-grabbing highlighter-green alternates.
“Old gold,” black and white looks good in virtually any combination – aside from those regrettable gold jerseys they tried in 2002 – whether in a callback to the team’s earliest looks from the 1960s or the monochrome white or black combos utilized in the current era.
They’re now 3-0 in the “White Bengal” presentation – which finally includes a white helmet – after it debuted last year and returned in Week 3 against the Rams.
But the Titans have finally gone back to their roots and will even be shoving it in the faces of their H-Town replacements, the Texans, in Week 15.
"It's been a long time coming," said Hall of Fame Oilers QB Warren Moon, who also hopes the Titans will get to wear the jerseys in Houston someday in appreciation of those fans.
They finally came to their senses and brought back their slick J-E-T-S logo from the 1980s in the “Legacy White” package they’ve already used to honor the “New York Sack Exchange” twice this season – including opening night.
After that, let’s maybe consider an entirely radical logo – which actually incorporates the silhouette of a jet fighter – and slap that on your crowns while scrapping the dopey Stealth Black helmet introduced in 2022.
When it comes to the extra uniform – forgettable throwbacks or gray Color Rush – they’ve done alternate in pretty much the most forgettable ways.
Very cool way to commemorate what’s already becoming a memorable season between the lines for the NFC North leaders, not to mention the franchise’s 90th year as the Lions.
You could argue – and I have – no club has better unis.
Not only that, since moving back to LA and updating their closets in 2020, they’ve given themselves so many mix-and-match scenarios, in addition to the royal blue and navy (with corresponding helmet lightning bolt) Color Rush options.
(For the record, love the navy and white.)
Let’s commend them for maximizing the use – three appearances this season – of the retro red helmets and original logo with the black, white and gold striping mix meant to honor both the University of Georgia and Georgia Tech.
At least we won’t be subject to those vile gradient alternate jerseys in 2023.
Little reason to mess with something that’s practically perfect, but their deviations work well.
The “Steel Curtain” era throwbacks won’t pop off the screen, but the 1970s number font style is the giveaway.
Pittsburgh’s all-black Dark Knight look is among the best alternates going – especially when you consider the mistake it would be to revive some of the club’s awful appearances from yesteryear, bumblebees, shoulder swatches and whatnot.
Sunday afternoon, they’re going to roll out their new “Indiana Nights” one-off for 2023.
Couple of thoughts here.
They’ve added black helmets because Indy fans allegedly demanded them, and they play into the nocturnal theme – fine … aside from the fact the Colts have zero prime-time games this year.
Otherwise, this is fairly boss.
The secondary logo – with the state of Indiana serving as the center of the “C” for Colts on the shoulder is a plus.
But the “heather pattern” used for the blue-on-blue uniform – golfers will recognize it immediately – really distinguishes this get-up.
Never too far afield, their alternates provide truly nice subtleties.
And keep your eyes peeled for the perfectly pleasing and pristine purple-and-gold alternates.
It’s not quite as slick as the retro Jets, but Sunday night marked this season’s first usage of the block GIANTS logo – with the white Color Rush road treatment – Big Blue used for the final quarter of the 20th century.
But the Fins will be kitted in their original unis in Week 8 and again in Week 16.
They’ll continue wearing the duds – with shaded jersey numbers – the 1994 Super Bowl champions made famous, sporting the red version twice this season and the white roadies once.
Their 2020 rebrand has aged fairly well so far – doesn’t hurt when you win the Super Bowl in your new threads.
Let’s issue belated credit for this season’s very clean uniform reboot, the whites (with a new dash of silver) especially evocative of their long-gone days in St. Louis.
The alternate all-blacks, plus helmet, that debuted in Week 5 still seem extraneous.
But, fine, whatever.
Cardinals can only be so badass.
Their latest rebrand has gone so well … that new ownership is already mulling yet another one.
But the alternate black uniforms topped with the black lids are the least-objectionable aspect – the usage of the D.C. flag on the right shoulder (in burgundy and gold) and back of the helmet the deftest touch.
They're one of several old-school organizations that’s never embraced hindsight or foresight flair especially well.
The green jerseys with gold numbers paired with green pants in recent years have been a marked step forward … but another could be taken with a fresh second helmet to top it off.
Never been a huge fan of their 1960s-era throwbacks, whether home or away – and they’ll sport both this season.
In Monday night’s win, they topped it with their alternate white-shelled helmet adorned with the current star insignia.
They added a black helmet to the wardrobe last year and have evidently decided it would look better atop their “Panther Blue” jerseys than as part of a monochrome blackout.
Low bar, but agreed … not that it’s likely to help them win a game.
What is it with 1995 feline expansion teams?
Thankfully, the Jags are finding their way back from the black-and-gold, two-toned wilderness.
But nothing inspiring, or especially objectionable, in their black and (mostly) teal look at present.
They’ve got multiple ways to mix and match their various (dark) colors, the best alternate the purple on purple with gold jersey numbers.
The original logo Baltimore used from 1996 to ’98 was one of the busier ones in NFL history … and might be fun to break out periodically for nostalgic purposes – especially if we could see those ugly black pants with the fat white stripe from the days of Ravens yore.
The NFL’s youngest franchise is also the only one to never change its crest.
Tradition – yay.
But last year, the Texans really stepped out by adding a metallic “Battle Red” helmet to go with the alternate jerseys branded the same way.
This ranking is more a penalty that they’re not doing more than interspersing the alternate red jersey and pants.
Let’s mix that grazing bison from the AFL days into heavier rotation and work up another lid – meaning something more imaginative than just taking the red shells from the 1990s Super Bowl teams out of mothballs.
For years, pretty much everything they’ve touched has turned to horse scat.
Extend that to their attempt at merging their history with an edgy look.
It returns in Week 16 if you were fortunate enough to miss it the first time.
Let’s acknowledge there isn't much to do historically for a franchise that opted for a hideous color scheme and no primary logo.
While on some level we appreciate the Browns’ decades-long holdout on helmet symbology, couldn’t we bend that rule in the alternate space?
Stick with the winged University of Michigan knockoffs – yes, the Bears briefly wore them first in the 1930s – and call it a day.
In my most recent overarching uniform power rankings, their iconic look ranked No.
And, as expressed elsewhere, it’s sometimes foolish to mess with magnificence.
But the Silver and Black are being ranked last here mostly to put them on notice while serving a complacency penalty.
The white Color Rush and white throwback jersey (with silver numbers) they’ve utilized in recent years are totally ... fine.
But there’s a real opportunity to take their sinister look to a new, Darth Vader-caliber level a few times a year.
Black helmets with a chrome Raiders shield?
Seriously, Mark Davis, what are we waiting for here?
Commit to uniform excellence!
Pulling on the red pants is as frisky as they get, so no alternates or throwbacks to assess.
And a team based in K.C.
As far as anything in the pipeline?
“I think we have a very distinct brand with the red and white, and I don’t anticipate steering away from that any time soon,” owner Clark Hunt revealed this year, saying he also wanted to honor the wishes of his later father – AFL and team founder Lamar Hunt – who wanted uniform continuity.
Follow USA TODAY Sports' Nate Davis on X, formerly Twitter @ByNateDavis.
Indianapolis Colts quarterback Anthony Richardson will indeed undergo shoulder surgery that will end his rookie season after just four games.
Richardson suffered a reported Grade 3 AC joint sprain in his shoulder during a Week 5 win over the Tennessee Titans and was placed on injured reserve last week.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
He threw for 329 yards on Sunday against Jacksonville, but committed four turnovers in a 37-20 loss.
Joel A. Erickson of the Indianapolis Star, part of the USA TODAY Network, contributed to this story.
An Oct. 17 Instagram post (direct link, archive link) claims veteran actor Arthur Roberts has secretly been Joe Biden’s body double.
“The title of the video in Arthur’s acting credit is ‘Joe Biden Sworn in as U.S. President on Inauguration Day 2021,’” a man says in an embedded video, as an image of a screenshot from IMDB.com appears.
It’s been erased.
The post was liked more than 300 times in a day.
There is no evidence that President Joe Biden has a body double.
Roberts has no association with Biden and has never appeared as him, according to the actor’s representative.
Roberts, an 85-year-old actor, has numerous stage, screen and film credits, according to his professional website and IMDB profile.
None of those roles involved playing Biden, and he has no connection to the president.
“It is not true,” said Kathryn Boole, a manager with Studio Talent Group, which represents Roberts.
Boole said this claim previously surfaced several years ago when Roberts was edited into pictures that were shared on social media.
The current version of the claim hinges on an IMDB entry that listed Roberts as playing Biden at his 2021 inauguration.
The linked page is now dead, and the credit has been removed from his profile on the site.
But an archive of the page shows it was on IMDB on Aug. 19 and taken down no later than Sept. 15.
Users can submit a request to add a TV or movie title or an on-screen credit to IMDB, according to its guidelines.
Those are supposed to be reviewed by editors before they can be published.
IMDB did not respond to a request for comment.
Boole said she had no idea how that credit was attached to Roberts and had no record of him ever portraying Biden in any project.
Baseless claims that Biden has a body double are not new.
USA TODAY has debunked claims that Biden died in 2019 and was secretly replaced by either his (non-existent) twin or an actor, as well as a claim that his body double revealed himself by signing documents with the wrong hand.
USA TODAY could not reach the user who shared the post for comment.
Lead Stories debunked an earlier version of the Roberts claim.
Thank you for supporting our journalism.
You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or e-newspaper here.
Our fact-check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook.
A second co-defendant with Donald Trump in the Georgia election conspiracy case, Sidney Powell, pleaded guilty Thursday to a half-dozen misdemeanors dealing with a conspiracy to interfere in the 2020 election.
“Miss Powell is at the vortex, the center, the hub of the alleged conspiracy,” said Gene Rossi, who handled Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations cases in his three decades as a former federal prosecutor and Justice Department official.
She was charged with tampering with election equipment in Coffee County, Georgia.
She pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit theft by taking and five counts of conspiracy to commit intentional interference with performance of election duties.
Powell agreed to testify in future trials in exchange for serving six years of probation, a $6,000 fine and paying restitution of $2,700.
Powell is one of 19 co-defendants charged in the case, which alleged a broad racketeering conspiracy.
Other portions of the conspiracy included the recruitment of fake presidential electors to vote for Trump despite President Joe Biden winning Georgia, lying about election results to state officials and in court records, and soliciting public officials to violate their oaths of office.
Legal experts said Powell's agreement to testify against others in the case is "very significant" because she dealt at length with Trump, lawyer Rudy Giuliani and others charged in the conspiracy.
Powell worked closely with major figures in the chase.
She participated in a news conference with Giuliani and co-defendant Jenna Ellis at the Republican National Committee portraying baseless allegations of election in November 2020.
Powell met with Trump at the White House, including on Dec. 18, 2020, to discuss having the military seize voting machines, which Trump didn't order.
“Rudy Giuliani, as if he doesn't have enough to worry about, should be very worried,” O’Brien said.
Powell is the second co-defendant to plead guilty in the case, after bail bondsman Scott Hall.
The other 17 co-defendants have all pleaded not guilty.
Powell’s guilty plea came days before her trial was scheduled to begin Monday.
Iowa state Rep. Brad Sherman took the stage at a Cedar Rapids auditorium as supporters of Donald Trump continued to file in, buzzing as they awaited the arrival of the former president.
Sherman began Saturday afternoon's program with a prayer.
"They've shot their lying arrows at him, Lord, without cause," Sherman said of Trump.
The prayers, often accompanied by a pledge of allegiance and the national anthem, provide a glimpse into how religious leaders and attendees channel their frustrations with President Joe Biden, their fervor for a candidate or their policy priorities through their faith — at a time when division and unease increasingly define American politics.
"But I would say that it's kind of a broader reflection on the culture as a whole."
Iowa caucuses:Track candidates' visits to Iowa
Sherman, who has endorsed Trump, believes both religion and politics "have drifted far away from what we were originally."
"Few people seem to think about the fact that if demons and demonic spirits exist, then that means angels exist as well," he told the Register in an interview.
"They're doing battle in the spirit."
The outcomes of those battles, he says, "often have a big effect on what's happening in the natural" world — including the results of the Iowa caucuses.
War in Ukraine, and now between Israel and Hamas in the Middle East, has lent a new urgency to those invocations.
At an event for Ron DeSantis on Oct. 8, the Rev.
Jeremy Higgins of Calvary Community Church, who said he had visited Israel 17 times, led a prayer in support of the country's military and civilians.
"Your word tells us to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, so Lord, we do that, but also the nation of Israel as a whole," Higgins said.
That uncertainty abroad, combined with a critical primary cycle for the future of the Republican Party and a large chunk of religious voters in Iowa, has prompted some to demand even more direct involvement in the caucus process from parishes and faith leaders.
They run from the word 'political.'"
In the eyes of many faith leaders, the crowd of presidential hopefuls is more than just politicians vying for support in the first-in-the-nation caucus state — they're "instruments" of faith, given "assignments" and "callings" to lead, and "serve the interests of God."
"Vivek, when you talk about being an instrument, and God using you as an instrument, that reminds me and my Christian faith of God using us as a vessel, is how we would say that," Chapman said as she introduced the candidate in West Des Moines earlier this month.
Candidates traveling through Iowa aim to position themselves as the best one to usher in that revival — attending church, shaking hands and courting endorsements from faith leaders, and emphasizing their opposition to abortion.
The former president, who generally speaks little of his own faith, is preceded on stage at rallies by prayer, and leans on his record and previous support among evangelical voters.
Sherman believes that "God does place assignments, callings" on people, and that includes candidates for elected office.
He's not concerned by those who don't believe in blending prayer and politics.
"You can take just the flip side of that and say, well, I'm uncomfortable with people that don't believe in it," he said.
"I will stand for people's right to believe whatever they want to believe, that's freedom," Sherman added.
"But I'm not going to be muzzled from telling what I believe."
Katie Akin and William Morris contributed reporting.
Reach him at gbacharier@registermedia.com or (573) 219-7440, and follow him on Twitter @galenbacharier.
During one of the busiest periods in the still early 2024 presidential campaign, White House hopefuls are making a civic pilgrimage to New Hampshire.
The Republican contenders are chatting with people at diners, coffee shops and bookstores.
Some are trekking to the state capitol in Concord to sign their name at a historic desk to be on the ballot.
Others are sharing their messages through several town halls and other stops, including a GOP dinner that happens once every eight years.
Voters have a message, too: some of you need to drop out.
"Let some weed themselves out, and those that rise to the top, you know, we’ll wait it out and see."
Whether Granite State natives or political tourists traveling across states lines to get a closer glimpse at the candidates, many are wishing for fewer options after what some called a disastrous second primary debate hosted by the Republican National Committee in California.
"The field was too crowded on that stage to get anything as a meaningful debate."
"I think that would be helpful for not only the party but also the country."
A USA TODAY/Boston Globe/Suffolk University survey of likely voters showed Trump at 49% with Haley, a former South Carolina governor, the closest rival at 19%.
The non-Trump voters say they are hoping one of the other Republicans can break through, but they are by no means certain that's possible.
In the most recent example, former Rep. Will Hurd, of Texas, left the race and endorsed Haley.
Haley, a former UN ambassador, has surged in the New Hampshire poll ahead DeSantis, the governor of Florida who was once held as chief alternative to Trump.
Norman Stuart, a veteran and retired machine shop worker, attended a Haley event at the Rochester American Legion last week.
He was impressed with her, but he remains undecided.
That provides a glimmer of light for the other Republicans, who hold out hope that despite Trump's strong standing in the polls, there are some signs the race is fluid.
Those surveyed in the Suffolk poll, for instance, are split 48%-44% when asked whether Trump's nomination was inevitable or whether some other candidate could win the nomination.
Nearly 4 in 10 said they might change their minds before the January primary.
But the Trump base is fiercely loyal, with 84% saying their minds were made up to back him and just 15% saying they might switch to someone else.
I don't like his personality.
"But he doesn't have any lobbyists telling him what he has to be or beholden to them."
Several of the Republican contenders are "too much" in the sense they brag about themselves or insult others.
She prefers the more somber style of North Dakota Gov.
Doug Burgum or former Vice President Mike Pence, who she describes as more "down to Earth."
Both men are in the basement of the polling at 1%, according to the Suffolk University survey.
Other independent voters, who can participate in the New Hampshire GOP primary, said they aren't sure what to make of the current field yet.
Chase, who identifies as an independent, said she has "deep concerns" about the country's partisan divide, and how, "this is the pool that we have to select from."
Many voters shared how they aren't crazy about the prospect of a Trump-Biden rematch in 2024, but don't see a way to change that probability.
Given its status as the "first-in-the-nation primary," New Hampshire draws a fair amount of out-of-state visitors.
Those voters said they were impressed with lesser-known candidates they had a chance to see in-person, but admit there is an underlying pessimism that makes it hard for others to take that contender seriously.
I didn't notice you before.
"It just doesn't happen."
People may not like Trump's "crudeness" or the personal attacks he makes, but they agree with him on many issues, he said.
They also think the criminal charges against him are politically motivated.
"It is what it is."
Republican Rachel Hannah Swift, 46, who comes from Hagerstown, Maryland said no one is happy with the prospect of a Biden-Trump re-match, and she has a unique response: Running for president herself.
Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell hinted Thursday that the central bank may hold interest rates steady next month amid rising long-term bond yields that could curtail economic growth, effectively doing the work of another rate hike.
At the same time, Powell said that an economy and labor market that continue to run hot could prompt the Fed to raise rates again at some point.
“Financial conditions have tightened significantly in recent months, and longer-term bond yields have been an important driving factor in this tightening,” Powell said in written remarks he planned to deliver at the Economic Club of New York at noon.
“We remain attentive to these developments because persistent changes in financial conditions can have implications for the path of monetary policy.”
The yield in the 10-year Treasury bond has shot up to 4.9% from 3.2% in March because of a stronger-than-expected economy that could push inflation higher and a large increase in the supply of Treasuries linked to federal government infrastructure and other spending.
That's the highest level since 2007.
The rise in Treasury yields has pushed up 30-year mortgage rates close to 8% and driven up borrowing costs for corporations.
Those developments will likely further dampen the housing market and hobble business investment.
“Given the uncertainties and risks, and how far we have come, (the Fed’s policymaking committee) is proceeding carefully,” Powell added.
The Fed has raised its key short-term interest rate by 5.25 percentage points since early last year to fight a historic inflation spike.
Recently, however, Powell has said the Fed will move more cautiously since the risk of failing to subdue inflation and causing a recession by hiking rates too aggressively are more balanced.
“Doing too little could allow above-target inflation to become entrenched and ultimately require monetary policy to ring more persistent inflation from the economy at a high cost to employment,” Powell said in his written remarks Thursday.
“Doing too much could also do unnecessary harm to the economy.”
Yet Powell also noted that economic and job growth have been surprisingly strong recently and that could stall further progress on inflation, which he said has fallen notably.
“Additional evidence of persistently above-trend growth, or that tightness in the labor market is no longer easing, could put further progress on inflation at risk and could warrant further tightening of monetary policy,” Powell said.
In a research note, Barclays said it expects the Fed to stand pat in November but hike rates again in mid-December.
Fed officials are slated to make a decision on rates at the close of a two-day meeting on Nov. 1.
Powell noted that the Fed’s preferred inflation measure, which strips out volatile food and energy costs, is projected to fall 3.7% for September from a peak of 5.6% in early 2022.
He also said the labor market is “gradually cooling,” with the number of job openings falling from record levels and wage growth easing.
Still employers added a booming 336,000 jobs in September.
And the economy has been resilient despite high inflation and interest rates.
Gross domestic product is expected to have increased at a healthy 3.5% annual rate in the third quarter, according to a survey by Wolters Kluwer Blue Chip Economic Indicators.
That follows growth of just above 2% the first half of the year.
 “The record suggests that a sustainable return to our 2% inflation goal is likely to require a period of below trend growth and some further softening in labor market conditions,” Powell said.
Cheetos has its own take on the traditional pretzels and cheese sauce snack: new Cheetos Pretzels.
The treat, now hitting stores, comes in two flavors: Cheetos Pretzels Cheddar and Cheetos Pretzels Flamin' Hot.
They can be purchased at stores nationwide for $5.69 in 10-ounce bags and $2.49 in 3-ounce bags.
Cheetos isn't a newbie when it comes to experimenting with new combinations.
Three years ago its Cheetos Mac 'n Cheese received a lot of attention and launched in three flavors: Bold & Cheesy, Flamin’ Hot and Cheesy Jalapeño.
Mac and cheese ... ice cream?
If you are a Cheetos junkie, there's more to explore among its other new limited release snacks.
They include Cheetos Flamin’ Hot Cinnamon Sugar Popcorn, plus all these different flavors of Cheetos: Flamin’ Hot Smoky Ghost Pepper, White Cheddar Bag of Bones, Cinnamon Sugar Bag of Bones, Crunchy Nashville Hot, and Crunchy Flamin’ Hot Tangy Chili Fusion.
Cheetos' parent company Frito-Lay decided to venture into pretzel territory because it found 63% of Cheetos consumers were also buying pretzels and that flavored pretzels have been driving 58% of the pretzel sales growth.
"Cheetos pretzels maximize the fan-favorite seasoning in each bite with the perfect product texture, ultimately bringing the Cheetos flavor experience to life in pretzel form."
What's everyone talking about?
Sign up for our trending newsletter to get the latest news of the day
Federal safety regulators are recalling tens of thousands of gun safes after they say a child died accessing a firearm inside of one.
According to the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) and Fortress Safe, the recall involves about 61,000 biometric gun safes because of a safety hazard and risk of death caused by a programming feature that, in more than three dozen instances, allowed unauthorized access to the safes.
"Consumers can believe they have properly programmed the biometric feature when in fact the safe remains in the default to open mode, which can allow unauthorized users, including children, to access the safe to remove hazardous contents, including firearms," the CPSC posted in its Thursday recall.
So far, CPSC said, at least one death has been tied to the issue that prompted the recall.
The agency said "it is aware of a recent lawsuit" claiming a 12-year-old boy died from a firearm obtained from one of the recalled safes.
The CPSC did not release additional details about the child's death.
As of Thursday, the agency said, there had been 39 incidents of consumers reporting their safes were accessed by "unpaired" fingerprints.
Drug, medical device recall:Family Dollar issues huge recall for over-the-counter drugs, medical devices in 23 states
Nine models are being recalled:
Retailers sold the safes, manufactured in China, from January 2019 through this month.
The safes sold between $44 and $290, the CPSC reported.
Check car recalls here:Ford and Mercedes-Benz among nearly 250,000 vehicles recalled
Consumer should "immediately stop using the biometric feature, remove the batteries from the safe, and only use the key for the recalled safes being used to store firearms," the agency said.
For instructions on how to disable the biometric feature and get a free replacement safe contact Fortress Safes.
Reach her at nalund@usatoday.com and follow her on X @nataliealund.
77-year-old Thomas Willard told Oregon Lottery officials he only plays when the jackpots grow to large amounts.
The convenience store will receive a $100,000 commission for selling a winning ticket.
"At our age, this is just about right," Willard told lottery officials of his win, which he will enjoy with his wife, Nancy, of 49 years.
Nancy was the one who discovered the win, checking their numbers online the morning after the drawing.
She initially thought they had won $100,000, but then realized it was the much larger $1 million prize.
"Wake up, you have to see this!"
Nancy told her husband.
Players have a year to claim their prize, according to the Oregon Lottery, which also recommend players to consult a trusted financial planner or similar professional in the event of a jackpot win.
Tickets can be purchased in-person at gas stations, convenience stores and grocery stores.
Some airport terminals may also sell lottery tickets.
Not affiliated with any State Lottery.
Visitjackpocket.com/tos for full terms and conditions.
Days at the beach.
It’s a perfect day – the crisp air, light breeze, warm sun – oh, and most importantly, your hair looks fantastic.
So what are sea salt sprays?
What are they made out of?
Are there any downsides?
How long do they last, and what do they cost?
We answer all of your burning questions about this handy styling product.
It’s not seawater.
But it does contain salt and other minerals like magnesium or potassium.
There’s also, usually, a fragrance associated with it.
These sprays are designed to mimic the way your hair looks after getting out of the ocean.
Since seawater contains a high amount of salt, so does sea salt spray.
The reason your hair gets curly after getting out of the ocean or using sea salt spray is that the salt pulls moisture out of the hair.
The result is that the hair strands begin to lift – just enough to reveal a slightly curly pattern.
It will stay put until you wash it out.
To rephrase: the minerals will stay on your hair until you wash it out.
However, the style will likely not stay put for more than a day without the use of a standard hairspray.
Is sea salt good for you?
How it compares to other salts and how to watch your sodium
It depends on the brand and the amount of spray you buy.
The range is generally $6 to $50.
Too much sea salt spray (or exposure to seawater) can dehydrate or damage your hair.
You can combat dehydrated hair with a moisturizing shampoo and conditioner.
Overall, sea salt spray is a safe and stylish choice for your hair!
So the strip came back with two lines, you may not be the first to know.
It's a commonly held belief that dogs can sense pregnancy.
Some say they even see changes in their pup's behavior before they even know themselves that they are pregnant.
So what, if there is any, is the science behind this?
To find out how much of this idea is fact and how much is fiction, we consulted an expert.
"Dogs have an absolutely incredible sense of smell," she said, so it's not out of the realm of possibility that with the hormone changes caused by pregnancy, a canine might be able to sniff out the condition.
She jokes that signs from your pup should not be used in lieu of a pregnancy test.
Do dogs dream?
In a sitting setting, which is where most of Bond Vet's clinics are located, clients have reported that after pregnancy, their dog would become difficult to walk, she said, trying to attack nearly every other dog that passed by.
She described the change in behavior mostly as "subtle things that other people probably wouldn't notice as a change, but because you know your pet well you would probably pick up on."
It's not out of the question in terms of pregnancy though, she said, saying some clients have told her as soon as they got pregnant their cat wanted to sleep on its belly every night.
Why is my dog throwing up?
USA TODAY is exploring the questions you and others ask every day.
From "Can my dog eat that?"
Head to our Just Curious section to see what else we can answer for you.
Cars making loud noises are never a good sign and are a particular hassle when the cause of the noise is a missing catalytic converter.
Catalytic converters are regularly targeted car parts, sometimes stolen right out of driveways.
This month, three members of a California family pleaded guilty to their roles in a $600 million catalytic converter theft ring, USA TODAY previously reported.
The theft can cause car owners headaches and up to thousands of dollars.
What are catalytic converters, and why are they stolen so often?
Catalytic converters are your car’s way of filtering out harmful engine exhaust pollutants.
This exhaust system converts pollutants (hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide and nitrogen oxides) into compounds that already make up our atmosphere (nitrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide and water).
Well-designed catalytic converters can reduce hydrocarbon and carbon monoxide emissions by about 90%, as well as Diesel Particulate Matter emissions by 25-35%.
These converters work by using metallic catalysts to drive reactions at lower temperatures than would normally be needed.
Per guidelines from the Environmental Protection Agency, cars made in or after 1975 have catalytic converters to curb pollutants.
Some states have even adopted stricter environmental protections for catalytic converters.
The California Air Resources Board requires CARB-compliant catalytic converters, which use an enhanced process to meet the stricter standards for curbing harmful emissions.
California and Colorado require all cars to use CARB-compliant catalytic converters.
The state of New York requires cars made in 1993, 1994, 1996 and newer to use the converters, and Maine mandates CARB-compliant catalytic converters for cars made in and after 2001.
Catalytic converter thefts are up:How to protect yours from being stolen
Reported catalytic converter thefts increased by 325% between 2019 and 2020.
The reason for stolen converters is the explanation behind any theft — money.
The rhodium, palladium and platinum used in these parts are valuable, and rhodium can go for $20,000 per ounce, according to the National Insurance Crime Bureau.
Palladium costs nearly $3,000 per ounce, and platinum costs about $1,128 per ounce.
Twenty-six states proposed bills in 2021 to prevent catalytic converter theft, with 10 states passing legislation.
If your catalytic converter was stolen, you may get an engine error code from your vehicle.
Because the converter muffles the exhaust sound, you also will notice a louder, unusual sound coming from the exhaust, TheMotorGuy.com reports.
While driving without a catalytic converter is technically possible, you may run into legal issues if you live in a state where emissions tests are required to use the vehicle.
Federal law also prohibits the removal of catalytic converters.
Prices vary when it comes to replacement converters because of the fit of the part.
These direct-fit converters can cost as much as $2,500.
How to jump start a car:Steps to get your vehicle up and running
USA TODAY is exploring the questions you and others ask every day.
From "What is a hybrid car?"
Head to our Just Curious section to see what else we can answer for you.
Electric and hybrid car sales are on the rise as the Biden administration proposes tougher greenhouse gas emissions for cars and trucks sold in the U.S. Nearly 98 thousand hybrid vehicles were sold in the U.S. in April 2023, which is up over 36% from last year, the U.S. Department of Energy’s Argonne National Library reports.
Even more popular are plug-in vehicles – over 105 thousand were sold in April 2023, a number that includes both battery electric vehicles and plug-in hybrid vehicles.
Here’s everything you need to know about the different types of hybrid cars.
These cars are appropriately named because they are a cross between a gasoline car, which runs on a combustion engine, and an electric car, which uses a battery-operated electric motor.
Latest car recalls:Nissan, Kia, Mercedes-Benz, Ford and more
This is because the extra power from the electric motor allows for a smaller combustion engine.
There are two main methods of designing hybrid vehicles.
Parallel hybrids connect the engine and electric motor to the wheels through mechanical coupling, according to the DOE, while series hybrids use the electric motor exclusively to drive the wheels.
Plug-in hybrid vehicles can be charged with charging equipment but also use other methods outside of electric charging to keep the vehicle running.
Other types of hybrid cars do not need to be charged at all and cannot be plugged in.
The battery in a hybrid car is charged through both the internal combustion engine and a process called “regenerative braking,” when the vehicle’s electric motor acts as a generator and captures energy typically lost during braking.
Switching to an electric car?
USA TODAY is exploring the questions you and others ask every day.
From "What are catalytic converters?"
Head to our Just Curious section to see what else we can answer for you.
One of the most worrying results was that not everyone is seen as having the same freedom to speak their minds on college campuses.
People said conservatives had the least freedom to speak, but they perceived problems of exclusion beyond just one group.
Asian people also were seen as having less freedom of expression than other groups, and respondents said campuses did the worst at providing an inclusive environment for conservatives, visiting speakers, Asian people and transgender people.
We see related problems for campus expression as people respond to the tragedies of the Israel-Hamas war.
Many students don’t feel free to express their views, and some universities risk chilling discussions on their campuses by taking collective positions, sending the message that there is one “official” stance and other opinions are not welcome.
That is a troubling trend in our polarized times.
We face huge challenges as a society, and we can’t address them fully if people at colleges and universities – our greatest engines of new thinking and innovation – do not feel free to challenge each other and pursue ideas and breakthroughs wherever they lead.
Sadly, just as the need for new knowledge and discovery becomes more acute, universities have been riddled with challenges to free inquiry from all ideological factions.
We find ourselves in something of a moral panic, from which neither the left nor the right is immune.
But we also see signs that the tide is turning, and fast.
Our survey found heartening public support for many aspects of free expression, including bipartisan resistance to state restrictions on what professors at public universities can teach.
Among the encouraging stands that universities are taking on free expression, Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, this year rejected a call for mandatory trigger warnings for potentially offensive course content.
In Northern California, Stanford Law Dean Jenny Martinez, who wrote an articulate defense of free expression after the disruption of a talk by U.S.
Circuit Judge Kyle Duncan, was appointed provost of the university.
Many schools – including our own – are launching new free inquiry and expression initiatives, while others have adopted the “Chicago Principles” on free expression.
Biden is too old.
Such bold moves are critical, but they go only so far.
To realize the potential of free inquiry we need an active shift in campus culture.
The project of free inquiry and expression is about much more than solitary acts of expression – it’s about unlocking the power of discovery and knowledge in the context of an academic community to address major challenges and promote the flourishing of knowledge.
Freedom of expression on college campuses is not the same as an absence of personal constraint on speech, nor is it grounded primarily on the First Amendment.
Universities are crucibles of truth-seeking, for faculties and students alike.
To advance that ideal, they must be places where students and scholars are challenged by alternative viewpoints.
Universities have it in their power to take concrete steps to build stronger cultures of free inquiry and expression, including:
Despite the challenges to free inquiry, we remain enthusiastic about the breakthroughs of human ingenuity and discovery that our colleges and universities will yet make possible.
They can’t happen soon enough.
Combining the remarkable burgeoning activity across the higher education landscape with the creativity and passion of Generation Z makes for a very bright future.
Doubling down on free inquiry and expression is the key.
Without it, universities will lose all that makes them distinctive.
Republican Rep. Jim Jordan lost votes on his second attempt to become House speaker, an embarrassing setback for a party that seems to specialize in embarrassing itself.
It’s clearly time for the Republican Party to consider an outsider for the role of speaker of the House, so in the interest of bipartisan helpfulness, I’ve prepared the following LinkedIn-inspired job posting they can use to identify potential candidates.
You’re welcome, Republicans, and good luck filling the position!
Who would vote for that mess?
The Republican Party is seeking an enthusiastic, qualified (or unqualified) conservative interested in leading a not-particularly-dedicated team of politicians in the U.S. House of Representatives through a time of ideological uncertainty.
The ideal background would be a person who can unite people with varying views on the importance of democracy and rally them to accomplish as little as possible while still yelling into television cameras in a manner that sounds serious.
Base salary: $223,500 a year
Perks include free flights on donor jets and a complimentary copy of Donald Trump Jr.’s book “Triggered.”
While the Biden administration was still floating trial balloons regarding support of Israel after the Hamas terrorist attack on Oct. 7, Florida Gov.
Ron DeSantis was making concrete plans to help get Americans trapped in Israel out of harm’s way.
More than 30 U.S. citizens have died in the war.
When times are tough, DeSantis is a guy you want to have on your side.
Last Thursday, he issued an executive order that authorized the emergency response to fly Floridians out of Israel.
In the order, DeSantis argued that the Biden administration had been too slow in its effort to get Americans to safety – and that commercial flights had been grounded given the violence in the region.
Just days later, on Sunday night, a flight of 270 Americans – more than 90 of them children – landed in Tampa on “DeSantis Airlines,” as some have dubbed the effort.
DeSantis was on the ground to greet the evacuees.
The relief and gratitude on the passengers’ faces were palpable.
And they won’t have to pay the state back – unlike U.S. citizens who call on the federal government to get them out of Israel (which is apparently customary in such instances).
Late last week, the State Department began arranging charter flights for Americans stranded in Israel.
More than 300 citizens have returned home to Florida, thanks to the governor – and Project Dynamo, the rescue nonprofit that coordinated the flights.
Florida is home to one of the largest Jewish populations in the world, as well as many dual Israeli American citizens with family in Israel, according to the executive order.
President Joe Biden should send DeSantis a thank-you card.
He’s not likely to, however, because DeSantis does actively want Biden’s job.
DeSantis as governor is impressive, as he has proved during several natural disasters in Florida, as well as effectively running the state government.
When things need to get done, that’s when he shines.
The presidential campaign trail and finding his voice on the national stage have proved more challenging for him.
After an initial surge in the polls, DeSantis has struggled to maintain his No.
2 spot behind GOP presidential front-runner and former President Donald Trump.
Bipartisan corruption scandals:Sure, GOP Rep. George Santos is bad news.
The Florida governor seems to be hitting his stride now, leaning into the leadership qualities that make him an attractive candidate.
We need less of the forced culture warrior and more of the capable governor.
DeSantis also is bolder in his attacks on Trump, and that’s a positive sign.
He called out Trump’s poorly thought out comments last week, when the former president slammed Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu for not being prepared for the attack and called Hezbollah militants “very smart.” It was supposed to be an indirect criticism of Biden, but was typical of Trump’s crass and cringeworthy style.
“Now is not the time to be attacking our ally,” DeSantis said in New Hampshire last week.
He added: “If you want to change from Trump, I think I’m the best leader.”
DeSantis’ ability to deliver hundreds of Floridians safely home from Israel is a welcome contrast with the chaos on display among Republicans in the U.S. House in recent weeks.
After a small faction of the party ousted Speaker Kevin McCarthy without having a clue whom they wanted to replace him, the House has been paralyzed in its ability to send aid to Israel after the attack.
Not to mention the upcoming fight over funding the government.
It’s all been a very bad look for Republicans, who should be poised to have a good year in 2024, following Biden’s lackluster presidency and Americans’ continued concerns over the economy.
And most important, conservatives must wake up from their Trump trance and move on to a presidential candidate who can ditch the drama and just do the job well.
Ingrid Jacques is a columnist at USA TODAY.
Contact her at ijacques@usatoday.com or on X, formerly Twitter: @Ingrid_Jacques
In the den of insanity, sanity occasionally wins.
Fingers, toes and elbows crossed the victory will hold.
The U.S. House of Representatives is so far saying "hell no" to the idea of giving Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, the speaker's gavel.
The House voted again Wednesday and Jordan lost again.
But the fact that Jordan has gotten this far shows Washington isn’t broken.
It’s smashed to bits.
It seems some in Jordan’s own Republican caucus has tired of his scorched earth politics.
He’s a Trump apologist and election denier who claims he never said the 2020 election was stolen, until he says it was.
“I don’t know how you can ever convince me that President Trump didn’t actually win this thing based on all the things you see,” Jordan told Fox News after the 2020 election.
He wants to impeach President Joe Biden because – no one knows why, beyond some vague allegation of dishonesty.
As a co-founder of the hard-line Freedom Caucus, he could name a fellow far-right member as speaker pro tempore.
He could assign plum committee assignments to his cronies.
He could craft a House leadership more beholden to Donald Trump than to the voters.
That’s even more disturbing when considering that if a Biden-Trump election were held today, Trump would likely win.
If the House remained in GOP control – a big if – then the system of checks and balances would crumble because the House would do Trump’s bidding, a frightening prospect because the revenge-seeking former president has vowed to go after his perceived enemies.
Americans can’t stand politics, as polls show voters have little regard for politicians or the government.
If you don’t understand the basics, how do you understand even slightly more complex topics that have a big impact on how government works?
How can you understand that the U.S. House speaker is a big deal?
Fortunately, the caucus beat back an effort to name Jordan speaker and defeated his “MAGA-see, MAGA-do” compatriots.
That’s not much of a surprise given the immediate objection to this candidacy.
Despite Jordan’s contention that he could unite the party, he and his supporters are treating the speaker election like a boxing match, seeking to pummel his opponents into submission.
Congress is a mess:Sure, GOP Rep. George Santos is bad news.
Let’s do it.
On the floor.
... You want to explain to your voters why you blocked Jordan?
It’s one thing to be a firebrand who loves to cause havoc.
Have at it.
It’s another to control the House and be second in line to the presidency.
The Republicans have gotten it right.
Let's hope they continue to say, "Hell no."
In excerpts of her upcoming memoir, shared by People, Britney Spears wrote that she became pregnant with Justin Timberlake’s baby and had an abortion because he wasn’t ready to become a father.
Spears’ statements underscore the benefits that male partners receive from having access to abortion care — an often overlooked aspect of reproductive health in light of Roe v. Wade’s downfall last year that, if ignored in society and politics alike, perpetuates the idea that abortion is solely a women’s issue.
“Abortion is a highly stigmatized form of healthcare, and women almost always bear the brunt of the stigma and shame around abortion,” said Bethany Everett, an associate professor of sociology at the University of Utah.
Everett, who studies the social and political implications of reproductive health, said Spears' claim that Timberlake did not want to become a parent suggests he was aware that a child could “derail his career,” a reality that “men rarely publicly acknowledge” but is critical to recognize in a post-Roe world.
Timberlake has yet to publicly respond to Spears’ comments.
Andréa Becker, a medical sociologist and postdoctoral research fellow with the University of California San Francisco’s Advancing New Standards in Reproductive Health program, said this example is “consistent with the literature,” in that “men don’t necessarily have to come forward and tell their abortion stories if they don’t want to.”
This pattern is due in part to a lack of research analyzing how access to abortion impacts male partners, a shortfall that Becker said “reinforces the way we talk about birth control, condom use and pregnancy avoidance as a woman’s responsibility and issue.”
“We just forget about the sperm involved in creating a pregnancy,” Becker said.
As a result, stigmas associated with abortion disproportionately impact women.
Data show that 1 in 5 men in the U.S. have been involved in abortion, which researchers say is likely an undercount.
Meanwhile, research has found that some men are hesitant to admit their involvement with abortion.
In a 2022 study, men were less likely to disclose the fact they were involved in an abortion during face-to-face interviews compared to an online survey.
In one of the few studies to analyze how abortion impacts male partners, Everett found that men who impregnated someone as a teenager were more likely to pursue post-high school education and graduate from college when the pregnancy ended in abortion compared to those that ended in live birth.
More on maternal health care inequities:Inequities in maternal health care access are not new.
They have deep roots in history.
“When men don’t speak up, the burden of having to make decisions about unplanned pregnancies and access to abortion falls exclusively on women — and that’s an equity issue,” said Dr. Brian Nguyen, an associate professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Southern California’s Keck School of Medicine.
Nguyen runs a research group called the EMERGE Lab that conducts studies aimed at ensuring men recognize their responsibility in women’s reproductive health and gender equity.
While questions still abound about what role male partners should have in the abortion landscape, it’s important to recognize the general lack of knowledge about abortion in the U.S., particularly among some men, Becker said.
Consequently, research shows many policy decisions now in place threaten the lives of women and girls who would benefit from abortion care, especially for people of color, migrants, people with disabilities, and those living on low incomes or in rural areas.
“They can donate to abortion funds and reproductive health care organizations, and, importantly, with the consent of their partners, acknowledge how abortion access has benefited them.”
This is the third story in a series exploring grief, how people face it, cope with it and heal from it.
Click here to read the first installment: This family went through an unimaginable tragedy.
How YouTube helped.
And here for the second: At 25 she found out she had the breast cancer gene.
Now, she's grieving motherhood.
Lisa Bowman had everything going for her − until she didn't.
The now 56-year-old was the global chief marketing officer for United Way.
United Way, an education, economic mobility and health-focused nonprofit, recruited her.
What should've been a dream job spiraled into a nightmare: she alleged she was sexually harassed at work, and more than 20 former employees of the company said "sexual harassment, discrimination and retaliation is commonplace," at the company, according to a 2021 HuffPost report.
The nonprofit fired Bowman in January 2020, months after she reported the harassment.
Multiple claims have been filed with the EEOC; United Way told USA TODAY it doesn't comment on matters of employment.
The CEO of United Way resigned as the chaos swirled.
But Bowman didn't just lose her job.
She lost much more.
"The loss of my job was really that loss of my identity," she says.
Grief doesn't apply to death alone.
And all can coexist.
(You can share yours with us at the bottom of this article).
"There's room enough in the world for all these losses, and one doesn't take away from the other," says David Kessler, grief expert and founder of Grief.com.
Bowman says her grief affected her as a woman: "When I talk about the grief over the loss of a job, I think for women, as we fight so hard sometimes to get to executive levels, and those C-suite positions, when we get there, that job becomes an integral part of our identity," she says.
"And so we identify very closely with our role."
She attempted to push through her grief – a "fake it 'til you make it" mentality – the same way she dealt with it at 26 following the death of her mother.
I'm missing out on all of those things, because of this loss of a job.
And that in and of itself – it's grief.
Bowman confided in friends and family in lieu of professional help.
While none could relate to her quandary, they listened to her.
Heard her cry.
Bowman previously had a 15-year stint in executive-level marketing roles at UPS but now freelances.
"It's made it very, very difficult for me to find employment," she says.
Another kind of grief: missed opportunities.
Bowman's grief is not more or less than any other type of grief.
"There's a context to think about it, as sometimes we approach grief like it's a pie," Kessler says.
But I need a lot of it because my spouse died.
Plus, "the emotions can be the same, regarding all kinds of loss," says Amy Morin, psychotherapist and the host of a podcast.
"Someone who lost their job may feel sad, anxious, and a bit disoriented, which might be the same feelings someone experiences when they lose a friend or relative."
Read next:At 25 she found out she had the breast cancer gene.
Now, she's grieving motherhood.
Today, Bowman's grief hasn't dissipated.
It's just that you get used to carrying it.
Sad:Her son died, and she felt alone.
In her grief, she found YouTube.
Catching a flight across the country or just having some trouble sleeping?
Many people turn to melatonin supplements in these instances for extra help catching some Z’s.
While melatonin does not have huge risk factors tied to it, every supplement can bring side effects if too high of a dose is taken or if used instead of prescribed medicines, according to the National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements.
Whether you are using the supplement to avoid jet lag or fight insomnia, or just want to sleep better, these are the side effects of melatonin and what to watch out for.
Side effects from melatonin are rare, but there is more risk involved when taking higher doses, explained Dr. Hal Alpert, telemedicine consultant for Blue Sleep.
Here are some of the side effects to be aware of:
If a person were to take much too high of a dosage, the following could occur, according to Alpert:
Additionally, melatonin can interact with other drugs, so it is important to know when to avoid melatonin depending on any other conditions, said Alpert.
“Melatonin can decrease the effectiveness of drugs for epilepsy and immune suppressive drugs,” said Alpert.
“You should avoid using melatonin in pregnant women, breastfeeding women, seizure disorders [and] depression.”
Melatonin can sometimes either raise or lower your blood pressure and make bleeding more likely if you’re on blood thinners, according to Alpert.
Here at Just Curious, we're looking into all of your questions.
From "Can cats eat watermelon?"
(The radio version, of course.)
The rhythm and energy of this song may match the excitement some feel for this beloved fruit.
People around the globe go bananas, for, well, bananas.
Most people are familiar with the sweet flavor and soft texture of the banana – but some may wonder about its nutritional value – like its upsides, its downsides, and if we can actually eat them every day.
Although bananas have many benefits, there are three main nutritional benefits that we want to focus on.
The main drawback of bananas is the sugar content.
Even though it is natural, too much sugar can lead to issues, particularly if you’re a diabetic or if you have weight loss goals.
It's a good idea to eat the banana before it gets all spotted like a leopard.
“Keep the portions small, have them with fibrous foods like vegetables, and/or pair them with a healthy protein or plant-based fat to increase satiety and dilute sugar concentration.” She gives some examples of what she does at her practice, “Some great pairings would be Greek yogurt with a banana or a handful of nuts with a banana.”
A seismic ground shift that will overtake movie theaters on Thursday, but first trembled Wednesday night, when Taylor Swift's "The Eras Tour" concert film made its world premiere.
More:Watching the world premiere of 'Eras Tour' movie with Taylor Swift felt like a dance party
After popping in to visit invited moviegoers in 13 of the theaters, Swift arrived at the one offering Dolby sound – the most effective presentation of this faithful-to-the-live-show movie – with a casual, "Hi, guys."
Swift stood at the front of the theater for a few minutes to express how much fun she's had performing during her Eras Tour and praised her backup singers and dancers, several of whom sat alongside her, pumping fists and singing along as the film unfolded.
"We pranced on that stage grinning because of what met us on the other side," Swift said.
Fans enthralled by the Eras concert will undoubtedly thrill at the opportunity to relive the magic and enjoy "The Eras Tour" as a communal concert experience more than a staid movie.
More:Taylor Swift rewards fans with 44 songs at Eras Tour opener: Inside her triumphant return
At just under three hours, the celluloid version of Swift's live spectacle is about 30 minutes shorter than her in-person performances throughout her six-month U.S. tour (her overseas dates kick off in November).
Her live shows offered an incredibly fulfilling set list of 45 songs – once she added "Long Live" to the rundown in July – and the film, directed by Sam Wrench, shaves off only a handful of tunes for a more efficient run time.
The concert footage comes from Swift's final U.S. shows of 2023 at SoFi Stadium in Inglewood, California – she played an astounding six nights at the 70,000-capacity venue – and the film pulls from her Aug. 4 and Aug. 5 dates for her customary "surprise" songs.
Swift opted for "Our Song" to "thank the people who liked me when I was a little teenager writing songs for my ninth-grade talent show," she says on stage in the film.
The entire film offers a front-row seat to the grandeur.
The staging is so massive that even the best seats in a stadium – and the King Kong-sized video screens – could provide only so much detail.
But on the big screen, the close-ups are glorious, whether zooming in on Swift's cat-eye makeup outlining her crystal blue eyes, the moss covering her piano and the sweat sticking to her bangs during "Champagne Problems" and her meticulous table setting at the start of "Tolerate It."
Among the performances, "Look What You Made Me Do" sizzles.
The detailed shots of the various Swift incarnations in glass cases spotlight the intricacy of the number, while Swift is in her snarling, sexy glory as the camera whirls around her.
"Blank Space" – already one of the meatiest songs in her extensive catalog – also receives a boost from Swift's uncanny ability to find the camera for a coy wink and to unleash her long-legged strut.
At the premiere, it was difficult to tell the screams from the crowd on film from the cheers in the audience, and throughout, several fans stood to sing and dance along.
By the time the show-closing "Karma" rolled out, the atmosphere felt like the encore at a concert, a joyful encounter full of love that indicated Swift isn't the only one having a blast at her shows.
More:Taylor Swift surprises fans with global premiere for upcoming Eras Tour movie
The 33rd annual benefit and tribute concert will take place at the Los Angeles Convention Center Feb. 2, two nights before the 66th annual Grammy Awards at the Crypto.com Arena.
In addition to founding and fronting one of the most successful rock bands in history, the New Jersey native and Grammy Award winner has long engaged in philanthropic efforts.
Nearly two decades ago when I formed the JBJ Soul Foundation and JBJ Soul Kitchens, I saw firsthand and continue to see today the impact of charitable community-based work.
Tables and tickets for the event are available for purchase at http://personoftheyear.musicares.org/.
More:U2 brings swagger, iconic songs to Sphere Las Vegas in jaw-dropping opening night concert
The company behind the program, on the other hand, said it was a tool used to help write closing statements, and a harbinger of major changes in the field.
Generative AI programs are capable of creating realistic text, images and video.
They're raising tough questions about misinformation and copyright protections as well as industry calls for regulations in Congress.
The arguments in the Michel case could preview issues to come as the technology makes a rapid advance.
The Grammy-winning rapper's trial was touted as the first time generative AI was used in a federal trial in a news release from the startup company that designed the system.
Kenner did not respond to a phone call and email seeking comment from The Associated Press.
The company, EyeLevel.AI, said the program wasn't "experimental" but instead trained using only facts from the case, including court transcripts, not musical lyrics or anything found online.
It's intended to provide fast answers to complex questions to help, not replace, human lawyers, said co-founder and COO Neil Katz.
He denied an allegation from Michel's new lawyers that Kenner appeared to have a financial interest in the program.
The case will likely be closely watched as more law firms adopt the technology, said Sharon Nelson, president of Sensei Enterprises, a digital forensics, cybersecurity and information technology firm.
A substantial number of firms are using it now, and surveys indicate more than 50% of lawyers expect to within the next year, she said.
"It's gone much faster than we thought," she said.
"The problem is, if you don't work with it, you're going to be left behind."
Michel was found guilty in April on all 10 counts he was charged with, including conspiracy and acting as an unregistered agent of a foreign government.
He faces up to 20 years in prison on the top counts.
He is free ahead of sentencing, which has not yet been set.
His other arguments for a new trial included the jury being prejudiced by being allowed to hear references to the "crime fraud exception" and "co-conspirators."
His trial included testimony ranging from actor Leonardo DiCaprio to former U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions.
Kenner had argued during the trial the Grammy-winning rapper simply wanted to make money and got bad legal advice as he reinvented himself in the world of politics.
It wasn't immediately clear when a judge might rule on the motion for a new trial.
The American Bar Association does not yet have any guidelines on the use of AI in the legal profession, though there is a new task force studying the issue, a spokeswoman said.
Using it for closing arguments is complicated because of the many factors that develop over the course of a trial, he said.
Generative AI, meanwhile, also sometimes produces "hallucinations," statements that initially read as if they are accurate but are not.
"A good attorney coming up with closing arguments will be mindful of basic goals of the case but also of the specific ways in which the trial has played out," he said.
Even as products improve, "attorneys that use AI should make sure they very carefully fact check anything they are going to use."
The next great cult classic movie might be this one, with identical twins, an eccentric mom and dad, a domineering lady boss, a flying vagina, sewer creatures and the Almighty.
“Dicks: The Musical” (in theaters nationwide Friday) is a polarizing, saucy and R-rated spin on “The Parent Trap” with F-bombs galore.
Rapper Megan Thee Stallion plays Gloria, the guys' money-loving manager, and “Saturday Night Live” regular Bowen Yang plays the narrator, God himself, who plans to include what Sharp calls “this insane story” in the Bible.
“It's just sort of the dumbest thing we could do.”
Are you prepared for “Dicks”?
Here’s what to expect from the year’s most bizarre musical:
Sharp and Jackson’s original two-man, 30-minute, way-off-Broadway show was born at Manhattan’s Upright Citizens Brigade Theater in the 2010s.
Back then, “the stakes were low,” Sharp says.
Jackson says they lost money on the show but by turning it into a movie – a much bigger lift – “we did get paid.” Sharp jokes: “I bought a boat for each of my six beautiful daughters.”
Bowen’s God is an omniscient narrator who ultimately becomes a part of the story, has several "fabulous" costume changes and is part of the big finale.
Seeking an addendum to the Bible is “such a clever, simple, elegant way to make his presence have some stake to it.”
Yang definitely had a different take on the role, in contrast to actors like Morgan Freeman and Alanis Morissette.
Bowen Yang on 'SNL':'Fuel up, do more' to fight racism against Asian Americans
Everything from “The Rocky Horror Show” and “Book of Mormon” to old Gene Kelly musicals were influences.
That brought a throwaway joke in the original show to diaper-clad life in the film.
Sharp recalls when Lane first read in the script that their names were, inexplicably, Backpack and Whisper, he laughed for five minutes straight at the absurdity.
“Go home and watch 12 hours of ‘Blue Bloods.’”
The conversation gets rowdy when awards season comes up: “Best actress for me and Aaron?” Sharp asks.
“Do the Oscars still do Best Gay Guy Comedy Duo?” Yet “Dicks” has a legitimate shot at the best original song with its catchy, often ribald show tunes.
But we're all for potentially seeing Megan Thee Stallion strut and twerk at the Oscars doing her movie showstopper, “Out-Alpha the Alpha.” “She was very down to clown,” Sharp adds.
As "Dicks" goes wide, chances are conservatives and religious folk won't love the lyrics of the finale number "All Love Is Love" – especially with the use of a certain gay slur in the chorus.
What Jackson's more interested in is "if it will make $1 or $2 billion," he says with a laugh.
"Honestly, in making this movie, we're only thinking about the people who get it and not the people who wouldn't," Sharp adds.
Week 7 of the 2023 NFL schedule comes in light, six teams (Bengals, Cowboys, Jets, Panthers, Texans and Titans) breaking for byes.
But a decent slate of games kicks off Thursday with the New Orleans Saints hosting the AFC South-leading Jacksonville Jaguars.
No international games this week, so Sunday starts at 1 p.m.
ET with a juicy matchup in Baltimore, the Ravens facing the Detroit Lions in a battle of first-place squads.
The "Sunday Night Football" nightcap is the biggie, the Miami Dolphins (5-1) visiting the Philadelphia Eagles (5-1) – decked out anew in Kelly Green – in the latest candidate for game of the year.
Who's 6-1 on Monday?
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Gannett may earn revenue from sports betting operators for audience referrals to betting services.
Sports betting operators have no influence over nor are any such revenues in any way dependent on or linked to the newsrooms or news coverage.
Terms apply, see operator site for Terms and Conditions.
If you or someone you know has a gambling problem, help is available.
Call the National Council on Problem Gambling 24/7 at 1-800-GAMBLER (NJ, OH), 1-800-522-4700 (CO), 1-800-BETS-OFF (IA), 1-800-9-WITH-IT (IN).
Must be 21 or older to gamble.
Sports betting and gambling are not legal in all locations.
Be sure to comply with laws applicable where you reside.
The Week 8 slate in college football features four Top 25 showdowns for our panel of experts to consider.
The Saturday headliner features No.
3 Ohio State hosting No.
6 Penn State in a highly anticipated contest with Big Ten and national championship implications.
Three of the other major conferences feature key games as well.
A share of the lead in the ACC is on the line as No.
4 Florida State hosts No.
In the Pac-12, No.
14 Utah visits No.
There's also the measure of the Trojans trying to get revenge for two losses to the Utes last season.
Speaking of revenge, there's a big one in the SEC as No.
8 Alabama hosts No.
The Crimson Tide lost one to the Volunteers in Knoxville.
This season, both teams already have a lost, making this a College Football Playoff eliminator.
Our staff weighs in on those key clashes, while also looking for potential upsets among the rest of the Top 25.
The Phoenix Mercury’s leadership could have just had T-shirts made up with a middle finger on the front.
The effect would have been the same.
Less than an hour before Game 4 of the WNBA Finals tipped off, no less.
It shouldn't be that hard to treat women as equals to men rather than objects to be patronized or, the other default, pitied.
Yet here we are.
This, however, is as far from right as it gets.
He’s apparently well thought of in the NBA, though not enough to get a head coaching job.
But he doesn’t know the women’s game, and it’s an insult to everyone to suggest that doesn’t matter.
Basketball is basketball, but there are different rules between the WNBA and the NBA.
As a coach, he’s got no experience with the different challenges the women’s game will present.
Challenges like pregnancies.
Injuries that are more likely to occur in women athletes than men.
If there was no one else out there who was qualified, the Mercury’s move could be understood.
For decades, women’s sports have been run by men who thought they were doing the girls some big favor by giving them a place to play.
First-class facilities, professional support staff and savvy marketing campaigns – what would women need with that?
A pat on the head will suffice!
Thankfully, most people have woken up to the fact that these are world-class athletes, every bit the professionals as LeBron James and Stephen Curry.
And the smartest owners have realized there’s a boatload of money to be made, if only you treat your women’s team the way you would your men’s.
It’s no coincidence the teams in the WNBA Finals were Las Vegas Aces and the New York Liberty.
Aces owner Mark Davis and Liberty owners Joe and Clara Wu Tsai have poured money into their teams, building dazzling practice facilities and, you guessed it!
Hiring the best coaches.
Men can coach in the WNBA.
As McGraw pointed out, 50-plus years after Title IX, more than 60% of women’s teams are coached by men.
But it has to be the right man.
Not some guy whose main qualification seems to be that he’s a "Girl Dad."
It also underscores how things have evolved since the former Stanford soccer goalkeeper died by suicide more than a year and a half ago.
On Thursday night, she will be remembered publicly again at Stanford’s campus in California, where she was a captain of the women’s soccer team when she took her life.
They have no plans to attend this year's event.
"We have, and always will be, fully supporting the Stanford Women's Soccer Program and the amazing young women of that team.''
The litigation between the Meyers and Stanford has grown increasingly combative, as reflected by court filings.
Both parties, in assigning responsibility for Meyer’s death, have accused the other of breaching duty of care.
Key evidence about why Meyer took her life at 22, just months before she was set to graduate, could be found on the mirror drive of Meyer’s laptop, according to court records.
Meyer’s laptop is relevant because of what her parents say it proves, according to court filings.
Their assertions center around disciplinary action Stanford took against Meyer in 2022, according to court filings.
School officials determined Meyer may have acted in retaliation when she spilled coffee on a Stanford football player in 2021.
The unnamed player, who suffered burns on his back that required medical attention, had kissed one of Meyer’s teammates without consent a week earlier, according to the school’s records filed with the court.
On Feb. 28, 2022, the night before Meyer’s body was found in her dorm room, she received an email from Stanford informing her that she was facing a disciplinary charge stemming from the spilled coffee.
According to a court filing, a five-page letter sent by email explained her degree was going to be placed on hold less than four months from graduation and the charge could result in her removal from the university.
“The actions of Stanford and its employees in charging Katie with a violation of fundamental standards over spilling coffee on a Football Player perpetrator of sexual assault without sufficient evidence was reckless, and wrongful and resulted in an acute stress reaction and her impulsive suicide.''
Stanford said the unnamed soccer player who was kissed by the football player without consent did not take the necessary steps to initiate a formal investigation, according to court records.
The school objected after months of delays following the Meyers agreeing to provide the mirror drive.
It led to the Sept. 28 order from Judge Frederick Chung of the Superior Court of Santa Clara that the Meyers produce the mirror drive in 30 days.
The Meyers agreed March 10 in responses verified under oath to produce the mirror drive but, according to the judge's order, "then backtracked.''
The Meyers later argued they never agreed to provide an "absolute mirror image of the decedent's computer'' and only "responsive,'' "non-privileged information," according to the order.
The judge wrote that argument is "baseless."
Meyer's parents say she reported suffering from depression and suicidal ideation at the time she was going through the disciplinary proceeding.
According to Meyer's parents, Stanford's handling of the disciplinary process led to Meyer's suicide.
Stanford, in response to the Meyers' complaint, introduced evidence it argues shows Meyer’s parents contributed to her suicide.
In February 2022, six days before Meyer was found dead, she rehearsed in front of teachers an oral presentation she would make to the class about her family relationships before she came to Stanford, according to a court filing.
This was cited as part of the school’s contention that Meyer’s parents "breached...duty of care."
A suicide note was recovered from the scene, according to the autopsy report, which provides no additional information about the note.
According to the autopsy report, Meyer had been diagnosed with Major Depressive Disorder and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).
The report, which cites a medical record review, does not say when Meyer was diagnosed.
No drugs were found in her body at the time of her death, according to the toxicology report.
Dougherty, the attorney representing Meyer's parents, said they are prepared to comply with Judge Chung’s deadline to produce the mirror drive by the end of this month.
On Tuesday, as Stanford was preparing for the women’s soccer team’s mental health awareness match, Dougherty said she has been working on an amendment to protect third-party rights in the release of the mirror drive.
We are not seeking to hide anything as it relates to the Meyers or Katie.
We have nothing to hide.''
There is no information on the setting of a trial date, according to Jessica Kellogg, communications program manager for the Superior Court of Santa Clara County.
On Thursday night, when Stanford plays Oregon State, Meyer will be recognized in a variety of ways, according to the school.
They argue it would have saved their daughter.
As they have all season, Stanford players will wear jerseys with a butterfly patch in honor of Meyer.
She loved butterflies.
If you or someone you know may be struggling with suicidal thoughts, you can call the U.S. National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 800-273-TALK (8255) any time day or night, or chat online.
Crisis Text Line also provides free, 24/7, confidential support via text message to people in crisis when they dial 741741.
A fire broke out on an American Queen Voyages cruise ship Wednesday morning in Portland, Maine, injuring one crew member.
Portland Fire Department crews arrived at 14 Ocean Gateway Pier shortly before 7:30 a.m. local time and received reports of an explosion in the Ocean Navigator vessel’s engine room, possibly related to a generator, according to a news release.
The ship was carrying 128 passengers and 82 crew members.
“PFD crews worked quickly to treat and transport one crew member with serious injuries to a local hospital,” the department said.
“Additional crews were simultaneously able to stabilize the engine room issue and remained on scene to assist with extensive ventilation efforts and complete overhaul to prevent any further issues.”
Cruise ship medical evacuations:Here's what to know
An American Queen Voyages spokesperson said the ship had a generator fire, but passengers were unharmed “and thanks to the quick action of our crew, everyone has been safely evacuated off of the vessel.” Guests are being housed in a hotel.
You can reach him atndiller@usatoday.com.
Travelers on a recent easyJet flight had to endure every passenger’s worst nightmare when the already delayed flight was canceled after a passenger allegedly defecated on the floor.
One passenger shared the moment it was announced the flight was canceled until the next day in a video posted on X, formerly Twitter.
“(Unintelligible) defecated in the front toilet,” the crew member said in the clip.
“So we’re now staying the night here.”
Learn more: Best travel insurance
More:'It's a party plane': Young man and woman caught having sex on flight to Ibiza
The pilot had just announced the flight was cleared to take off in 20 minutes when the defecation incident occurred.
While the plane was grounded for about an hour, he saw two passengers go to the restroom at the front of the plane.
Shortly after, a rumor spread in the cabin that someone had defecated on the restroom floor.
“It was just a very uncomfortable experience,” he told CNN, but it was likely an “accident.”
Passengers were given hotel accommodations and another flight was scheduled for the next day.
Kathleen Wong is a travel reporter for USA TODAY based in Hawaii.
You can reach her at kwong@usatoday.com.
U.S. Customs and Border Protection Agriculture Specialists at the Chicago O’Hare International Airport were faced with an unlikely situation after they discovered 15 pounds of raw goat viscera in the baggage of two passengers.
The incident happened on last Tuesday Oct. 10th.
The agency, in a news release, said that two passengers, who were arriving from the Democratic Republic of Congo, were referred to agriculture secondary for inspection.
A photo provided by the agency shows the internal organs of the goat as an officer holds up the body parts.
'Fierce argument':Woman throws cash at an airport worker after her mid-flight argument diverted the plane
The news release said that agriculture specialists seized the prohibited items and destroyed them to prevent livestock diseases and plant pests from entering the country.
She urged all passengers, whether entering or returning to the U.S., to be truthful about their baggage and declare all items they are bringing.
"If one prohibited item enters the U.S. it could have dangerous ecological or economical results," emphasized Sutton-Burke.
'Planned to make a necklace':Airport agents seize giraffe poop from woman returning to US
Meanwhile, this is not the first time that a passenger was caught carrying something unusual in their luggage.
Earlier this month on October 6, U.S. Customs and Border Protection officers in Minnesota seized a shipment containing a small box of giraffe poop that was being transported by a passenger returning home from Africa.
Officials with the federal agency working at Minneapolis–Saint Paul International Airport in Minneapolis reported a passenger returning from Kenya arrived at the airport on Sept. 29 and was chosen for inspection by border patrol agriculture specialists.
"The passenger declared giraffe feces and stated she had obtained the droppings in Kenya and planned to make a necklace," according to a press release from the federal regulator.
Reach her at sshafiq@gannett.com and follow her on X, formerly Twitter, @saman_shafiq7.
Mosquitoes on a plane:Video shows insects swarm airplane, delay takeoff in Mexico
UPDATE: This story has been updated with news that within hours of publication of USA TODAY's investigation, MSU suspended Coach Mel Tucker without pay.
Two years ago, one of the nation’s star college football coaches and a prominent rape survivor teamed up to fight the culture of sexual violence in sports.
Their partnership should have been a force for good.
Instead, it has devolved into scandal, with the activist accusing the coach of the same misconduct that both of them preached against.
Accusing him is Brenda Tracy, a rape survivor who has made educating athletes about sexual violence her life’s work.
Over eight months, they developed a professional relationship centered on her advocacy work.
Tucker invited Tracy to campus three times – twice to speak to his players and staff and once to be recognized as an honorary captain at the team's spring football game.
But their relationship was upended during a phone call on April 28, 2022, Tracy says in a complaint she filed with the university’s Title IX office in December that remains under investigation.
According to her complaint, Tracy sat frozen for several minutes while Tucker made sexual comments about her and masturbated.
His violation, she said, reopened 25-year-old wounds from her rape by four men – two Oregon State University football players, a junior college player and a high school recruit.
“The idea that someone could know me and say they understand my trauma but then re-inflict that trauma on me is so disgusting to me, it’s hard for me to even wrap my mind around it,” she told USA TODAY.
“It’s like he sought me out just to betray me.”
In his statements to the Title IX investigator, Tucker acknowledged masturbating on the call but said Tracy grossly mischaracterized the episode.
According to him, they had consensual “phone sex.”
Michigan State hired an outside Title IX attorney to investigate the complaint.
She finished her investigation in July.
A formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated the school’s policy banning sexual harassment and exploitation is scheduled for Oct. 5 and 6, during the Spartans’ bye week.
The stakes are high for everyone.
Tracy says Tucker is following through on a threat to ruin her career and reputation by painting her as a woman who mixes professional and personal relationships and files false reports.
She fears he will undo her legacy.
Tucker, who signed one of the most lucrative contracts in college sports history two years ago, could lose out on the roughly $80 million he is owed if Michigan State fires him for cause, which would be a stunning fall from the elite ranks of college coaches.
Reached by USA TODAY on his cellphone Saturday night, Tucker hung up after a reporter mentioned the case.
Hours after USA TODAY published its investigation, the university suspended Tucker without pay, pending a resolution of the Title IX case.
“This step, suspending Mel Tucker without pay, is … necessary and appropriate for today's circumstances,” Interim President Teresa Woodruff said at a Sunday evening press conference.
“These actions are not taken lightly.”
USA TODAY typically does not identify people who allege sexual harassment.
Tracy agreed to be identified and shared more than 1,200 pages of case documents.
Title IX, the federal law banning sex discrimination in education, requires schools to investigate allegations of sexual harassment that took place in the context of a school program or activity.
Such claims are inherently difficult to adjudicate because of many of the factors at issue in this case: a lack of eyewitnesses and recordings, the passage of time and the thorniness of litigating consent.
Adding to the uncertainty, the institution tasked with sorting out the facts is perhaps best known for missing repeated opportunities to stop one of the most prolific sexual abusers in American history.
Gymnastics and campus physician accused of sexually assaulting more than 300 female athletes under the guise of medical treatments.
He has been sentenced to a minimum of 100 years in prison.
Amid its efforts to rebuild trust among students, employees, alumni and the East Lansing community, Michigan State's leaders must now decide whether the face of its prestigious football program is guilty of sexually harassing one of the country’s most influential advocates against gender-based violence.
For some, how the university navigates the crisis will send a clear message about its commitment to progress.
“This goes beyond coach Tucker and Brenda Tracy,” said Jennifer Gomez, a Boston University professor who researches the effects of interpersonal trauma and violence.
“What happens here has the potential to be very healing or very harmful for lots and lots and lots of other people.”
Tracy and Tucker met in August 2021 during her first visit to Michigan State, after a mutual acquaintance introduced them.
Standing before a packed auditorium in the Spartans’ football operations building, Tracy told a gut-wrenching story of turning her pain into purpose two decades after filing a police report saying she had been gang-raped as a 24-year-old mother of two.
At the end, she challenged the “good men” in the room to use their privilege and influence to educate themselves and call out bad behavior.
By then she had delivered versions of the speech more than 100 times to at least 40,000 athletes and coaches.
Michigan State paid her a $10,000 speaking fee.
Tucker was in his second season as head coach.
A former University of Wisconsin-Madison defensive back, he had spent two decades coaching defenses for 10 college and NFL teams before landing the top job at the University of Colorado in late 2018.
Michigan State lured him away a year later by doubling his salary.
Mel Tucker's career at Michigan State: A timeline
Tucker and Tracy “hit it off” immediately, they would both later tell the Title IX investigator.
They bonded over their love of Jordan sneakers, shelves of which lined Tucker’s office walls.
Tucker had been moved by her speech, and she had been a big hit with players, he told the investigator.
They discussed her coming back to campus in the future.
Tracy left East Lansing feeling she had found a champion in Tucker, she told the investigator.
He seemed engaged with her cause, leading his players in signing her pledge to, among other things, obtain “ongoing, affirmative consent” before engaging in sexual acts with another person.
During that time, the two also talked on the phone at least 27 times, Tracy’s phone bills show – an average of once every two weeks for a half hour.
They often spoke at night to accommodate their work schedules, they said.
They chatted about their jobs and eventually more personal matters, such as their families, mental health and daily lives.
In November, Michigan State signed him to an unprecedented 10-year, $95 million deal that came fully guaranteed, even if it fired him for poor performance.
The only way he could lose out on the money, the contract said, was if he materially breached it, was convicted of a crime or engaged in “conduct which, in the University’s reasonable judgment, would tend to bring public disrespect, contempt or ridicule on the University.”
It was around then that Tucker, who had been married for more than two decades, started becoming interested in Tracy romantically, they both told the investigator.
Whether Tracy reciprocated is where their accounts diverge.
Tucker told the investigator that he and Tracy developed a romantic connection and talked openly about it.
They frequently made flirtatious comments about each other’s looks and bodies, Tucker said.
Tracy told him she wanted a “sugar daddy” who would pay her a monthly amount to be his girlfriend, he said, and that she would be “all over” him if he wasn’t married.
Tucker said they had acknowledged their mutual desire for a romance but agreed it would be “too messy” because of his marriage and the physical distance between them.
By contrast, Tracy told the investigator that Tucker’s romantic interest in her was entirely one-sided.
She said she came to feel he was less interested in her cause than in her.
Tucker messaged her photos of herself that he had found on her Instagram page, making comments such as, “This is the one,” or complimenting her eyes, Tracy said.
Once, Tucker called Tracy via FaceTime.
He was in bed, shirtless.
He talked about his unhappy marriage, describing himself as “more or less single.” Then, during a Nov. 9, 2021, call, she said he asked her, “If I wasn’t a football coach and if I wasn’t married, would you date me?”
Tracy said she responded that she would not because they worked together – one of several times she recalled trying to set boundaries.
She said she made clear to Tucker on a Dec. 1 call that they would only be friends, and he seemed to agree.
Then, after the spring game, Tucker called her four times, phone records show.
Tracy said he repeatedly asked her to meet him alone, without her assistant, and even suggested slipping into her hotel through a back door so no one would see him.
She said no.
Twelve days later came the call.
Tracy was in her home office in Oregon.
Tucker, who was in a hotel in Florida, called her at 12:39 a.m. EST, phone records show.
The call lasted 36 minutes.
According to Tucker, he became aroused when Tracy made a comment about needing to hit the gym more to look better without clothes on.
“Unequivocally, there’s no doubt about it,” Tucker told the investigator, case documents show.
“She was the one who said we’ll do it.”
Tracy denies all of that.
The call started off normal, she said.
But when she sent Tucker a photo of them together from the spring game, she said he responded by commenting on her buttocks and calling himself an “ass man.”
She remembered Tucker’s voice getting deeper and weirder as he continued talking about her buttocks.
She asked him what he was doing, and he said he had a “hard dick” and was touching himself.
“You’re touching yourself?” Tracy asked, according to the investigation report.
Tucker responded, “Yes.”
Tracy said she thought to herself, "Oh my god, this is happening, and I can’t stop it."
Eventually she said something along the lines of, “If you do this, I don’t ever want to hear about it, we are only friends, that’s it.”
When he finished, Tracy said, Tucker told her, “Thank you, good night, sweetheart.” She responded, “Yeah,” and he hung up.
Then she sat at her desk for a while, staring at her phone and crying.
Three months passed between the call and the next time Tracy and Tucker spoke.
At first, Tracy tried to pretend to herself that nothing had happened.
Tucker, however, was not responding to her text messages.
And he abruptly canceled her in-person training, planned for July 25, three days before it was supposed to take place.
A team staffer told her they had double-booked, but Tracy believed she knew the real reason.
When Tracy finally got Tucker on the phone about a week later, he was angry, she said, accusing her and her assistant of gossiping about his marital problems.
Tracy recalled that Tucker made comments such as, “I can’t trust you,” “If you say anything about this, I’ll hear about it,” and “I’ll be fine, it’s you that I am worried about.” She viewed it as a threat to destroy her reputation if she spoke out about him.
Tucker at one point told her he had done nothing wrong.
According to Tracy, she started to say, “Well, something…” referring to his masturbation, and Tucker interrupted, saying, “But nothing happened.”
Tucker recalled the Aug. 2 phone call much differently.
He told the investigator that Tracy apologized to him for discussing his marriage with her assistant, and he accepted.
Although they ended the call on good terms and discussed postponing her visit until next year, Tucker said he had lost trust in Tracy.
The training was never rescheduled, and they never spoke again.
Tracy initially stayed quiet about Tucker for the sake of her career, she said.
Ultimately, she decided that if she let it slide, she wouldn’t be the person she claimed to be – the one who encourages people to speak up about sexual misconduct and hold others accountable.
She filed her complaint in December – eight months after the call.
In dry and bureaucratic language, the record of that complaint begins: “The specific allegations of prohibited conduct against Respondent are as follows …” A notification was delivered to Tucker the following day.
Tucker was “absolutely shocked,” he would tell the university’s investigator.
In subsequent correspondence, he and his attorney suggested Tracy’s motive: She held a vendetta against Spartans athletics because of its history of sexual misconduct scandals and falsely accused him for financial gain.
“To say that I have learned from this situation is an understatement,” Tucker wrote in a letter to the investigator on March 22.
“I will never again allow myself to be duped by kindness.”
A former Indiana sex crimes prosecutor who now heads a private practice, she also previously worked in the Title IX offices at Michigan State and the University of Michigan.
Jacqueline Swanson, Tracy’s attorney who is also her friend, turned over a copy of the notes she took from their conversation on a yellow legal pad.
She shared a screenshot of a Dec. 2 text message in which Tracy told her she had just spoken with Tucker, who had agreed they could only be friends.
“I’m glad it didn’t get weird,” Tracy wrote.
Tracy provided phone bills and emails that corroborated her timeline of events and showed Tucker had been calling her from his personal cellphone.
Tracy said no.
In January, they sent a 12-page letter to the school arguing it lacked jurisdiction to investigate Tucker's “purely personal” relationship with Tracy.
“How far does MSU intend to go in policing the private conduct of its employees, and how does it expect its 20,000+ employees to react when they find out that they no longer have private lives outside the reach of their employer?”
Michigan State was not persuaded.
The alleged conduct would be covered by school policy, it concluded, because it took place in the context of Tracy’s work as a vendor for the school and affected their ongoing business relationship.
The case would go forward.
Tucker sat down for his interview on March 22.
He said he wanted to be transparent and set the record straight.
For instance, Tucker claimed he had made the phone sex call from home in East Lansing – not in a Florida hotel.
He had just returned from a trip to Florida, he said, where he had been doing charity work unrelated to his employment with the school.
An expense report Tucker submitted to Michigan State for his hotel and meal costs showed the trip's purpose was “administrative” and did not involve any personal travel.
The costs were paid by the Spartan Fund, the athletic department’s fundraising arm; he had flown to Florida on a donor’s private plane.
The information, Tucker said, made him question how Tracy “goes about her business.”
“I’m perplexed that Mel Tucker would respond to a complaint of sexual harassment by involving me or ESPN.”
Tucker did not identify any witnesses who could support his version of events, including his associate, whom he said he had promised anonymity.
That same associate, Tucker said, told him that Alvarado, Tracy’s assistant, had been gossiping about his marriage – a claim Alvarado denied.
Along the way, she had learned that one potentially rich source of evidence was missing: Both Tracy and Tucker had deleted their text messages with each other.
Tucker would tell her that he deletes his messages regularly because he receives so many; Tracy said she did so in a panic after their last phone call, feeling she needed to cut all ties with him.
At the hearing, planned for October, both sides will have the opportunity to present evidence and make arguments.
Another outside Title IX attorney hired by the school will then decide whether the evidence shows that Tucker likely violated school rules.
Among the witnesses who will be missing from Tracy’s witness list is her assistant and best friend, Alvarado.
She died in a car accident in June.
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
It was a private event thrown by the school to promote its migrant student services program, which provides financial aid and support to farmworkers seeking college degrees.
After the April 28, 2022, tour, disclosed in records obtained by USA TODAY this week, Tucker met with community leaders and alumni.
That night, Tucker would make the now-infamous phone call from his hotel room in nearby Naples, during which he is accused of masturbating and making unwanted sexual comments to Brenda Tracy, a prominent rape survivor and activist he had hired to speak to his team about sexual violence.
Yet, when Tucker met with the university’s outside investigator in March for his interview in the sexual harassment case against him, he insisted the trip was not work-related – a claim the investigator would disprove in her report.
It’s just one example of Tucker failing to keep his story straight at the most consequential moment of his career.
With his job, reputation and the roughly $80 million left on his contract at stake, Tucker repeatedly made false statements to the investigator and misled her about basic facts, such as his location during the phone call and the date it occurred, a USA TODAY review of more than 1,200 pages of case documents found.
Michigan State suspended Tucker without pay on Sept. 10, hours after Tracy went public for the first time with her story in USA TODAY.
On Monday, the school informed Tucker it plans to fire him for cause based on the conduct he had admitted to and the embarrassment he had caused the school.
Investigation:Michigan State football coach Mel Tucker accused of sexually harassing rape survivor
Although Tucker denied sexually harassing Tracy, he acknowledged masturbating on the call, saying he and Tracy had been in a romantic relationship and had consensual “phone sex.” Tracy said Tucker’s romantic interest in her was completely one-sided and that she had tried to set boundaries multiple times during their yearlong business partnership.
Per his contract, Tucker has until Tuesday to make a case for keeping his job.
Regardless, a formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated school policies against sexual harassment and exploitation is expected to proceed on Oct. 5 and 6.
He accused the school of conducting a “sham” hearing and having “ulterior motives.” Yet even in these written statements, the central details of his story changed entirely.
Tucker, who previously hung up on a reporter who called him on his cellphone asking about the case, did not respond to a message seeking comment for this story.
Tracy declined to comment for this story.
“Very often you’re weighing credibility based on little bits and pieces of information.”
“I believe a fact finder could assess these pieces of evidence about credibility and make a determination that Brenda is more credible than Mel,” she said.
“In my experience, a clear sign of a lack of credibility is generally taken very seriously.”
The school had informed him of Tracy’s complaint on Dec. 22, the day after she filed it.
Tucker was the only holdout.
Rather than tell his side of the story right away, Tucker and his attorney spent three months trying to stop the investigation, case documents show.
They wrote legal arguments urging Michigan State to drop the case and twice approached Tracy’s attorney proposing a settlement agreement.
Tracy said no, and the school pressed forward.
Only a handful of text messages remained; he and Tracy both told the investigator they had deleted their texts with each other in the months after the April 2022 phone call.
In his interview, which lasted 3 ½ hours, Tucker questioned whether Tracy had mixed up the date of the call.
He said he recalled being at his home in East Lansing when it occurred, but his own records showed that he had been in Florida on April 28, attending a charity function that was “absolutely not a University-sponsored event.”
His seven-page account told a different story – that he had called her while he was “alone in a hotel room.”
But by then she knew what he told her in the interview was untrue: she had already obtained records proving he had not been home in East Lansing.
An expense report he had submitted to the university for reimbursement of his hotel and meals shows Tucker flew to Naples, Florida, to attend a golf fundraiser hosted by The Greg H. Montgomery Jr. Foundation for Ultimate Growth, which raises awareness for suicide prevention.
It showed he stayed at the Hilton from April 27 to 29, that the trip’s purpose was “administrative” and that it did not involve personal travel.
He had flown there on a donor’s private plane.
The event was titled “Working to make dreams a reality,” according to an agenda obtained from the university by USA TODAY through a public records request.
The agenda features Tucker’s name prominently.
Tucker posted photos from the tour on his Twitter account.
That Tucker was on a university-sponsored work trip during the incident was a contributing factor in the university’s determination that it had jurisdiction to investigate, the investigation report shows.
Tucker’s lists of calls and text messages also were missing an important detail: They did not show any communication with Tracy on April 28.
He acknowledged in the interview, however, that he had not reviewed the lists before submitting them and that they may have been incomplete.
Tucker and Tracy did not speak in the three months after the April 28 call.
Meanwhile, their assistants were planning Tracy’s third visit to campus – an in-person training with coaches and players scheduled for July 25.
Tucker canceled that training three days before, the investigation report shows.
When Tracy spoke to him by phone on Aug. 2 seeking to find out why, she would tell the investigator in her interview that Tucker insinuated he would harm her career if she spoke about his conduct.
He never rescheduled her visit, and they never spoke again.
The cancellation became a key focus of the investigator – one of a series of alleged incidents that taken together would meet the definition of sexual harassment, which can include pressuring someone into engaging in sexual behavior for an employment benefit and threatening that rejecting such behavior will carry a negative consequence.
Tucker tried to distance himself from the cancellation in a public statement on Sept. 11, the day after Michigan State suspended him without pay.
“I never cancelled any presentation,” he wrote.
But that statement contradicts what he told the investigator.
Such timing would not make sense, he added, because most of his new players would not yet be on campus.
Tucker also told the investigator why he canceled the visit, blaming it on a scheduling conflict.
He said he had recently hired a mental conditioning coach, Ben Newman, who needed to implement his new program on short notice.
There was limited time in fall camp, Tucker said, and he didn’t want to “overwhelm” the players.
He said he decided to yield the time to Newman.
He had been meeting with them weekly since June 6, the records showed but held no meetings between July 15 and July 28.
One of Tucker’s assistants, who is a witness in the case, also told the investigator that Tucker asked him via text message to cancel it.
He said he was never instructed to reschedule.
Tucker confronted Tracy about the alleged gossiping during the Aug. 2 phone call, they both told the investigator.
Tracy said he berated and bullied her, repeatedly saying he could not trust her.
She said she told him she did not know what he was talking about.
During the Aug. 2 call, Tracy said she pressed Tucker to identify his source – the associate.
In her report, she wrote that he said he had “given (his) word that (he) wouldn’t divulge their name.”
Tucker never revealed the associate’s name to the investigator, nor did he identify anyone who could support his version of events.
In his Sept. 11 public statement, however, he lamented that the hearing would not afford him the opportunity to “offer any substantive evidence of innocence.”
It was not the only claim he attributed to his anonymous associate.
It turned out to be yet another falsehood.
“Neither the organization nor Tracy is or has been the target of any investigative reporting.”
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
Contributing: USA TODAY reporter Steve Berkowitz.
The bullets came in plywood crates.
Any given box was about the size of a small microwave oven.
The printed label stuck to each one demonstrated a militaristic brevity.
“CARTRIDGES FOR WEAPONS, INERT PROJECTILE,” next to a bright yellow hazmat sticker, “EXPLOSIVES.”
Inside the boxes: drab green steel cans of .50-caliber ammunition.
Each round was giant, more than 5 inches long, built to be fired from a gun so big it is typically bolted to a truck.
The bullets were clipped together in long strands for rapid, machine-gun fire.
By the time Bill Brown got to the boxes, they sat double-stacked eight high atop wooden pallets inside a Missouri warehouse.
The pallets went on, row after row.
Three million bullets in all.
It was enough ammunition to feed a single machine gun – if fired nonstop at its rated speed eight hours a day, seven days a week – for almost six months.
Brown’s job was to get it out of there and toward the Ukrainian front lines.
The faster, the better.
“War is bad,” Brown said.
There would be virtually no public record of this Ukrainian arms shipment.
As a weapons dealer, Brown’s company would deliver the bullets under a system known as a direct commercial sale.
Instead, it was part of a shadowy system of brokers, exporters, arms dealers and country-to-country transfers that has become one part of the race to meet demand on distant battlefields.
President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said the effort was delayed in part by the wait for more arms.
Most of America’s $44 billion in documented support to Ukraine came in the form of old U.S. military stock, donated directly by the federal government.
In general, commercial sales over $14 million, and sales of military-grade weaponry like mortars or missiles, require State Department approval and congressional notification.
But other aid comes via private sales.
More than 14,000 U.S. entities are registered to conduct defense trade activities.
Their deals are monitored by an alphabet soup of agencies including Departments of Homeland Security, Commerce, Defense and the Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
Trade secrecy clauses in federal law mean this flow of gear, weapons and ammunition is almost never revealed to the public.
Brown, who works for a small Nevada-based logistics company called Battle Born Munitions, provided USA TODAY with a rare look behind the curtain of these private sales.
Details about the shipment were verified by his employer and the European government that made the purchase.
State Department officials declined to answer questions about the specific shipment Brown described.
This March sale and the secret number of other shipments like it fuel Ukraine’s fight against a Russian invasion.
Those sales also release an unknown amount of weaponry into the world.
What becomes of that weaponry after it’s sold – and especially after it’s delivered – is difficult to track.
As Brown surveyed the warehouse in Missouri, a crew steered forklifts and skid lifts among the stacks of plain wooden boxes.
From high in the trusses, suspended lamp fixtures bathed the boxes in artificial daylight.
Brown lifted his camera and started snapping photos.
In just a few hours, he and his cargo would be boarding a jumbo jet.
From Ukraine:War crimes in Ukraine may be unprecedented.
So is the country's push for swift justice.
The bullets had once been bound for Saudi Arabia.
Lot number SMQ19K401L026 had rolled off the assembly line in 2019 at Lake City Army Ammunition Plant near Kansas City.
Lake City, owned by the government and run by a contractor, sprawls across nearly 4,000 acres of green Missouri farmland.
Roads curve past World War II-era bunkers known as igloos, spaced out amid the countryside – far enough apart that an explosion in one won’t trigger a chain reaction in the others.
Lake City has been pumping out ammunition almost without pause since 1941.
It is the largest small-arms manufacturing plant in the world.
And in 2019, Saudi Arabia was stocking up on weapons during the Trump administration, fueling the war in Yemen and other conflicts that drew criticism from congressional Democrats.
The plant manufactures .50-caliber ammunition on a rolling basis, for both military and commercial buyers.
That’s a testament to just what a legend the bullet – and the gun that shoots it – has become.
In 2019, the technology was already a century old.
The .50 caliber was the brainchild of American gunsmith John Browning during World War I.
Built to respond to German anti-tank rifles, the M2 was first tested in 1918, and it entered widespread service in 1923.
It earned the nickname “Ma Deuce” and has served in combat ever since, bolted to trucks, ships, planes and handheld stands on the battlefield.
The .50-caliber rounds – named for their diameter, about half an inch – can easily hit targets more than a mile away.
At closer ranges, they will blast through solid concrete or armored vehicles.
The gun can fire at a sustained rate of about 40 shots per minute.
Military setups use strings of “linked” ammunition to feed into machine guns.
Spaced out after every fourth bullet, so-called tracer rounds have small pyrotechnic charges that illuminate the line of fire, aiding in targeting.
The gun’s longevity and versatility made it popular for militaries the world over.
But this particular batch of bullets wouldn’t end up being sold to Saudi Arabia.
The Biden administration put a temporary freeze on sales to the Saudi government in 2021 as it reviewed weapons deals approved under Donald Trump.
Instead, Brown said, the bullets were sold to a U.S. ammunition provider, only to be held up again.
Ultimately, they were mothballed.
Then, in spring 2023, the bullets found a buyer, or actually two: first Battle Born; ultimately, the Netherlands.
The European country, a NATO ally, needed a big supply of ammunition.
It wouldn’t be keeping the bullets but giving them to Ukraine.
Its purchase, essentially a donation, would count toward the country’s required NATO contribution.
Brown had a line on exactly what they needed.
It was sitting in the warehouse in Missouri.
He arrived in March to personally oversee the shipment.
As he prepped for delivery, Brown dropped tiny black tracking devices onto several of the pallets.
Just $55 apiece, the units use GPS and cell signals to keep tabs on the load.
The idea was to ensure it wouldn’t fall into the wrong hands.
But packing up the bullets was just the beginning.
As with anything that’s deadly and made of metal, the shipping costs can be extreme.
Forty-five to 60 days on a ship?
Brown – or Chief Bill, as he prefers – is a no-nonsense 35-year veteran of the U.S. Army and former helicopter pilot.
He retired as a chief warrant officer and lives in Orlando.
Now 59, he still spends a lot of time on the road – 10 international trips this year.
He says his arms logistics work takes him to places most Americans would rather avoid – near the Syrian border or to unstable regions of Iraq.
He’ll travel halfway around the world, he quips, “have some soup, and go back to Warsaw to head home.” The trips aren’t really about the destinations.
They’re about the cargo.
On that spring day in Missouri, forklifts carefully loaded 107 pallets of the ammo onto 18 flatbed semitrailers.
They’d all make the eight-hour drive to O’Hare International Airport.
In Chicago, two Boeing 747-400s operated by National Airlines would be ready for the freight.
Four pallets each were stacked and shrink-wrapped to create “air pallets” or “cookie sheets” weighing 12,800 pounds.
Each plane could carry up to 17 of the pallets that ran the length of each plane secured by white cargo netting.
Flight records Brown provided show the two planes departed about seven hours apart, one in early afternoon, one after dark.
The flight would take nine hours.
Brown wasn’t going to the Netherlands, even though it was the buyer.
The planes were bound for Rzeszów, Poland.
The ancient city sits at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains in southeastern Poland.
It has a gleaming modern airport next to a major east-west freeway.
From there, it’s barely 60 miles to the border with Ukraine.
It was an expensive journey.
The trucking company’s bill for those 18 semis?
Chartering the two 747s?
But this shipment of .50-cal rounds was profitable for Battle Born Munitions, according to Brown.
The company purchased the 3 million rounds from Northrop Grumman at a bargain and resold them for more than double the price.
(In subsequent interviews, representatives at BBM disputed the specific totals Brown mentioned, saying the accurate figures were protected by “various commercial and government non-disclosure agreements.” They did not dispute the other specifics of the deal he provided.)
Retail prices for .50-caliber ammunition run roughly $5 per bullet.
At that rate, the whole shipment would have been worth $15 million.
The pricing might also be elastic.
The Dutch mark up the price of the bullets and count it toward their NATO contribution, pegged to a percentage of gross domestic product, Brown said.
The Netherlands has contributed about $15 billion to NATO this year, or about 1.7% of its GDP and just under the NATO mandate of 2%.
Representatives of the Dutch military confirmed the shipment to USA TODAY but declined to comment further about the pricing or details.
The war in Ukraine has only increased the demand for private deals.
The State Department signed off on more than $154 billion in commercial arms deals directly to foreign countries in 2022, a 48% increase from the previous year.
Direct commercial sales represent a modest portion of the contribution to Ukraine compared with the $44 billion donated by the U.S., but they still amounted to more than $600 million in sales from U.S. companies to the Ukrainian government last year alone.
That doesn’t include sales to other countries that also support Ukraine – sales like the one Brown described.
Jim Bartlett, an attorney with expertise in the specialized international arms transactions, said private U.S. businesses are playing a small but important role in the conflict.
“American companies are happy to export defense articles to foreign buyers approved by the U.S. State Department,” Bartlett said.
Those sales also come with risks.
Direct sales face fewer regulatory controls, oversight and enforcement, said Robert Nichols, an international military sales expert and attorney at the law firm Nichols Liu.
“You can imagine the range of characters involved in supplying a war effort,” Nichols said.
So far, the Department of Justice has indicted just a handful of arms brokers over deals related to the war in Ukraine.
They allegedly lied to Commerce Department agents and told them the parts were bound for Turkey.
Both pleaded not guilty to the charges this summer.
A State Department spokesman declined to provide details of enforcement actions but said, “The United States takes seriously our responsibility to protect American military and dual-use technologies and prevent their diversion, including through strong enforcement actions.”
NATO said it oversees allied arms deliveries, and that those arms generally reach Ukraine.
NATO itself technically only provides non-non-lethal aid, like fuel, medical supplies and generators.
Brown, of Battle Born, says he fields calls weekly from “clowns” without the proper licensing, whom he reports to the State Department for potential violations.
Some raise red flags when they approach him about transactions that include payment via diamonds or gold.
He prefers traditional wire transfers with approved sales partners since he knows government officials are watching.
He validates the contracts and checks certificates for the final users.
That’s part of why he traveled with the ammunition.
He would be meeting a Dutch military official for the official handoff.
“My job is to keep us all out of jail,” Brown said.
The two 747s touched down in Poland, one before the sun, the other in late morning.
Brown exchanged paperwork with a young Dutch military staffer who signed for the delivery, he said.
They traded military patches as souvenirs.
They snapped a photo together.
The bullets bought by the Netherlands would never touch Dutch soil.
U.S. aid:Billions from the US flows to Ukraine.
Here's where it comes from, and how it adds up
Despite playing a small role proportionately in the war, $600 million in direct commercial sales can buy a lot of small weaponry.
Put another way: It’s hard to sneak away an F-16 or a missile launcher the size of a tractor-trailer.
But a bunch of guns or a pallet of ammo?
Much easier to resell.
After Russia invaded Ukraine in 2014, the Small Arms Survey, a Swiss arms research project, estimated that within a year, battlefield seizures and other forms of diversion led to 300,000 small arms and light weapons going missing, including 100,000 in Crimea alone.
When small arms go missing, they can go missing into another country, maybe one led by a despot or even a terrorist organization.
The U.S. government says diversion of American donations has been widely absent so far in Ukraine.
That could be a combination of intensive “end-use-monitoring” programs and the reality of the battlefield, where supplies are rapidly put to use.
But even if not now, unused ammo could be resold someday.
“These are commodities with very long shelf lives.”
Florida-based Global Ordnance, another State Department-licensed exporter, is a competitor in the direct weapons sales business.
General counsel Bryan Van Brunt said the company has extensive protocols in place to track shipments and make sure the end-users are federally approved, though he declined to provide specifics about those systems.
Brown, with Battle Born Munitions, says the company employs a mix of simple and sophisticated tracking technology to ensure his shipments are tracked to end users.
The black GPS devices he dropped onto his cargo tracked the ammo all the way across the globe.
But that system only works as long as Brown is actually tracking.
“Technically, my role ends when I deliver it to NATO,” he said.
Sometime after the 747s touched down in Poland, along with signing the paperwork and snapping a selfie with the Dutch official, Brown found the tiny black GPS trackers and lifted them off the pallets.
Ukrainian trucks would arrive at the airport to pick up the ammunition.
They would point toward the border, and onward to Lviv, and some distant battlefield.
Brown would point in the opposite direction.
Just like one of his quips: Fly in, have soup, get home.
He headed toward Warsaw, with the GPS trackers in his bag.
Contact him at npenz@usatoday.com or @npenzenstadler, or on Signal at (720) 507-5273.
The geography professor didn’t hide his clown fetish or the fact that he sometimes indulged his urges by recruiting students as subjects.
He posted regularly about it on social media.
He submitted his resignation the same day their story was published.
His interactions with students and open discussion of his fetish happened in both mainstream and tailored digital spaces.
He popped into Facebook groups geared toward new students and niche forums on websites like Reddit.
He posted videos on YouTube.
Over the years, two students reported him to campus police; others complained online.
He left Kent State University after pleading no contest to something different: a theft charge that involved entering his peers’ offices without permission and taking a USB drive.
Nicholls State, for example, told USA TODAY Network reporters it does not routinely check social media for new hires.
The money was appealing but the interactions soured.
“I thought maybe they could prevent anything bad from happening since other girls would go with him.”
She said there was never any followup from campus police – or anyone else.
The two who expressed public concerns on social media told USA TODAY they never heard from their campus officials either.
She said she would pass along that reporters were trying to reach him.
He said his contract was not renewed because he was the target of a “grade inflation task force.”
She has seen the pattern often in her work maintaining a database of publicly documented sexual misconduct by faculty and staff.
As for grad students?
“I don’t on purpose,” she said, “because that’s information that almost never comes out.”
He was working toward his doctorate and researched fading businesses.
His work about shopping malls in the Rust Belt won several awards.
Like many graduate students, he also taught classes.
“I will literally pay you!”
What’s more, she figured out that he was a graduate student, a fact she said he didn’t disclose in his posts.
It arrived at midnight and contained no message, although writing on his shirt read: “I'm not a failure.”
“It’s definitely burned into my mind.”
He would send “get to know you” messages, the police report said, and then ask the student if she was “interested in having her face painted for one of his class projects.”
“She does not have any concerns for her safety, but just wanted this documented,” the police report read.
In July 2017, another student had retweeted a message from Kent State’s Twitter account that asked for Kent State love stories.
She said she tweeted to draw officials’ attention to it and moved on but now wishes she had reported it officially.
College campuses are supposed to offer students special protections from sexual harassment even when it falls short of criminal behavior.
Title IX, often associated with equity in women’s sports, also addresses “sex-based harassment, which encompasses sexual assault and other forms of sexual violence” at schools that receive federal funding.
Colleges infrequently and unevenly enforce the rule, however.
A 2022 USA TODAY investigation found just one of every 12,400 students was suspended in connection with sexual misconduct.
The student who shared her story online said the only response she received was from a graduate student in the geography department, who contacted her on Oct. 1, 2018.
In an email, he wrote that he had seen her post and suspected he knew which faculty member had asked her about face painting.
“I brought it to the attention of some of our faculty because I was pretty sure I knew who it was, but they were certain it wasn’t that individual and that you probably just meant geology,” he wrote.
He went on to reference another student being “approached in (at least by just looking at your tweet) a much more aggressive way.” The grad student asked the undergraduate for more information, but, she told USA TODAY, she didn’t respond.
She said she started drafting a reply, but a year had passed.
She wanted to move on.
Kent State would not say whether any actions were taken after the students’ reports, but Eric Mansfield, a spokesman for the university, said the police department confirmed that the students who filed police reports were provided with “university resources, which would include other non-criminal avenues to pursue (Counseling Services, Title IX, Center for Sexual and Relationship Violence Services, etc.)
Mansfield also said that the university monitors social media but that colleges “can’t always see or track every mention on social media.”
A blotter item in the local newspaper shows police obtained an arrest warrant in connection with a third-degree felony burglary charge.
“Also, we do not comment on personnel matters.”
In more recent years, Buckley has become critical of the law and how schools interpret it.
He told the Columbus Dispatch in 2010 that “the law needs to be revamped.”
Survivors of sexual violence and students accuse universities of using the law to avoid negative media coverage.
Students with a history of bad behavior may jump from one school to another without the public ever knowing about their histories.
One case involved Brandon Austin, who was accused of sexual assault at Providence College in 2013 while on the school’s basketball team.
But Providence College initially said Austin was suspended for violating the school’s code of student conduct and declined to share further details with the Providence Journal, citing federal privacy laws.
Austin denied wrongdoing and was not charged with a crime.
Austin was able to transfer to the University of Oregon, where he was again accused of sexual assault, along with other players.
Police investigated the claims, and the local district attorney declined to press charges.
And it doesn’t apply when a student is “seeking or intending to enroll” at another college.
He blamed the overuse of the law on fear of being sued.
While most U.S. employers conduct background screening, according to trade group data, those inquiries typically focus on criminal history.
Social media receives far less attention even though that is where people are most likely to share their unguarded thoughts.
Undertaking a full review of a person’s social media presence is more difficult than just checking an applicant’s Facebook page.
Does an applicant have an account on X, formerly Twitter?
How about an account with Discord, an online platform frequented by gamers, where leaked Pentagon documents were recently shared?
Or what about a Telegram account, a messaging platform popular among white nationalists?
Further complicating things, it’s common on sites like Reddit for users to adopt usernames and describe experiences with little to no ties to reality.
A little digging, however, can turn up a lot of dirt.
His time as a student and instructor at Kent State is absent.
That is the same handle used on Reddit by someone with a special interest in face paint.
Other posts mention a “clown fetish.” In a forum titled “Creepy,” he wrote, “I convince pretty girls to let me paint their faces,” along with a photo with multiple women in white face paint.
That and other similar posts remained live for years until they were taken down after the Nicholls students published their story in late March.
USA TODAY Network reporters captured screenshots before they disappeared.
With dates in 2019, the posts feature a young woman wearing a Kent State T-shirt.
The material would have been available to administrators at Northern Illinois before the start of the fall 2019 semester.
Joe King, a spokesman for Northern Illinois, said departments hiring new graduate students are “not required to check social media or investigate a disciplinary history.” He added some departments may reach out to the graduate students’ former advisers.
But there are signs the behavior continued.
She said she declined to do it but was aware that other Northern Illinois students had participated.
She asked, had anyone complained?
Many students would find a reason to complain, as Nicholls State student journalist Sally-Anne Torres learned firsthand.
It started in January when one of her fellow reporters picked up an odd rumor: a professor was offering extra credit for students willing to paint their faces like clowns.
Initially, Torres dismissed it because it seemed too unusual and there weren’t a lot of leads to follow.
He blamed his departure on giving too many A’s.
That seemed suspicious to Torres.
“It wasn’t just this innocent thing that a lot of these girls thought it was,” Torres said.
Some, she said, were followed on Twitter by him while others opted into an extra credit assignment he offered.
The women told Torres he sometimes giggled and laughed as they painted their faces in his office.
It seemed unusual at the time, Price said, because his friend wasn’t in the class.
It became more concerning to him on reading the student newspaper’s report.
“I feel frankly disgusted and disappointed that Nicholls couldn’t do a proper background check on this professor, because this is unacceptable,” Price said.
Ramos learned that the person behind the account was likely a professor at the university.
She posted about the behavior in January 2022, but nothing came of it.
On March 27, the same day the student newspaper published its piece, Ramos posted screenshots of her discoveries on Twitter with the message, “Found a Nicholls state university professor on Reddit.”
“I wish the university had acted sooner because all this information was public on the internet,” she told USA TODAY.
No one from the university, she said, has ever reached out.
He can be reached at CCampo@gannett.com.
An Oct. 17 Instagram post (direct link, archive link) claims veteran actor Arthur Roberts has secretly been Joe Biden’s body double.
“The title of the video in Arthur’s acting credit is ‘Joe Biden Sworn in as U.S. President on Inauguration Day 2021,’” a man says in an embedded video, as an image of a screenshot from IMDB.com appears.
It’s been erased.
The post was liked more than 300 times in a day.
There is no evidence that President Joe Biden has a body double.
Roberts has no association with Biden and has never appeared as him, according to the actor’s representative.
Roberts, an 85-year-old actor, has numerous stage, screen and film credits, according to his professional website and IMDB profile.
None of those roles involved playing Biden, and he has no connection to the president.
“It is not true,” said Kathryn Boole, a manager with Studio Talent Group, which represents Roberts.
Boole said this claim previously surfaced several years ago when Roberts was edited into pictures that were shared on social media.
The current version of the claim hinges on an IMDB entry that listed Roberts as playing Biden at his 2021 inauguration.
The linked page is now dead, and the credit has been removed from his profile on the site.
But an archive of the page shows it was on IMDB on Aug. 19 and taken down no later than Sept. 15.
Users can submit a request to add a TV or movie title or an on-screen credit to IMDB, according to its guidelines.
Those are supposed to be reviewed by editors before they can be published.
IMDB did not respond to a request for comment.
Boole said she had no idea how that credit was attached to Roberts and had no record of him ever portraying Biden in any project.
Baseless claims that Biden has a body double are not new.
USA TODAY has debunked claims that Biden died in 2019 and was secretly replaced by either his (non-existent) twin or an actor, as well as a claim that his body double revealed himself by signing documents with the wrong hand.
USA TODAY could not reach the user who shared the post for comment.
Lead Stories debunked an earlier version of the Roberts claim.
Thank you for supporting our journalism.
You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or e-newspaper here.
Our fact-check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook.
U.S. Capitol Police said Thursday that they arrested more than 300 protesters who held a demonstration inside a U.S. House office building in Washington D.C., over the Israel-Hamas war.
Police reported that the protest broke out at the Cannon House Office Building just before 1:40 p.m. Wednesday and shut down roads outside the building due to the demonstration.
Video shows demonstrators wearing black T-shirts reading "Jews Say Ceasefire Now" in white lettering shouting "Ceasefire now!"
Other footage shows the group sitting on the Cannon Rotunda floor clapping in unison.
Arrests took place in the Cannon Rotunda, police reported.
They were ticketed and released.
The rotunda was cleared by 5 p.m., police said.
The war:As war in Israel, Gaza rages on, President Biden is having a moment
On Oct. 7, a major Jewish holiday, Hamas militants stormed from the blockaded Gaza Strip into nearby Israeli towns.
The attack, which killed hundreds of civilians, stunned Israel and caught its military and intelligence apparatus completely off guard.
Israel immediately launched airstrikes on Gaza, destroying entire neighborhoods and killing hundreds of Palestinian civilians in the days that have followed.
As of Thursday, the war's death toll surpassed 5,000, making the conflict the deadliest of five Gaza wars for both sides.
At least 199 people, including children, were captured by Hamas and taken into Gaza, according to Israel.
The Hamas incursion came on Simchat Torah, a normally joyous day when Jews complete the annual cycle of reading the Torah scroll.
Israel declared war the next day.
Previous Israel-Hamas wars were in 2008, 2012, 2014 and 2021.
Israel-Hamas war updates:Biden says Gaza to get aid by Friday; US says Israel not to blame for hospital blast.
Reach her at nalund@usatoday.com and follow her on X @nataliealund.
A second co-defendant with Donald Trump in the Georgia election conspiracy case, Sidney Powell, pleaded guilty Thursday to a half-dozen misdemeanors dealing with a conspiracy to interfere in the 2020 election.
“Miss Powell is at the vortex, the center, the hub of the alleged conspiracy,” said Gene Rossi, who handled Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations cases in his three decades as a former federal prosecutor and Justice Department official.
She was charged with tampering with election equipment in Coffee County, Georgia.
She pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit theft by taking and five counts of conspiracy to commit intentional interference with performance of election duties.
Powell agreed to testify in future trials in exchange for serving six years of probation, a $6,000 fine and paying restitution of $2,700.
Powell is one of 19 co-defendants charged in the case, which alleged a broad racketeering conspiracy.
Other portions of the conspiracy included the recruitment of fake presidential electors to vote for Trump despite President Joe Biden winning Georgia, lying about election results to state officials and in court records, and soliciting public officials to violate their oaths of office.
Legal experts said Powell's agreement to testify against others in the case is "very significant" because she dealt at length with Trump, lawyer Rudy Giuliani and others charged in the conspiracy.
Powell worked closely with major figures in the chase.
She participated in a news conference with Giuliani and co-defendant Jenna Ellis at the Republican National Committee portraying baseless allegations of election in November 2020.
Powell met with Trump at the White House, including on Dec. 18, 2020, to discuss having the military seize voting machines, which Trump didn't order.
“Rudy Giuliani, as if he doesn't have enough to worry about, should be very worried,” O’Brien said.
Powell is the second co-defendant to plead guilty in the case, after bail bondsman Scott Hall.
The other 17 co-defendants have all pleaded not guilty.
Powell’s guilty plea came days before her trial was scheduled to begin Monday.
On today's episode of the 5 Things podcast: USA TODAY Domestic Security Correspondent Josh Meyer looks at how an independent probe could help assess blame for the Gaza hospital strike.
USA TODAY Congress, Campaigns and Democracy Reporter Ken Tran gives an update from Capitol Hill, where Republicans are still struggling to agree on a new speaker of the House.
It's LGBTQ Center Awareness Day.
But some college LGBTQ centers are disappearing.
The Las Vegas Aces are WNBA champions again.
Podcasts: True crime, in-depth interviews and more USA TODAY podcasts right here
Hit play on the player above to hear the podcast and follow along with the transcript below.
This transcript was automatically generated, and then edited for clarity in its current form.
There may be some differences between the audio and the text.
I'm Taylor Wilson, and this is 5 Things you need to know Thursday the 19th of October 2023.
Today, a look at what an independent investigation into the Gaza hospital strike could look like.
And the House is still frozen without a speaker.
President Joe Biden has secured an agreement with Israel to allow humanitarian aid into Gaza.
That's as he returns home following a meeting with Israeli Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, in the wake of a strike on a hospital in Gaza City that killed hundreds of people.
Protests have erupted across the Middle East after the blast, with thousands taking to the streets in many Arab countries to condemn Israel's airstrikes on Gaza.
Many questions remain about the strike on the hospital, including who's at fault.
I spoke with USA Today Domestic Security Correspondent Josh Meyer about whether an independent investigation could help bring answers.
Josh, thanks for making the time.
My pleasure, Taylor.
So just starting here, Josh, what exactly happened in this Gaza hospital strike?
What do we know as of now?
Well, that's a good question.
We don't really know.
We know that a missile or some kind of ordinance landed on the hospital or at the hospital parking lot, killed several hundred people that were either injured and at the hospital or people seeking shelter there.
But Israel is saying that it was an errant rocket fired by Palestinian Islamic Jihad, which is another militant group in the Palestinian territories, along with Hamas.
Hamas and the Palestinians are saying that Israel did it and said that they did it on purpose, and that they had been warning people to evacuate hospitals and that this was part of that effort.
So the problem is both sides insist they're right.
Israel offered a lot more forensic evidence to back up its assessment that it was not responsible for the missile strike, including intercepts and public source information and satellite imagery, suggesting that the rocket was fired northbound from south in the Gaza Strip.
But this may be one of those circumstances where you need some kind of independent investigation to determine really what happened in a way that people believe.
And this is exactly what it would be if it was an intentional strike, it would be a war crime.
And he said that you need a dream team of forensic scientists skilled enough to look at the evidence on the ground and also that evidence that's been put forward by all sides, including Hamas, Israel and the Biden administration.
The problem is they need to be on the ground almost right away because the evidence will dissipate.
It's something that's not going to stay very long.
One option is the International Criminal Court.
Another option is the United Nations Affiliated Commission of Inquiry.
A third one is the International Commission of Jurists, which is based in Geneva, Switzerland.
And then there's also a Commission for International Justice and Accountability.
Well, it's going to be tricky, especially, Taylor, because of the politics involved.
Anybody Palestine, the Gaza authorities or Hamas or Palestinian Islamic Jihad recommends would be vetoed by Israel.
But Israel would likely contest that too because Israel is not a party to the ICC, nor is the United States.
And actually, in 2021, when the top ICC prosecutor confirmed the opening of an investigation into potential atrocities committed in the territories, Anthony Blinken, who was the Secretary of State at the time and still is, said that the US government firmly opposes that decision too.
Basically the Biden administration said that the ICC has no jurisdiction over the matter, in part because Israel is not a party to the ICC, but he also said that the Palestinian territories were not technically covered by the International Criminal Court.
And President Joe Biden has been visiting Israel this week.
We know he's said to give an address tonight about this hospital strike and there have also been mass protests surrounding this hospital attack and the conflicting answers after it.
Do we have any sense of what to expect from Biden's remarks on this?
Yeah, I mean, I think the sense we're getting is that Biden's going to talk about two things.
One, he's going to try to lower the temperature.
It's become so politicized.
You're seeing protests and threats and anger across the United States and across the world, so he's going to be trying to sort of talk to people and hope that level heads prevail.
But I think he's also going to talk about US funding for Israel and providing the Israeli government with whatever money they need to protect Israeli citizens.
And I think that we may expect that he will also provide some money for the Palestinian Territories, for the people there too.
The conditions that they're living in right now, especially with Israel's mounting response to the October 7th attacks, which were horrific.
But the Palestinians, according to reports, are living without food, easy access to water.
There's a lot of sickness going on and so forth.
Josh Meyer, thank you so much for your insight on all of this.
As always, my pleasure.
Federal prosecutors accused him in a 2010 indictment of hatching a plot to sell information about the location of Holloway's remains to her grieving family in exchange for $250,000.
He was extradited to the US in June to stand trial in the extortion case.
He was sentenced to 20 years in prison this week, but as part of his plea agreement, that sentence will run concurrently with his sentence in Peru on the murder case.
As a condition of the plea deal, he agreed to reveal how Holloway died and how her body was disposed of according to a federal sentencing memorandum.
Holloway was 18 when she vanished during a trip to Aruba with high school classmates.
Republican lawmakers again failed to elect a new speaker of the House yesterday after Congressman Jim Jordan lost his second vote for the position.
I caught up with USA Today Congress Campaigns and Democracy reporter Ken Tran for the latest.
Ken, good to have you back on.
Thanks for having me.
Ken, what exactly happened here?
Congressman Jordan, Chair of the [inaudible 00:08:06] for House Judiciary Committee, faced a first ballot on Tuesday at noon.
Here, he'd lost the first ballot, similar to former speaker Kevin McCarthy, who went through multiple rounds of voting.
Jordan lost that first ballot by 20 defections.
And Ken, who are the main holdouts at this point preventing Congressman Jordan from winning the vote?
What part of the party are we talking about here?
They span across a broad spectrum of the Republican Party but most of them are considered the more moderate Republicans who are namely upset with how the process has played out, especially the ousting of former speaker Kevin McCarthy.
These moderate Republicans, such as Congressman Don Bacon from Nebraska, he represents a Biden won district.
Congressman Steve Womack from Arkansas, he's a Senior Appropriator.
So these lawmakers are, one, against Jim Jordan, partly because of his more conservative credentials, but also because Jordan and his allies inadvertently have started a pressure campaign on these lawmakers to vote for Jordan and making them more entrenched in their views and opposition against him.
And who's Jordan's biggest challenger for the position at this point?
That's the problem we're facing right now is that there is no clear challenger.
His opponents are saying that Jordan will never be able to get the 217 votes necessary to become speaker.
At the same time, it's very unclear who else in the Republican Party can do that.
The most viable alternative talks right now is empowering the current acting speaker, speaker pro tempore Congressman Patrick McHenry, Republican from North Carolina, and giving him temporary powers to oversee more time-sensitive issues, such as funding the government by a mid-November deadline or passing a foreign aid package for Israel.
And Ken, what's happening at the house right now?
Is it completely shut down from legislative action while this happens?
House committees can continue doing their work, but otherwise, any legislation cannot go to the floor.
The House can only hold speaker elections.
But also the thing with Patrick McHenry is that we've never been in this situation before.
So anything that Patrick McHenry does as speaker pro tempore would set the precedent for anyone else in his position in the future.
However, McHenry has been resistant to the idea of being empowered.
He's laser focused right now, he says, on electing Jim Jordan to speaker.
So as far as we've seen, he's only overseen speaker elections.
There's a lot of hurry up and wait right now, Ken, what happens next here?
So Jordan will face a third vote at noon today, but we, again, don't know how many votes he's going to lose.
He's expected to also lose this vote, and it's also possible he loses more support.
If that does happen, we could see more GOP lawmakers start to urge him to drop out.
He's shown confidence that he will be elected speaker at some point.
We just don't know when.
So really just more waiting and seeing.
Ken Tran, thank you as always for making time for us on another busy week.
Thanks for having me.
Today is LGBTQ Center Awareness Day, a time to recognize the crucial resources offered by these kinds of community centers around the country and the world.
But some are disappearing on US college campuses.
And as it stands, there are only 250 professionally run LGBTQ centers on campuses across the country today, according to the Post-Secondary National Policy Institute.
That makes up just a fraction of the nearly 4,000 colleges and universities in the US, all while a fifth of college students surveyed in 2020 by the Associated Press said they identified as gay, lesbian, bisexual, asexual, queer, or questioning.
And there are concerns from some that new bills in Texas and Florida aimed at banning offices dedicated to diversity, equity, and inclusion, or DEI, could cut these centers even further.
Research shows that LGBTQ college students face persistent barriers to getting into college and staying there.
And advocates say the safe spaces afforded by these centers can make a big difference.
You can read more with a link in today's show notes.
The Las Vegas Aces are WNBA basketball Champions again.
They won their second championship in a row last night, taking down the New York Liberty.
Coach Becky Hammond, before the series, told her team, "This team over here was put together to take you out."
That was a reference to the Frenzied Free Agency last year in women's basketball, where several teams attempted to gobble up some of the biggest stars and make super teams, while the Aces relied on their continuity from the previous season.
They're now the WNBA's first back-to-back champion since the Los Angeles Sparks won it all back in 2001 and 2002.
And be sure to stay tuned to this feed later today at 4:00 PM Eastern for a special episode from my co-host Dana Taylor on the state of the nation's economy and how people are coping amid uncertainty.
You can find that episode right here, wherever you're listening right now.
Thanks for listening to 5 Things.
You can find us every day of the week, all year, on Google Podcasts, Apple Podcasts, Amazon Music, Spotify, or wherever you get your audio.
I'm Taylor Wilson, back tomorrow with more of 5 Things from USA Today.
Americans’ confidence in social media companies and their executives has plummeted.
The leaders of social media companies have lost the faith of the American people that they responsibly handle, user privacy, according to a new report on digital privacy views from the Pew Research Center.
Some 77% of Americans have little or no trust that companies will publicly admit mistakes and take responsibility for data misuse, the report found.
Americans also have low expectations that regulators or lawmakers will crack down, with 71% saying they do not believe that social media companies will be held accountable by the government for misdeeds.
Even more of them – 79% versus 75% – say they don’t trust social media companies to not sell their personal information without their consent.
And the vast majority – 81% versus 76% – of Republicans don’t think companies publicly admit and take responsibility for their mistakes.
Republicans are even more concerned about how the government uses their data.
The share who say they are worried about government use of people’s data increased from 63% in 2019 to 77% today.
Concern among Democrats has held steady at 65%, Pew said.
Pew research associate Colleen McClain cautioned that the partisan differences are “fairly small.”
“One striking pattern is how much distrust there is regardless of party,” she said.
The Pew findings come as political debate over online content is heating up in the middle of a presidential election.
Conservative frustration with social media reached a boiling point when Trump was banned from the major platforms after the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol.
The perception that social media companies are biased against conservatives intensified as Trump made “social media abuses” a major plank of his administration and reelection campaigns.
The alleged suppression and censorship of conservative voices and views will be heard by the Supreme Court this term.
Complaints of ideological bias come from across the political spectrum, but it’s difficult to prove social media platforms are targeting any one group since the tech companies disclose so little about how they decide what content is allowed and what is not.
Social media companies say they don't target conservatives, only harmful speech that violates their rules.
Passwords might be one of the biggest tech frustrations.
Make them too hard, and they're impossible to remember.
Too easy, and your accounts are practically wide open.
You could use a password manager or your browser's built-in option to remember your logins.
Here's how to find saved passwords in your browser.
Those solutions aren't perfect, of course.
Password managers get hacked, and anyone with the know-how can access your saved browser options.
No wonder tech companies are working to welcome us to a future sans passwords.
I write about the latest tech gear, security alerts and digital life hacks in my daily emails.
Join 600K+ who get the Current each day.
It starts with the FIDO Alliance
Big tech companies launched the industry association in 2013 to build a better system than passwords we have to keep track of and type in.
Now we're seeing more start to roll it out, and Google's beta testing worked so well that the company just made it the standard way to protect your account.
Before we get to how to use passkeys, let's do a deep dive into how they work.
What is a passkey, and how does it work?
A passkey is a personalized FIDO credential (like your fingerprint or face scan) that lives securely on your device.
You use that instead of a username and password to unlock your accounts.
Another bonus: No more sticky notes with passwords on your monitor.
Passkeys also eliminate the daily "Which password did I use here?"
Naturally, it'll be faster and easier to log in.
But is it safe to use?
Glad you're asking.
The unique structure of passkeys makes them near-impenetrable, unlike passwords – which are notoriously easy to crack.
Since they're stored on your local device, passkeys can't be hacked or guessed like passwords.
And there's no concern of a hacker getting their hands on one of your passwords and opening the keys to the castle since each device has its unique passkey.
That's a far cry from passwords, and studies show most people rely on only a handful of passwords for all their accounts.
Is paid social media the future?
If you want privacy, probably.
Want to try it out?
If you're sick of typing in credentials all day, you can set up passkeys with your Google account.
Note: Passkeys are automatically created for Google devices, but you must set them up for any other gadgets you use to access your account(s).
You need to do this individually on each device you want to give access to.
◾ Go to g.co/passkeys.
◾ Tap Get passkeys and sign in.
◾ Select Use passkeys, then follow the onscreen prompts.
You'll be prompted to log in without your password in certain situations.
My advice: Use biometric authentication (your fingerprint or face) anywhere you can.
It's much more secure than a PIN.
Fear not, Apple folks
You can use passkeys with your iPhone too.
These work through the iCloud Keychain.
Make sure you have that turned on and two-factor authentication enabled to use passkeys.
Note: To use passkeys, iOS 16, iPadOS 16, macOS 13, or tvOS 16 (or later) is required.
Depending on the website, browser, or app you're using, saving a passkey to your iPhone and iCloud Keychain usually consists of these steps:
◾ On your iPhone, go to the sign-in screen for a supported website or app and do one of the following: If setting up a new account: Tap the button or link for setting up new accounts, then follow the onscreen instructions.
◾ When you see the option to save a passkey for the account, tap Continue.
Your passkey is saved.
Note: If you don't see a passkey option, the app or website doesn't currently support passkeys.
To sign in to an account on your iPhone with a passkey:
◾ On your iPhone, go to the website or app and tap the account name field on the sign-in screen.
◾ Tap the suggested account name that appears at the bottom of the screen or near the top of the keyboard.
If the account name doesn't appear, or you want to use a different one, enter it.
◾ Use Face ID or Touch ID to complete sign-in.
If you didn't set up Face ID or Touch ID on your iPhone, enter your device passcode (the code you use to unlock your iPhone).
The passkey you saved completes the sign-in automatically.
When using a device not associated with your Apple ID, you can still sign in to an account using the passkey stored on your iPhone.
◾ Select Other options, Passkey from nearby device, or similar, then follow the onscreen instructions to display a QR code on the screen.
◾ Use your iPhone camera to scan the QR code.
The passkey that's saved to iCloud Keychain completes the sign-in automatically.
Now, onward, with your safe new logins.
Keep your tech-know going
It's a solid 30 minutes of tech news, tips, and callers with tech questions like you from all over the country.
Search for it wherever you get your podcasts.
For your convenience, hit the link below for a recent episode.
PODCAST PICK: Block war videos online, home swapping in NYC & goodbye to passwords
Plus, a website that makes it easy to find any movie on streaming.
The health features your watch can track and how to keep your location off Google Maps.
Kim takes calls and dispenses advice on today's digital lifestyle, from smartphones and tablets to online privacy and data hacks.
For her daily tips, free newsletters and more, visit her website.
If you’re a T-Mobile customer, take a close look at your phone bill.
The cell phone carrier is running a test in which it automatically switches some customers to more expensive rate plans unless they opt out.
"We haven’t kicked it off yet, this would be a small-scale test where we reach out to a small subset of customers who are on older rate plans to let them know they have the opportunity to move to newer, better plans with more features and more value," T-Mobile said in a statement to USA TODAY.
The rate hike affects some customers on older unlimited plans such as T-Mobile One, Simple/Select Choice, Magenta and Magenta 55 Plus.
Those customers will be migrated to Go5G.
Go5G plans start at $75 a month per phone line including taxes and fees.
"Eligible customers would hear from us when this starts," T-Mobile said.
"No customer accounts will be changed until then."
Customers can choose to stay on their current or similar plan if they prefer, T-Mobile said.
If you want to opt out, call T-Mobile customer service.
The carrier – now the country’s second largest of three nationwide cell phone networks – pledged not to raise rates on plans for three years to win regulatory approval for the Sprint takeover.
Rivals AT&T and Verizon raised rates on older plans last year.
Apple has announced a new, more affordable Apple Pencil that comes with a hidden USB-C charging port.
According to Apple, the new pencil is designed with a matte finish and a flat side that magnetically attaches to the side of an iPad for storage.
It will be available beginning in early November and cost $79.
The new pencil is also available for $69 for current and newly accepted college students and their parents, as well as faculty, staff, and home-school teachers of all grade levels.
Additionally, existing owners of the 1st generation Apple Pencil can get the USB-C to Apple Pencil adapter separately for $9.
Apple updates:Apple is urging everyone to update iPhone and iPad iOS (again).
Why you should do it now.
Apple touts the new pencil's "pixel-perfect accuracy, low latency and tilt sensitivity," however it doesn't have the pressure sensitivity, wireless pairing and charging, double-tap to change tools, or free engraving features of the 2nd generation Apple Pencil.
The new Apple Watch Series 9:how it measures up against competitors Google, Samsung
U.S. Capitol Police said Thursday that they arrested more than 300 protesters who held a demonstration inside a U.S. House office building in Washington D.C., over the Israel-Hamas war.
Police reported that the protest broke out at the Cannon House Office Building just before 1:40 p.m. Wednesday and shut down roads outside the building due to the demonstration.
Video shows demonstrators wearing black T-shirts reading "Jews Say Ceasefire Now" in white lettering shouting "Ceasefire now!"
Other footage shows the group sitting on the Cannon Rotunda floor clapping in unison.
Arrests took place in the Cannon Rotunda, police reported.
They were ticketed and released.
The rotunda was cleared by 5 p.m., police said.
The war:As war in Israel, Gaza rages on, President Biden is having a moment
On Oct. 7, a major Jewish holiday, Hamas militants stormed from the blockaded Gaza Strip into nearby Israeli towns.
The attack, which killed hundreds of civilians, stunned Israel and caught its military and intelligence apparatus completely off guard.
Israel immediately launched airstrikes on Gaza, destroying entire neighborhoods and killing hundreds of Palestinian civilians in the days that have followed.
As of Thursday, the war's death toll surpassed 5,000, making the conflict the deadliest of five Gaza wars for both sides.
At least 199 people, including children, were captured by Hamas and taken into Gaza, according to Israel.
The Hamas incursion came on Simchat Torah, a normally joyous day when Jews complete the annual cycle of reading the Torah scroll.
Israel declared war the next day.
Previous Israel-Hamas wars were in 2008, 2012, 2014 and 2021.
Israel-Hamas war updates:Biden says Gaza to get aid by Friday; US says Israel not to blame for hospital blast.
Reach her at nalund@usatoday.com and follow her on X @nataliealund.
When fall arrives, thoughts often turn to home and that cozy, comforting vibe we all crave.
Lighting a chic, heavenly-scented candle is an easy way to capture that autumnal feel, but the price of store-bought scented candles can be shockingly steep!
The good news is that crafting your own candle at home is surprisingly simple and can be a fun and budget-friendly endeavor.
Plus, you'll have the freedom to customize the scent to your preference and once you've mastered the basics, you'll be equipped to create custom candles for any season or mood.
With just a few supplies and a little candle-making know-how, you'll be on your way to creating homemade fall magic in no time.
Here's a step-by-step guide on how to make your own DIY Fall-scented candle.
Watch the video above to learn how to make your own DIY Fall-scented candle.
Fall treat: How to make fluffy maple glazed donuts
Make your house smell like fall: How to make a pumpkin spice oil diffuser
Purchases you make through our links may earn us and our publishing partners a commission.
Reviewed helps you find the best stuff and get the most out of what you already own.
A fun outing at a pecan festival in Texas took a scary turn when a gust of wind launched a carnival ride car into the air and left its operator dangling 30 feet above the ground.
A strong gust of wind suddenly propelled the car into the air with Juliana inside as the ride operator held onto the door to keep it shut and protect her, the station reported.
He managed to do that all while the compartment turned 180 degrees and stalled 30 feet from the ground.
Now he's being hailed as a hero.
Video:Day of adventure turns into nightmare for Canadian amusement park riders
As he went to close the door he just kind of flew up with it.
It "felt like the longest time of my life," before employees were able to get the ride's motor going and lower the ride, bringing both the operator and Juliana to safety.
Just before that the employees quickly removed a handful of children who were in a ground-level compartment of the ride.
The Bullet was shut down for the rest of the event.
A spokesperson for the festival organizer, the Groves Chamber of Commerce, told USA TODAY on Wednesday that the ride operator was fine and that they are not aware of any injuries.
Organized by the Groves Chamber of Commerce since 1969, the Groves Pecan Festival is a community-wide celebration that coincides with the yearly pecan harvest.
Pecans are an integral part of the Groves landscape and have been a focal point for community growth, the chamber of commerce says.
A spate of recent incidents related to amusement rides and attraction has left riders stuck or injured.
On Sept. 29, an 8-year-old boy sustained significant injuries when he was "sucked out" of his seat on a ride called The Storm at the State Fair of Virginia.
In August, guests were forced to walk down a 200-plus-foot roller coaster at Cedar Point in Sandusky, Ohio after the ride known as the Magnum XL experienced a mechanical issue.
Just two days before that, a North Carolina amusement park closed one of its rollercoasters after guests noticed a crack in a support pillars and video showed pieces moving out of place as cars moved along the tracks.
Reach her at sshafiq@gannett.com and follow her on X, formerly Twitter, @saman_shafiq7.
This Great Dane is now a great dame.
Meadow, a Great Dane about 2½ years old, gave birth to 15 puppies on Oct. 10, the largest litter ever for Perfectly Imperfect Pups, a foster-based rescue service in Raleigh, North Carolina.
Before having the litter, Meadow lived an uneven existence — something shelter founder and director Nicole Kincaid hopes is in the canine's past.
"She has been passed around to five homes" since giving birth to another litter in February, Kincaid told USA TODAY.
That person then called Perfectly Imperfect Pups to report that Meadow wasn't getting along with their dogs and the rescue could take her.
"Two days later, she gave birth to 15 pups," she said.
Happy ending:Two Husky puppies thrown over a Michigan animal shelter's fence get adopted
In case you were wondering whether Meadow set any records beyond the shelter, her litter falls a bit short.
A 2-year-old Great Dane from Virginia nearly set a world record after giving birth to almost two dozen puppies this past spring.
A Neapolitan mastiff named Tia currently holds the Guinness World Record for largest litter with 24 pups born in 2004.
For now, one of Perfectly Imperfect Pups' foster homes is looking after Meadow and the pups.
The foster mom "is supplement feeding in between feedings to make sure all puppies are getting food," Kincaid said.
"Taking in a pregnant dog is even more of a challenge because you don’t always know when Mom will give birth, how many puppies will be born, or what complications may come along," she said.
"It makes me so sad that Meadow had such an unsteady past, being bounced around is no life for a dog."
Feeding and caring for 15 puppies and a mom takes not just time but money.
If you want to help out, Perfectly Imperfect Pups has created an Amazon Wishlist for needed items and products.
You can also donate here by searching for Perfectly Imperfect Pups.
What's everyone talking about?
Sign up for our trending newsletter to get the latest news of the day
WASHINGTON — About 15 minutes into President Joe Biden's Zoom call last Friday with families of Americans taken hostage by Hamas, a White House aide started to end the session.
But Biden wouldn't have it, according to one of the family members on the call.
"He actually wanted to hear from every single one of us."
The moment encapsulated Biden's sudden transformation from a political figure whose commitment to Israel was often questioned by conservative critics inside and outside the Jewish state to – right now – arguably the world's leading champion of Israel outside the Middle East.
Biden's actions and words since the Oct. 7 Hamas attack, capped by a dramatic visit Wednesday to Israel, have been lauded even by many of Biden's biggest skeptics in Israel as he stands in solidarity with Israel and pledges "unprecedented" military assistance.
Israelis last week displayed a billboard off a highway in Tel Aviv stating, "Thank you, Mr. President," next to Biden's image.
A billboard welcomed Biden to Israel during his visit Wednesday.
The praise showering Biden in Israel comes as its own leader, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, has seen his support in his country plummet in the wake of the Hamas attack and Israel's military response.
Although polling on Biden's popularity in Israel since the attack isn't public, a whopping 48% of Israelis watched Biden's White House address last week when he condemned the attack as "pure, unadulterated evil" and committed U.S. military aid to Israel.
"It really resonated in Israel in a rather unique way, especially given the leadership vacuum in Israel right now."
During his whirlwind stop in Israel on Wednesday, Biden met with Netanyahu, family members of hostages and compared the atrocities of the Hamas attack, which killed more than 1,300 Israelis, to the brutality of the Holocaust.
"The world watched then and knew, and the world did nothing," Biden said in a speech from Tel Aviv with American and Israeli flags behind him.
Biden cautioned Israelis "don’t be consumed" by the rage they feel today, warning about "mistakes" the U.S. after the 9/11 attacks in 2001.
Yet his backing of Israel was unmistakable.
"Israel will be a safe, secure Jewish and democratic state today, tomorrow and forever."
Biden, upon landing in Air Force One in Israel, greeted Netanyahu with a big hug.
The Israeli prime minister has faced criticism in Israel for the security failure that allowed the Hamas massacre to unfold.
Netanyahu met Sunday for the first time with family members of kidnapped Israelis amid criticism that he's not done enough to save them.
Former President Donald Trump – who took actions such as relocating the U.S. Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem – was widely popular in Israel during his presidency as well.
Trump and other Republicans aligned themselves with the Israeli right, pushing a wedge between Jews and their historic support for Democrats, while some liberals in Congress sought to reduce foreign aid to Israel.
Yet over the last week, Biden has received glowing reviews from conservatives who once criticized Biden's foreign policy with Israel.
While Friedman remains "deeply critical" of the Biden administration, he said "the moral, tactical, diplomatic and military support that it has provided Israel over the past few days has been exceptional."
Meanwhile, Trump stunned conservative Israelis with his comments last week blaming Netanyahu for the Hamas attack and calling leaders of Hezbollah "very smart."
Many have since blasted Trump's remarks.
Biden's actions have not been without harsh criticism among conservatives in the U.S. Florida Gov.
Ron DeSantis, a Republican candidate for president, slammed Biden for committing $100 million in U.S. humanitarian assistance for Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank.
"They say it's 'humanitarian assistance.'
"How are you funding them when they're holding Americans as well as others hostage?"
And Republicans and Israelis alike criticized the Biden administration over a deal to free five American hostages from Iran that included transferring $6 billion to the nation for humanitarian purposes.
The U.S. and Qatar reportedly agreed to freeze Iran's access to the money last week after the agreement came under fire from Republicans who argued the money freed up funds for Tehran to help Hamas' attack.
The Biden administration has said there is no evidence linking Iran to the massacre.
Still, Israel's support for Biden, at least for now, overshadows the pushback.
Ruby Chen, the father working to free his hostage son from Hamas, said Biden told family members on last week's Zoom call "nothing is more important" to him than seeing the safe return of American hostages.
As each family member spoke, a photo of their loved one flashed on the computer screen for the president to see.
The meeting ended up lasting about an hour and 15 minutes.
"It was a very emotional session where he also shared some of his personal loss and how he copes with it," Ruby Chen said.
Reach Joey Garrison on X, formerly known as Twitter @Joeygarrison.
Hamas invaded my brother's home:Now, my family is held hostage in Gaza.
The Week 8 slate in college football features four Top 25 showdowns for our panel of experts to consider.
The Saturday headliner features No.
3 Ohio State hosting No.
6 Penn State in a highly anticipated contest with Big Ten and national championship implications.
Three of the other major conferences feature key games as well.
A share of the lead in the ACC is on the line as No.
4 Florida State hosts No.
In the Pac-12, No.
14 Utah visits No.
There's also the measure of the Trojans trying to get revenge for two losses to the Utes last season.
Speaking of revenge, there's a big one in the SEC as No.
8 Alabama hosts No.
The Crimson Tide lost one to the Volunteers in Knoxville.
This season, both teams already have a lost, making this a College Football Playoff eliminator.
Our staff weighs in on those key clashes, while also looking for potential upsets among the rest of the Top 25.
WASHINGTON — The historic ousting of former Speaker Kevin McCarthy earlier this month has left Americans divided over the unprecedented move − and the Republican Party may pay the price in the 2024 election.
House Republicans have struggled to coalesce around one leader since McCarthy's historic 15 rounds of voting to become speaker in January.
He made history again two weeks ago as the first speaker ousted from the House.
With House lawmakers up for re-election in 2024, McCarthy's removal might factor into their odds of winning again, experts said.
“At the basic level, either one side needs to win this in-party fighting, a compromise must be reached, or the voters will attempt to fix it next year,” Kevin Wagner, a political science professor at Florida Atlantic University, told USA TODAY.
Problems in the House can influence voters at home.
Several polls already show that voters are about evenly split over McCarthy's removal as speaker.
A Yahoo News/YouGov poll released Oct. 16 found 31% of registered voters approve of McCarthy being ousted while 27% disapprove of the House's decision.
Likewise, a CNN/SSRS poll conducted from Oct. 4 to Oct. 9 found 50% approve the decision and 49% disapprove.
Some 34% of Republicans and Republican-leaning Independents think his removal was bad for the GOP, while 30% think it was bad.
The polls were conducted before two failed votes for a new House speaker, including a second in which Republican nominee Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, earned less support than in the first election.
He compared the situation to a “giant freaking circus.”
“They can't even figure out what they want to do as near as I can tell,” Davis, an independent, said.
Republican presidential candidates have also spoken out against the move.
During a USA TODAY town hall last week in New Hampshire, former Vice President Mike Pence said, “I have some tough words for what I call the 'chaos caucus' in my party on Capitol Hill.”
“It never would have occurred to me to partner with every Democrat on Capitol Hill to oust a Republican speaker of the House,” he said, adding that if lawmakers fail to elect a speaker, voters will hold them "accountable, individually and collectively."
Former House Speaker Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., had a rocky start to his reign as speaker.
But once elected, his detractors' frustrations only grew, particularly during debt ceiling negotiations between McCarthy and President Joe Biden
Rep. Matt Gaetz, R-Fla., who criticized McCarthy for the measure, introduced a motion to vacate and remove McCarthy as speaker.
Eight Republicans and 208 Democrats voted to oust him.
At this point, Davis said he just wants lawmakers to elect somebody in the speaker position and get the job of representing their constituents done.
I mean, at this point, they've got the raw voting power.
Why not just pick anybody at this point?
They don't have to be popular.
Just need to put somebody up there who can say, hey, this is what we're voting on next.
And just get through it all.
For Kate Richards, a 59-year-old semi-retired entrepreneur in Manchester, New Hampshire, Congress entering its third week without a speaker makes her feel angry.
“It’s dangerous for the country,” Richards, an independent, said.
He's third in line, nothing's getting done.
And again, this is foolishness, and it's making the country at risk whether they understand that or not.
He doesn’t care who the speaker is, but said he just wants to see the GOP unified.
“I think it's a lot harder to show unity… I think it's not positive that there's that kind of open rebellion within the caucus.”
“I think we've got to get more Republicans on board to…be more conservative,” he said, applauding Jordan for leading the impeachment inquiry into President Joe Biden.
Kevin Fry, a 63-year-old retired air traffic controller in Fort Wayne, Indiana, criticized McCarthy for not getting the appropriation bills finished or scheduling votes on term limits for lawmakers.
Republicans already struggle to hold onto the majority after winning back control of the House from the Democrats in the 2020 midterms with a narrow margin.
The infighting between Republican lawmakers over the shutdown fight and now the speaker battle have only added pressure to the GOP.
In the Yahoo News/YouGov poll, 42% of voters blame conservative and moderate Republicans for the current gridlock in Congress while 32% of voters blame progressive and moderate Democrats.
McCarthy’s removal is a reflection of the political problems the Republican Party faces as it “navigates between trying to be a center-right party who can appeal to moderate voters and a party dominated by the hard-right side of the party,” according to Charles Stewart III, a professor of political science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
The speaker of the House can become a campaign issue, he added.
For instance, former Democratic Speaker of the House Tip O’Neill “was a major punching bag of Republicans back in the 1980 election, for instance, and that tactic was considered successful.”
“I can see Democrats having a field day going after House Republicans and perhaps a new speaker, especially if he or she is seen as being extreme,” Stewart III said.
“This is not good for Republicans, although they still have time to stanch the wounds.”
“In some districts, there will be a well-funded incumbent, others may be open, making them very different even if they are both purple,” Wagner said.
“ If the GOP lags in fundraising, messaging or candidate recruitment, it could help Democratic candidates, but it really depends largely on the district.”
“However, if the perception of disarray from the House were to paint the entire party, even the Presidential candidate may suffer some vote loss from voters who are frustrated with the entire party,” he said.
Some 2024 Republican candidates on the campaign trail have called out the divisions between GOP lawmakers in Congress.
Pence said in an interview with USA TODAY that he was concerned about how the chaos on Capitol Hill was affecting America and called on Republican leadership to elect a new speaker.
“I mean, look, we have war now raging in Eastern Europe, war in Israel,” Pence said.
Former Arkansas Gov.
Asa Hutchinson said in an interview with USA TODAY that if lawmakers elect a speaker soon and “show unity in that selection process,” then it's a bump in the road that will not have any impact on next year's election.
“If we struggle with getting the ballots to select a speaker, then it demonstrates that we're not ready to govern,” Hutchinson said.
As she filed for candidacy to participate in the New Hampshire Republican primary, former South Carolina Gov.
Nikki Haley suggested lawmakers shouldn't get paid until they elect a speaker.
It also underscores how things have evolved since the former Stanford soccer goalkeeper died by suicide more than a year and a half ago.
On Thursday night, she will be remembered publicly again at Stanford’s campus in California, where she was a captain of the women’s soccer team when she took her life.
They have no plans to attend this year's event.
"We have, and always will be, fully supporting the Stanford Women's Soccer Program and the amazing young women of that team.''
The litigation between the Meyers and Stanford has grown increasingly combative, as reflected by court filings.
Both parties, in assigning responsibility for Meyer’s death, have accused the other of breaching duty of care.
Key evidence about why Meyer took her life at 22, just months before she was set to graduate, could be found on the mirror drive of Meyer’s laptop, according to court records.
Meyer’s laptop is relevant because of what her parents say it proves, according to court filings.
Their assertions center around disciplinary action Stanford took against Meyer in 2022, according to court filings.
School officials determined Meyer may have acted in retaliation when she spilled coffee on a Stanford football player in 2021.
The unnamed player, who suffered burns on his back that required medical attention, had kissed one of Meyer’s teammates without consent a week earlier, according to the school’s records filed with the court.
On Feb. 28, 2022, the night before Meyer’s body was found in her dorm room, she received an email from Stanford informing her that she was facing a disciplinary charge stemming from the spilled coffee.
According to a court filing, a five-page letter sent by email explained her degree was going to be placed on hold less than four months from graduation and the charge could result in her removal from the university.
“The actions of Stanford and its employees in charging Katie with a violation of fundamental standards over spilling coffee on a Football Player perpetrator of sexual assault without sufficient evidence was reckless, and wrongful and resulted in an acute stress reaction and her impulsive suicide.''
Stanford said the unnamed soccer player who was kissed by the football player without consent did not take the necessary steps to initiate a formal investigation, according to court records.
The school objected after months of delays following the Meyers agreeing to provide the mirror drive.
It led to the Sept. 28 order from Judge Frederick Chung of the Superior Court of Santa Clara that the Meyers produce the mirror drive in 30 days.
The Meyers agreed March 10 in responses verified under oath to produce the mirror drive but, according to the judge's order, "then backtracked.''
The Meyers later argued they never agreed to provide an "absolute mirror image of the decedent's computer'' and only "responsive,'' "non-privileged information," according to the order.
The judge wrote that argument is "baseless."
Meyer's parents say she reported suffering from depression and suicidal ideation at the time she was going through the disciplinary proceeding.
According to Meyer's parents, Stanford's handling of the disciplinary process led to Meyer's suicide.
Stanford, in response to the Meyers' complaint, introduced evidence it argues shows Meyer’s parents contributed to her suicide.
In February 2022, six days before Meyer was found dead, she rehearsed in front of teachers an oral presentation she would make to the class about her family relationships before she came to Stanford, according to a court filing.
This was cited as part of the school’s contention that Meyer’s parents "breached...duty of care."
A suicide note was recovered from the scene, according to the autopsy report, which provides no additional information about the note.
According to the autopsy report, Meyer had been diagnosed with Major Depressive Disorder and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).
The report, which cites a medical record review, does not say when Meyer was diagnosed.
No drugs were found in her body at the time of her death, according to the toxicology report.
Dougherty, the attorney representing Meyer's parents, said they are prepared to comply with Judge Chung’s deadline to produce the mirror drive by the end of this month.
On Tuesday, as Stanford was preparing for the women’s soccer team’s mental health awareness match, Dougherty said she has been working on an amendment to protect third-party rights in the release of the mirror drive.
We are not seeking to hide anything as it relates to the Meyers or Katie.
We have nothing to hide.''
There is no information on the setting of a trial date, according to Jessica Kellogg, communications program manager for the Superior Court of Santa Clara County.
On Thursday night, when Stanford plays Oregon State, Meyer will be recognized in a variety of ways, according to the school.
They argue it would have saved their daughter.
As they have all season, Stanford players will wear jerseys with a butterfly patch in honor of Meyer.
She loved butterflies.
If you or someone you know may be struggling with suicidal thoughts, you can call the U.S. National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 800-273-TALK (8255) any time day or night, or chat online.
Crisis Text Line also provides free, 24/7, confidential support via text message to people in crisis when they dial 741741.
As grief consumed the University of Houston last year, one place on campus became a sanctuary.
Staff at the LGBTQ resource center, a cozy second-floor office furnished with a red sofa and a shelf full of comfort food, sprang into action after the unexpected death of Corey Sanders, a 23-year-old who helped lead a club for queer and transgender undergrads.
Sanders loved to sing, said Jamie Gonzales, the center’s former interim director, but he was shy about it.
She urged him to step out of his comfort zone and perform at his lavender graduation, a special ceremony for LGBTQ seniors.
She never got the chance to hear him.
Sanders died suddenly from a diabetic coma last October, according to the medical examiner.
The university couldn't confirm whether students were officially notified about his passing.
But at a memorial outside the LGBTQ resource center a few days later, a crowd spilled into the hallway.
A year later, that haven of safety and acceptance is gone, too.
As the first anniversary of Sanders’ death approached, the letters L, G, B, T and Q – which adorned the wall outside the door for years – were stripped from the entrance.
They came off at the direction of university administrators, who indicated the center would be disbanded after Texas’ Republican governor signed a law banning offices dedicated to “diversity, equity, and inclusion” – or DEI – at the state’s public colleges and universities.
Earlier this year, Texas and Florida’s conservative governors signed two of the most sweeping anti-DEI bills nationwide into law.
The bills, brainchildren of two influential conservative think tanks, were part of a flurry of recent legislation that was shuttled through numerous statehouses in tandem.
The effort entrenched college DEI programs as a culture-war issue in American politics.
Unlike the efforts in Texas and Florida, many of the anti-DEI bills introduced across the country didn’t succeed.
In other states – including North Carolina, North Dakota and Tennessee – less stringent bans, applying only to mandatory diversity training, passed.
Yet even those laws are raising questions about how they could affect the lives of vulnerable college students.
In the meantime, LGBTQ centers at several colleges across Texas and Florida are being shuttered, with little clarification from college leaders.
Caught in the crosshairs of it all is a generation of young people, for many of whom getting to college – and staying there – is already a miracle.
Fighting for LGBTQ+ rights:How a Christian transgender man increased his faith by taking on religious schools
Two years ago, the Office of LGBTQ+ Initiatives and Allyship at Florida Atlantic University was going strong.
Its staff were hard at work for their students, helping some figure out how to change their legal names during an April 2021 panel.
A professor at Florida Atlantic University, who asked not to be named for fear of retaliation, told USA TODAY that in recent months, the university’s resource center “just disappeared.” A web search for the school’s LGBTQ resource center now yields a “page not found” error.
In April, Texas Tech’s Office of LGBTQIA Education & Engagement held a party for Lesbian Visibility Day.
Just a few months later, its Twitter and Instagram accounts are inactive.
Texas Tech’s communications office did not respond to emailed requests for comment.
There are only about 250 professionally run LGBTQ centers on campuses across the country today, according to the Postsecondary National Policy Institute.
That’s just a fraction of the nearly 4,000 colleges and universities in the U.S.
The proportion is less than 1%, despite the fact that a fifth of college students surveyed in 2020 by the Association of American Universities said they identified as gay, lesbian, bisexual, asexual, queer, or questioning.
Institutions in Texas have until January 2024 before the new anti-DEI law can be enforced.
Florida’s law, however, took effect in July.
The legislation tasked the state’s 17-member Board of Governors, which oversees the public university system, to develop guidelines for implementing it.
USA TODAY obtained a copy of draft regulations recently sent by the board to public universities for comment.
The draft rules, first reported by the Chronicle of Higher Education, do little to clear up any confusion.
They continue to define DEI programs as those promoting “differential or preferential treatment of individuals,” including on the basis of gender identity and sexual orientation.
The draft regulations were not released publicly, yet another indication of how colleges and universities are quietly grappling with the new rule – a strategy that has, so far, obscured the law’s impacts, according to Carlos Guillermo Smith, a senior policy adviser with the LGBTQ advocacy group Equality Florida.
Smith said his group has been monitoring the situation.
And they’re alarmed by the silence from colleges.
“These programs exist for a reason,” he told USA TODAY.
Research shows LGBTQ college students face persistent barriers to getting into college and staying there.
Family rejections, an increased likelihood of homelessness and a tougher federal student aid process all contribute to an oppressive environment, said Jason Garvey, an education professor at the University of Vermont.
“Legal guardians hold a disproportionate amount of power over the lives of queer students,” says a study he and other researchers published last year in the Journal of College Student Development.
Filling out forms necessary to afford college, such as the Free Application for Federal Student Aid, or FAFSA, can pose a major challenge.
An analysis of Education Department and survey data indicates that queer and trans students are more likely than their heterosexual peers to have a lower socioeconomic status.
That’s where LGBTQ centers come in.
If queer and trans get to college, designated safe spaces for them make those students feel safer, according to a 2016 article in the Journal of Youth and Adolescence.
And when they feel safer, they’re more likely to stay in school – and graduate.
“It is through these services and these communities that students are retained academically,” Garvey said.
“We need to start treating them for the value that they bring.”
'Completely different from high school:'How colleges are making space for LGBTQ students
When Dane Ashton first learned about the University of Houston center, he had a Sharpie in his hand.
It was 2016.
He was in his freshman dorm room, and his roommate glimpsed him blacking something out from his university ID.
The target of his anxious blotting?
His legal name.
For about a month it had been glaring at him – one of those uncomfortable reminders that can easily become rote, but never stops being painful, for trans people like himself.
Go to the center, he remembered his roommate saying.
The staff there would help him make the change.
He took the advice, and by the end of the day, Dane Ashton’s ID said Dane Ashton.
His situation was a classic example of the type of work Lorraine Schroeder did every day.
The University of Houston is a big school, with more than 40,000 students, and bit by bit, the challenges queer and trans young people brought into her office weighed on her.
She loved her job, but after more than a decade leading the center, the burden of that work got heavier.
She retired in 2021.
“I just emotionally couldn’t take on anymore,” she said.
Schroeder, who has a master’s degree in clinical psychology, started the center at UH in 2010.
Back then, her position as director was just half-time.
The then-provost agreed to let her share space with the women’s resource center.
She had a small budget then, only about $10,000.
As far as staff, it was just her, plus a few federal work-study students.
One of her first ideas was simple.
She hosted brown bag lunches on Mondays.
They were a way for students to “make connections with other LGBTQ students” or “just hang out with friends,” she wrote in an old funding request.
Ten to 20 students showed up regularly.
The lunches were especially important for the freshmen, who often didn’t know any other queer or trans students on campus yet.
Building community – that was priority No.
She wanted to create a space where LGBTQ students could “let down their guard.”
“Gender identity, when you’re first trying to figure it out, is a big thing,” Schroeder said.
Regardless of which pronouns her students wanted to use that day, she honored them.
Some tried out different names.
As they progressed in their journey of self-discovery, some even volunteered to share their stories – “whichever parts they wanted,” in her words – at events put on by the center.
Each time they did, they got “more and more in touch with accepting themselves,” she said.
As her students grew, so did the center’s budget.
She fundraised and scraped for more money from administrators.
Three years in, she was hired full-time.
By fiscal year 2016, she had turned that initial $10,000 budget into a roughly $140,000 one, school records show.
Like many other schools, the staff organized a special graduation ceremonies just for queer and trans students.
There was even a special library with LGBTQ books.
Then, a few months ago, a decade’s worth of momentum came to a halt.
“In Accordance with Texas Senate Bill 17, the LGBTQ Resource Center has been disbanded,” read a sign posted outside the center in August.
Outcry rose swiftly.
University administrators first said the sign was posted prematurely.
Then Daniel Maxwell, the interim vice chancellor for student affairs, confirmed the center would close Aug. 31, along with the university’s Center for Diversity and Inclusion.
1 message, would be to “address the wide-ranging needs of our students.” No one appears to have lost their job at the LGBTQ center completely, but five employees were moved into new roles as a result of the change, university spokesperson Shawn Lindsey said in an email.
In a message to students Aug. 23, Maxwell said the university remains committed to supporting students.
Some of them see it differently.
She’s not alone in that sentiment.
She started a group called “Free U of H,” which is planning a campus-wide walkout later this month to protest administrators’ handling of the closure.
After his sudden passing, she remembers sending an email to the LGBTQ center, asking if she could use their space to plan a memorial.
Within 15 minutes came a response.
She didn’t need to organize anything, the staff said.
Give them three days, and they’d handle it all.
Weeks earlier, a similar chain of events had played out on a neighboring campus.
Both were chemistry majors.
Both were LGBTQ.
The two bonded instantly.
“Losing someone I think really reminded me how important it is to create that community,” Holladay said.
This summer, when Holladay heard UH’s LGBTQ center was closing, they knew they had to do something.
So Holladay, the co-president of the university’s LGBTQ club Rice Pride, offered honorary membership not just to UH students, but to students across Texas whose resource centers might be on the brink of closing.
Unlike at UH, Rice’s center is entirely student-run.
And unlike at UH, Rice is a private school, so it’s not affected by the new state law.
He’s been in touch with schools across both Florida and Texas, he said, who are wrestling with how to save their centers.
USA TODAY reached out to five public universities in Florida and five in Texas, plus the University of Houston, to ask about the status of their LGBTQ centers.
All of them have had designated centers or offices specifically for LGBTQ students.
Only a few responded to emailed requests for comment.
A spokesperson for Texas A&M University, Kelly Brown, said the university is “working toward compliance” with the law before January.
Administrators are considering how to support all students including those in the LGBTQ community, before taking any action.
Brian Davis, a spokesperson for the University of Texas at Austin, said in an email the school expects to receive more guidance from the UT system on how to implement the law in the coming weeks.
A spokesperson for Gov.
Greg Abbott of Texas did not respond to an emailed request for comment.
The first LGBTQ center dates back to 1971, according to Campus Pride.
It's one of many reasons why October is the month of LGBTQ Center Awareness Day, a holiday that now falls on the same week as the anniversary of Corey Sanders' death.
In North Dakota, queer and trans college students in the 1990s had to organize for their rights, he wrote, “out of necessity,” because his university was failing to protect them from discriminatory laws.
Those circumstances reminded him of the hue and cry across Texas and Florida today.
Progress, he said, came only when students pushed for it.
“Students bore that responsibility,” he said.
“But where was the institution?”
You can reach him by email at zschermele@usatoday.com.
Follow him on X at @ZachSchermele.
ORLANDO, Fla. – The city of Orlando plans to purchase the Pulse nightclub, the location of what was once the nation's deadliest mass shooting, in order to expedite the many fitful efforts to build a permanent memorial.
Orlando Mayor Buddy Dyer in a statement on X, formerly Twitter, announced the city's intent to purchase the land before beginning work on a memorial for the victims and survivors of the massacre that killed 49 people and injured 53 in 2016.
“We think we were probably the only ones that could step in and at least calm the situation down and make sure that everybody understands that we will in fact build a memorial on that site.”
The proposed $2 million land purchase will go before the city council on Monday, Dyer said.
It was the nation’s deadliest mass shooting until a year later when a gunman killed 60 people at a country music festival in Las Vegas.
In the seven years since the massacre, efforts to build a memorial have been mired in debate and controversy.
Some months ago, she exited the organization entirely, according to the Orlando Sentinel.
The foundation, meanwhile, scaled back plans for a $100 million memorial, citing fundraising challenges.
"We are thankful to the City of Orlando for ensuring that the National Pulse Memorial will be located at the Pulse nightclub site, which was always the hope of families of the 49 victims and the Pulse-impacted community," Bowie said.
"We look forward to being a part of the discussion with the City of Orlando as this moves forward."
It’s time for a permanent space where people can grieve, reflect, and honor those stolen from us.
"This is the right thing to do – the site of Pulse is sacred for so many of us and should not be sold to the highest bidder," she said on X.
"I am grateful for the City of Orlando for listening to Pulse families and taking this important step."
In 2021, President Joe Biden signed a law designating the Pulse nightclub in Orlando as a national memorial.
Construction of other permanent memorials commemorating deadly mass shootings in the U.S. has often taken years.
In Aurora, Colorado, an avian-themed memorial opened six years after 13 people were killed in a mass shooting at a movie theater in July 2012.
In June, designers unveiled renderings for a permanent memorial honoring those impacted by the Harvest Festival mass shooting, six years after the October 2017 massacre at the Las Vegas Strip.
Also in June, construction workers broke ground on a permanent memorial dedicated to the lives of the nine members of Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church, who were fatally shot by an admitted white supremacist in 2015 in Charleston, South Carolina.
Billie Eilish has unveiled a huge new back tattoo.
The "What Was I Made For?"
The photo sparked curiosity among many social media users who questioned what the tattoo meant.
"Looks like a toddler with a marker went to town…" one user wrote on X, formerly Twitter.
"It looks like it took a while," another user wrote.
"It seems like she enjoyed it…kinda seems like she's going through it."
Others seemed to be fans of the new ink.
"Billie Eilish tattoo is fire," a fan gushed.
"Please show us the fully colored in version of your tattoo as it looks absolutely killer," another wrote under the post.
Eilish unveiled the tattoo in the fourth photo of a post on Instagram.
Earlier this year, the singer-songwriter pushed back on criticism of her evolving style and choices, saying what others think of her is "not (her) responsibility."
Experts say Eilish, along with female stars such as Taylor Swift and Khloé Kardashian, face an unspoken pressure to stay current by reinventing themselves several times, although they also receive criticism for these changes.
"Some people might go as far as arguing that staying the same over time is a sign of a male star’s commitment to identity."
Eilish became a breakout star in pop music in her teens thanks to the release of the 2017 EP "Don’t Smile at Me" and her 2019 debut album "When We All Fall Asleep, Where Do We Go?"
The "Everything I Wanted" artist released "What Was I Made For?," a breathy piano ballad, as part of the "Barbie" soundtrack in July.
In excerpts of her upcoming memoir, shared by People, Britney Spears wrote that she became pregnant with Justin Timberlake’s baby and had an abortion because he wasn’t ready to become a father.
Spears’ statements underscore the benefits that male partners receive from having access to abortion care — an often overlooked aspect of reproductive health in light of Roe v. Wade’s downfall last year that, if ignored in society and politics alike, perpetuates the idea that abortion is solely a women’s issue.
“Abortion is a highly stigmatized form of healthcare, and women almost always bear the brunt of the stigma and shame around abortion,” said Bethany Everett, an associate professor of sociology at the University of Utah.
Everett, who studies the social and political implications of reproductive health, said Spears' claim that Timberlake did not want to become a parent suggests he was aware that a child could “derail his career,” a reality that “men rarely publicly acknowledge” but is critical to recognize in a post-Roe world.
Timberlake has yet to publicly respond to Spears’ comments.
Andréa Becker, a medical sociologist and postdoctoral research fellow with the University of California San Francisco’s Advancing New Standards in Reproductive Health program, said this example is “consistent with the literature,” in that “men don’t necessarily have to come forward and tell their abortion stories if they don’t want to.”
This pattern is due in part to a lack of research analyzing how access to abortion impacts male partners, a shortfall that Becker said “reinforces the way we talk about birth control, condom use and pregnancy avoidance as a woman’s responsibility and issue.”
“We just forget about the sperm involved in creating a pregnancy,” Becker said.
As a result, stigmas associated with abortion disproportionately impact women.
Data show that 1 in 5 men in the U.S. have been involved in abortion, which researchers say is likely an undercount.
Meanwhile, research has found that some men are hesitant to admit their involvement with abortion.
In a 2022 study, men were less likely to disclose the fact they were involved in an abortion during face-to-face interviews compared to an online survey.
In one of the few studies to analyze how abortion impacts male partners, Everett found that men who impregnated someone as a teenager were more likely to pursue post-high school education and graduate from college when the pregnancy ended in abortion compared to those that ended in live birth.
More on maternal health care inequities:Inequities in maternal health care access are not new.
They have deep roots in history.
“When men don’t speak up, the burden of having to make decisions about unplanned pregnancies and access to abortion falls exclusively on women — and that’s an equity issue,” said Dr. Brian Nguyen, an associate professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Southern California’s Keck School of Medicine.
Nguyen runs a research group called the EMERGE Lab that conducts studies aimed at ensuring men recognize their responsibility in women’s reproductive health and gender equity.
While questions still abound about what role male partners should have in the abortion landscape, it’s important to recognize the general lack of knowledge about abortion in the U.S., particularly among some men, Becker said.
Consequently, research shows many policy decisions now in place threaten the lives of women and girls who would benefit from abortion care, especially for people of color, migrants, people with disabilities, and those living on low incomes or in rural areas.
“They can donate to abortion funds and reproductive health care organizations, and, importantly, with the consent of their partners, acknowledge how abortion access has benefited them.”
We recognize that mistakes may happen – or that new information can emerge after a story is published – and we pledge to address all concerns quickly, fairly and transparently.
If a correction or clarification is warranted, we will highlight that in the original file and explain to readers why the change was made.
Any correction or clarification would also be published on our corrections log.
To report corrections & clarifications, contact:
Please indicate whether you're responding to content online or in the newspaper.
The following corrections & clarifications have been published on stories produced by USA TODAY's newsroom:
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated who is affected by this rule.
The story has been updated to reflect the proposed rule affects satellite and cable providers.
Money: A previous version of this story misstated the number of people 62 and older who have student debt loans.
Sports: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed the locations for Big Ten games.
"5 Things" podcast: On the Oct. 5 show in our segment about school psychologists, we misstated the ratio of counselors to students at a school in Hershey, Pennsylvania.
At 1 to 1000, it is half of the recommended ratio.
Money: An earlier version of this story mischaracterized the competitiveness of Capital One's savings-account interest rates.
The reference has been removed.
Jarrett Payton covers the Chicago Bears.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the amount of Fox Corp.'s settlement with Dominion Voting Systems in a defamation lawsuit.
Money: The UAW strike affects 38 locations across 20 states.
An earlier alert undercounted the number of states affected.
See the list.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly identified an organization.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified the Higher Education Advisory Group.
Sports: A headline on the story incorrectly described Christian Coleman's winning time in the men's 100 meters.
He won with a time of 9.83 seconds, tied for the world's fastest time this season.
News: This article was updated to remove incorrect details about math courses and departments at the University of California, Santa Cruz.
News: A previous version of this video misstated the Longwood Garden's distance from the prison.
His personal security guard ran onto the field to restrain the person.
A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the name of the home team.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified Chester County Prison.
It's the University of Pennsylvania.
News: A previous version of this video misstated how many co-defendants had been booked.
Money: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed among states with no Social Security tax Minnesota, which expanded in May 2023 a state tax exemption for benefits without eliminating the tax.
News: An earlier version of this story contained inaccurate or incomplete facts about the history of language.
Social media: A previous version of this post graphic contained a name misspelling of Scooter Braun.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the extent of the standing water around Dodger Stadium.
Sports: The USA TODAY Sports’ MLB power rankings in the Aug. 15 edition misstated the leader of the American League Central Division.
The Minnesota Twins lead the division.
News: A previous version of this video misidentified USA TODAY’s National Political correspondent, David Jackson.
Entertainment: The location of the bookstore in an earlier version of this story was incorrect.
Wild Geese Bookshop is located in Franklin, Indiana.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the next opponent for the U.S. women should they advance from their Round of 16 game vs. Sweden.
The Americans would then play the winner of Japan vs. Norway in the quarterfinals.
Money: Due to a typo, an earlier version of this story misstated total U.S. sales of the Kia Stinger.
The automaker has sold more than 65,000 Stinger sedans in the U.S. since the model's launch.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees between Madrid, Spain, and a mountainous area in Spain.
It also misstated a temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees in reference to average temperatures in Tunisia.
News: An earlier version incorrectly identified Victoria McQueen's title at her high school.
She is student body president.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified the Norwegian Gem.
It is a Jewel-class cruise ship.
News: A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the origins of Blue Moon.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the Iowa State teams being investigated by the Iowa Racing and Gaming Commission.
The school does not have a baseball program.
News: This article has been updated to include additional nonpartisan sources of data and research.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated 10-year-old J'Adore's diagnosis date.
News: In a 1A story on July 5 about primary care doctors, the relationship between physicians and health professionals such as nurse practitioners and physician assistants was unclear.
Paraprofessionals generally work under the supervision of a licensed physician.
Entertainment: A photo included in an earlier version of this report was misidentified as The Beatles.
The new record featuring John Lennon’s vocals will be a song.
Graphics: A previous version of this story misstated the number of competing teams in the Tour de France.
News: This story has been updated to clarify how many people died on the Titanic.
Money: This story has been updated to clarify details about local liquor laws.
News: A June 19 article on Page 2A misstated the year the 13th Amendment was passed.
Life: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated when the rescue was made.
Travel: A previous version of this story incorrectly described the Airbus A321 with new livery.
The aircraft is part of JetBlue’s existing fleet.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the number of states under red flag warnings.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly named ISR courses.
The courses are called Infant Swimming Resource courses.
News: This story has been updated to correct how far away the body was found from where the missing doctor was last seen.
News: An earlier version of this story did not make clear which versions of the AP African American Studies course framework excluded the word "queer."
It has been updated to clarify that versions in May 2022 and February 2023 did not include the word.
Travel: An earlier version of the story incorrectly listed how police resolved the case.
News: A previous version of this article incorrectly referred to the tornado data provided by the Storm Prediction Center of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Sports: A story on the documentary movie “It Ain’t Over” in the May 12 edition misstated the number of league MVP titles won by Yogi Berra.
The Yankees legend won three.
The information has been updated.
Those portions have been removed.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the Australian Open women's singles champion.
News: In some editions, the March 30 1A story about attackers targeting schools misstated the partners in the mass killing database.
They are USA TODAY, The Associated Press and Northeastern University.
News: This story originally included an inaccurate detail related to one woman's application for a domestic violence restraining order.
The information on Alison Kessler has been updated.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the comparative price between electric vehicles and gas-powered vehicles.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the year of Paul Walker's death.
News: A previous version of this article misstated Terry Wilson's employment status.
He remains a Fresno State employee but was granted leave from the position to serve as a staff-wide union representative.
News: An earlier version of this podcast incorrectly stated that USA TODAY ran the Dilbert comic strip.
It was the USA TODAY Network, not USA TODAY.
News: USA TODAY did not publish the Dilbert comic strip.
A previous version of this article was incorrect.
Facebook: A previous version of this post contained photos from other events earlier this month in Florida.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated salary figures of bartenders and pharmacists.
News: A story on Page 1A Feb. 16 about corporate diversity gave the incorrect date of Southern Co.’s annual meeting.
It takes place later this year.
News: A previous version of this graphic misstated the title of a movie.
News: A previous version of this article misstated the number of Maryland’s Eastern Shore counties.
Social media: An earlier version of this video had an incorrect description.
News: An earlier version misstated the requirements in the Biden administration’s proposed Title IX rule for determining the outcome of sexual assault cases.
The proposed regulation would require schools to use the “preponderance of evidence” standard most of the time.
News: An earlier version of this video misstated the status of a House Ethics Committee investigation.
Social media: A previous post misidentified the award Beyoncé won.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the home state of Sen. Chris Coons.
He is from Delaware.
Social media: A previous version of this post included an incorrect year of death.
News: An earlier version misstated the name of Hillsdale College's spokesperson, Emily Stack Davis.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated the new price of the Tesla Model Y.
It is $52,990.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this gallery included a photo incorrectly identifying Paige Butcher.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified who created Seven Principles of Leave No Trace.
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2016
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2017
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2018
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2019
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2020
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2021
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2022
The USA TODAY Opinion section publishes analysis, argument and essays on a wide variety of subjects.
We're looking for timeliness (pegged to news), persuasion pitched to the other side, new information, novel arguments, revelatory insights, passion without partisanship, first-person experience, original reporting that reveals fresh angles and makes news, expert knowledge, and/or a topic that will drive conversation on social media and in the real world.
We accept only pieces that are submitted exclusively to USA TODAY.
We do not accept material that has been published on blogs, social media or anywhere else.
Columns typically run 550 to 750 words.
They should be pasted directly into an email and sent to theforum@usatoday.com.
Pieces should include links (URLs, not headlines or footnotes) to back up quotes and factual material.
People featured in columns must be identified by their real, full names.
We do not publish open letters, class projects or material that has been submitted to multiple outlets.
Rebuttals to editorials and columns published in USA TODAY should be submitted as letters to the editor, not as full-length op-eds.
Due to the volume of submissions, we can’t respond to all columns sent to us.
If our Opinion team is interested in yours, you will hear from us within three business days.
Submissions may be edited for accuracy, clarity, style, standards and length.
Please include with your submission a short biography, two sentences at most, to run at the end of your column, as well as a current photograph, to which you own publishing rights.
If you or a business, trade group or other institution with which you are associated stands to gain financially or in any other way from your column, you should disclose that information in detail.
In most cases, it should also be included in the body of the piece or in the author's biographical information.
Columns are accepted for online publication; print publication is not guaranteed.
All columns published by USA TODAY are available for use online and in print by the more than 250 properties in the USA TODAY Network.
They include Austin; Bergen County, New Jersey; Burlington, Vermont; Cincinnati; Columbus, Ohio; Des Moines; Detroit; El Paso, Texas; Indianapolis; Louisville, Kentucky; Memphis, Tennessee; Milwaukee; Nashville, Tennessee; Phoenix, Reno, Nevada; Palm Beach, Florida; and Wilmington, Delaware.
Authors may post their columns elsewhere 48 hours after they are published at USA TODAY.
By submitting a column to USA TODAY and agreeing to its publication, authors are granting exclusive rights to the piece to the USA TODAY Network for 48 hours and non-exclusive rights thereafter.
To get a sense of our range, preferences and requirements, check out our op-ed section, follow us on Twitter and Facebook, or sign up for our daily Opinion newsletter.
If you're interested in joining conversations about topics in USA TODAY, email letters@usatoday.com, comment on Facebook or use #tellusatoday on Twitter.
Letters are edited for accuracy, clarity and length and to conform to our editorial style and standards.
Submissions of 200 words or fewer have the best chance of being published.
Letters must include a name, address and phone number.
Corrections to published letters or columns follow USA TODAY guidelines.
She had fun learning the chants that fans perform at football games.
“I knew that I was in a safe space.”
This has in the past two years become an important consideration for college-bound students from all backgrounds and beliefs.
The digital tables also list, for every four-year institution in the country, such things as racial and gender diversity among students and faculty, the number of student veterans enrolled, the incidence of on-campus race-motivated hate crimes, free-speech rankings and if the university or college serves many students from rural places.
Test our new College Welcome Guide:These tools offer a new lens on campus life.
Students have long picked schools based on their academic reputations and social life.
But with campuses in the crosshairs of the culture wars, many students are now also taking stock of attacks on diversity, course content and speech and speakers from both ends of the political spectrum.
They’re monitoring hate crimes, anti-LGBTQ+ legislation, state abortion laws and whether students like them ‒ Black, rural, military veterans, LGBTQ+ or from other backgrounds ‒ are represented and supported on campus.
When they look at colleges in various states now, she said, “There are students who are asking, ‘Am I really wanted here?’”
For some students on both sides of the political divide, the answer is no.
In the chaotic new world of American colleges and universities, many say they feel unwelcome at certain schools, while others are prepared to shut down speakers and report faculty with whose opinions they disagree.
It’s too early to know how much this trend will affect where and whether prospective students end up going to college since publicly available enrollment data lags real time.
But there are early clues that it’s having a significant impact.
One in 4 prospective students has already ruled out a college or university for consideration because of the political climate in its state, according to a survey by the higher education consulting firm Art & Science Group.
Among students who describe themselves as liberal, the most common reason to rule out colleges and universities in a particular state, that survey found, is because it’s “too Republican” or has what they consider lax gun regulations, anti-LGBTQ+ legislation, restrictive abortion laws and a lack of concern about racism.
Students who describe themselves as conservative are rejecting states they believe to be “too Democrat” and that have liberal abortion and gay rights laws.
Of these, 8 in 10 say they would prefer to go to a state with greater access to reproductive health services.
“We have many young women who will not look at certain states,” said Levine.
One of her own clients backed out of going to a university in St. Louis after Missouri banned almost all abortions following the Supreme Court’s Dobbs decision, she said.
Institutions in Alabama, Florida, Louisiana and Texas are the most likely to be knocked off the lists of liberal students, according to the Art & Science Group survey.
They’re generally most likely to steer clear of the South and Midwest, while conservative students avoid California and New York.
One in 8 high school students in Florida say they won’t go to a public university in their own state because of its education policies, a separate poll, by the college ranking and information website Intelligent.com, found.
“You are attacking kids who are already vulnerable,” said Javier Gomez, an LGBTQ+ student in his first year at Miami Dade College.
It’s not yet evident whether the new laws are affecting where LGBTQ+ young people are choosing to go to college, said Casey Pick, director of law and policy at The Trevor Project, which supports LGBTQ+ young people in crisis.
But LGBTQ+ adults are moving away from states passing anti-LGBTQ+ laws, she said.
And “if adult employees are taking this into account when they decide where they want to live, you can bet that college students are making the same decisions.”
“The real attack here is on the feeling of belonging,” said Jeremy Young, who directs the Freedom to Learn program at PEN America, which tracks laws that restrict college and university diversity efforts and teaching about race.
“What it really does is hoist a flag to say to the most marginalized students, ‘We don’t want you here.’”
More than 40% of university and college administrators say the Supreme Court ruling curbing the use of affirmative action in admissions will affect diversity on their campuses, a Princeton Review poll found as the school year was beginning.
College students of all races and political persuasions report feeling uncomfortable on campuses that have become political battlegrounds.
It found that those who answer in these ways are more likely to frequently experience stress and more likely to drop out.
Nearly two-thirds say that faculty and administrators don’t understand the challenges they face, and 70% say the same thing about their non-veteran classmates.
Colleges should be “safe and affirming spaces,” said Pick, of the Trevor Project ‒ not places of isolation and alienation.
Of those, 72% say they worry their opinions would be considered unacceptable by classmates and 45%, by their professors.
Conservative students are less likely than their liberal classmates to believe that all points of view are welcome and less willing to share theirs.
“Is that really an intellectually diverse environment?” asked Sean Stevens, director of polling and analytics at the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression, or FIRE, which has launched a campus free-speech ranking based on students’ perceptions of comfort expressing ideas, tolerance for speakers and other measures.
“Anecdotally and from personal experience, there’s certainly a pocket of students who are weighing these factors in terms of where to go to college,” Stevens said.
Eighty-one percent of liberal students and 53% of conservative ones say they support reporting faculty who make comments that they find offensive, the same survey found.
It used sample comments such as, “There is no evidence of anti-Black bias in police shootings,” “Requiring vaccination for COVID is an assault on individual freedom” and “Biological sex is a scientific fact.”
A professor at Texas A&M University became the subject of an investigation when a student accused her of criticizing the state’s lieutenant governor during a lecture, though she was ultimately exonerated.
An anthropology lecturer at the University of Chicago who taught an undergraduate course called “The Problem of Whiteness” said she was deluged with hateful messages when a conservative student posted her photo and email address on social media.
More than half of all freshmen say that colleges have the right to ban extreme speakers, according to an annual survey by an institute at the University of California, Los Angeles; the College Pulse poll says that sentiment is held by twice the proportion of liberal students as conservative ones.
A group of Stanford students in March disrupted an on-campus speech by a federal judge whose judicial record they said was anti-LGBTQ+.
When he asked for an administrator to intervene, an associate dean for diversity, equity and inclusion confronted him and asked: “Is it worth the pain that this causes and the division that this causes?” The associate dean was put on leave and later resigned.
“Today it is a sad fact that the greatest threat to free speech comes from within the academy,” pronounced the right-leaning American Council of Trustees and Alumni, which is pushing colleges to sign on to its Campus Freedom Initiative that encourages teaching students about free expression during freshman orientation and disciplining people who disrupt speakers or events, among other measures.
“I have to imagine that universities that have a bad track record on freedom of expression or academic freedom, that it will affect their reputations,” said Steven Maguire, the organization’s campus freedom fellow.
Some colleges are now actively recruiting students on the basis of these kinds of concerns.
Colorado College in September created a program to ease the process for students who want to transfer away from institutions in states that have banned diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives; Hampshire College in Massachusetts has offered admission to any student from New College in Florida, subject of what critics have described as a conservative takeover.
Thirty-five have so far accepted the invitation.
Though many conservative critics of colleges and universities say faculty are indoctrinating students with liberal opinions, incoming freshmen tend to hold left-leaning views before they ever set foot in a classroom, according to that UCLA survey.
Fewer than 1 in 5 consider themselves conservative.
Three-quarters say abortion should be legal and favor stricter gun control laws, 68% say wealthy people should pay more taxes than they do now and 86% that climate change should be a federal priority and that there should be a clear path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants.
Prospective students say they are watching as new laws are passed and controversies erupt on campuses and actively looking into not just the quality of food and available majors at the colleges they might attend, but state politics.
Florida’s anti-LGBTQ+ laws prompted Javier Gomez to leave his native state and move to New York to go to fashion school.
“People ask me, ‘Why the hell are you back in Florida?’” said Gomez.
It’s overwhelming at times.
It can be very mentally depleting.
Sign up for our higher education newsletter.
Thousands of Israelis and Palestinians have been killed and Palestinians have been ordered to evacuate from the northern Gaza Strip ahead of Israel's impending ground invasion, leading to a humanitarian crisis that has brought protests from the United Nations and around the world.
The U.N. said about 1 million Gaza residents have been displaced in just a week, about half of them finding refuge in U.N. schools and other facilities where water supplies are diminishing.
The war has claimed more than 4,000 lives since Hamas launched an unprecedented surprise attack Oct. 7.
Meanwhile, the World Health Organization pleaded with Israel on Sunday to immediately reverse evacuation orders for hospitals in northern Gaza, saying the deadlines are impossible to meet and risk additional loss of life.
"Evacuation orders by Israel to hospitals are practically impossible to implement and are a death sentence for the sick and injured."
Here are several organizations that are providing aid to people caught in the conflict.
How to cope:The videos out of Israel, Gaza are graphic, but some can't look away
"Our members are speaking loudly and clearly about the values that unite our community: Opposition to this horrific violence, and a commitment to Israeli/Palestinian partnership on the path to ending it, and achieving peace and equality," the agency said in a statement.
The organization is asking for donations to improve access to essential services like water and to support livelihood projects.
Doctors Without Borders is a nongovernmental organization that describes itself as an "independent, impartial and neutral" charity that provides humanitarian aid to people affected by conflict, disease outbreaks and natural and human-made disasters.
The agency is seeking donations to continue to provide medical care in the area.
The agency has reported overcrowding in hospitals, a lack of medical supplies, and dangerous working conditions as it tries to support the thousands injured by the fighting.
UNRWA has designated shelters to host the estimated 127,000 people displaced in Gaza.
The agency is seeking donations to support its work.
The Jewish Agency for Israel North American Council, an American charity organization, is accepting donations to help victims of terrorism.
Save the Children issued an emergency alert in response to the conflict, noting that escalating violence has left 1.2 million children in need of humanitarian aid.
The agency is accepting donations.
National and international organizations that aid victims in the conflict include the Palestine Children's Relief Fund (PCRF), which works to provide lifesaving medical relief and humanitarian aid.
Founded by former President Jimmy Carter and his wife, Rosalynn Carter, in partnership with Emory University, The Carter Center is a humanitarian aid organization that has been promoting peace and a viable two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict for decades.
After Israel declared war, The Carter Center released a statement condemning the targeting of Israeli and Palestinian civilians and called for international action to end the violence.
WASHINGTON — President Joe Biden urged Americans in an Oval Office address on Thursday evening to stand with Ukraine and Israel, arguing that U.S. leadership abroad and congressional aid to both countries is essential.
Biden sought to drive home the value of continued U.S. support for the close allies to a war-weary public less than a day after his visit Israel to meet with the country's prime minister.
He pressed for the release of hostages that are being held by Hamas and connected the militant group's assault on Israel to Russian President Vladimir Putin's war against Ukraine.
"Hamas and Putin represent different threats, but they share this in common: they both want to completely annihilate a neighboring democracy," Biden said.
He added, "I know these conflicts can seem far away, and it's natural to ask, why does this matter to America."
Speaking from behind the Resolute Desk, the U.S. president said it is vital to America's national security to prevent dictators and terrorists from spreading chaos and destruction.
"If we don't stop Putin's appetite for power and control in Ukraine, he won't limit himself to just Ukraine."
Biden will detail a request to Congress on Friday to pay for more weapons for Ukraine, buy new equipment for the American military to replace what it has sent Kyiv and replenish the Iron Dome air defense system that protects Israel.
Biden plans to request more than $98 billion in emergency funding for the wars in Israel and Ukraine, U.S. border security and other international crises, according to a source familiar with the funding request who asked for anonymity because they are not authorized to speak publicly.
The source said Biden wants $60 billion for the war in Ukraine, with half of the money going toward replenishing U.S. military stockpiles.
Biden is also seeking $14 billion for Israel and $14 billion for the U.S. border as part of the request, which also includes money for the Indo-Pacific and $10 billion for humanitarian assistance.
It was only his second speech from the Oval Office as commander-in-chief.
The ask amends Biden's previous supplemental request to Congress for more money for the U.S. border and Ukraine's counteroffensive against Russia.
He arrived at the White House early Thursday morning and spoke with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy later in the day.
Earlier this week, long-range missiles that Ukraine had been requesting from the Biden administration showed up on the battlefield in Russian-held territory inside of Ukraine.
The U.S. secretly supplied to weapons to Ukraine after Zelenskyy's visit to Washington last month.
As he flew back from Israel, the White House said Biden would make a rare address to the nation on Thursday that outlined the U.S. response to both conflicts.
His first Oval Office address came in June after he reached a deal with Congress to avert a default on the nation's debt.
Biden's latest funding request pairs money for Ukraine with assistance to Israel, which is fighting the militant group Hamas.
Thousands of people have died in the conflict that erupted on Oct. 7 when Hamas launched a sudden attack on the Israelis.
At least 32 Americans have been killed, the U.S. president said in Thursday's address.
He again pledged to pursue every avenue to bring home U.S. citizens who have been taken hostage, saying he has no higher priority.
"The terrorist group Hamas unleashed pure unadulterated evil in the world, but sadly the Jewish people know perhaps better than anyone that there is no limit to the depravity of people when they want to inflict pain on others," Biden said.
Hamas blamed Israel for an explosion at a hospital in Gaza that killed hundreds of civilians.
Israel and the U.S., citing intelligence, have denied the accusation.
Biden said Wednesday as he returned to the U.S. from the Middle East that he had secured an agreement to deliver some aid to the densely populated strip of land that borders Egypt.
If Hamas does not divert the assistance, Biden said Thursday, the shipments of aid will be sustained.
He said that Israel must also protect civilians and provide the people of Gaza with food, water and medicine and that he discussed the humanitarian relief with Netanyahu during his visit to Tel Aviv.
Biden said he told Israeli leaders about lessons learned by the U.S. after the Sept. 11, 2001 terror attacks.
Biden in Israel:President embraces Netanyahu, says Israel must again be 'safe place' for Jewish people
Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., the top Republican on the Senate Intelligence Committee, said he doesn’t anticipate a problem with getting support for aid to Israel.
“I think the challenge is determining exactly what that aid consists of because that will be largely determined by the nature of this conflict,” Rubio told reporters Wednesday, before Biden sent Congress his request.
“Like almost every other Republican, I feel strongly that we have to demonstrate that we’re willing to secure our own border if we’re going to ask the taxpayers in this country for more to support somebody else’s,” he said.
Sen. Mark Warner, D-Va., who chairs the Senate Intelligence Committee, told reporters Wednesday it is “extraordinarily important” that the United States supports Israel and continues to stand up for Ukraine.
“I think we’ve got to get this full supplemental done as quickly as possible,” he added.
Getting an aid package through Congress could be an uphill climb, given the chaos that has paralyzed the House of Representatives and the opposition by some Republican lawmakers in the lower chamber to any additional Ukraine assistance.
The chamber has been without a speaker for 16 days since lawmakers ousted Rep. Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., from the position during a vote triggered by a group of conservative rebels.
Republicans have been unable to elect a successor for McCarthy, bringing the business of the House to a standstill.
Without a speaker, the House cannot approve critical legislation such as the aid package Biden is requesting to support America's allies.
Further complicating matters: a possible government shutdown in mid-November.
A temporary funding bill that has kept government agencies running expires on Nov. 17.
Lawmakers must pass another funding bill by then or all government functions will cease except those deemed necessary.
Addressing the calamity in the House, Biden recalled his visit to Kyiv in February, which he said served as a reminder that "America is a beacon to the world, still" and an indispensable nation.
I know we have our divisions at home.
We can not and will not let terrorists like Hamas and tyrants like Putin win.
Netanyahu is out, Biden is in:Why Israel is embracing a new 'father figure'
The latest conflict between Israel and Hamas began when the Palestinian militant group staged a surprise attack in southern Israel nearly two weeks ago.
Crossing the border into several towns, Hamas fighters kidnapped and killed more than 1,400 Israeli civilians and soldiers and took at least 199 hostages, including some U.S. citizens.
Hamas militants in the Gaza Strip have launched rockets every day since, aiming at cities across Israel.
Israel responded by hitting Gaza with a series of airstrikes that the Hamas-run Palestinian Health Ministry says have killed 2,800 people.
Israel also has been setting the stage for a ground invasion that could begin any day.
The U.S. fears that other countries and militant groups could get pulled into the conflict, causing it to engulf the Middle East.
Antisemitism, racism and Islamophobia are also intensifying in the U.S., Biden said on Thursday evening.
The White House said that the president and first lady called the boy's father and uncle after Biden's national address.
Contributing: Michael Collins and Rachel Looker
Warning: This article contains graphic descriptions of death.
JERUSALEM − They don't agree on a lot of things.
They agree on this: what they have seen and had to do, no one should have to see or do.
Two weeks into the conflict that began when members of Hamas massacred civilians in rural communities and at a music festival on Israel's border with the Gaza Strip, Israelis and Palestinians have been collecting, weeping over and burying their dead with as much dignity as they can in trying, unpredictable and dangerous circumstances.
In Israel, where some 1,400 civilians and soldiers have died and where all Jews are by religious tenet supposed to be buried immediately after death − a few days at most − this has involved emergency responders going to great lengths to recover victims which they have discovered in scenes of unspeakable horror, sometimes in locations where fighting is still taking place.
In Gaza, where at least 3,500 Palestinians have been killed and large parts of the territory controlled by Hamas is in ruins as a result of Israel's bombing campaign, this has meant families resorting to makeshift graveyards dug in empty lots and authorities storing bodies in ice cream freezers as morgues run full, doctors and witnesses say.
'I won't condemn Hamas':Some Palestinians find it hard to denounce attacks on Israel
On both sides of the Israel-Gaza border, faith traditions define the rules of burial.
For Jews, who believe the dead must be watched until buried, and that every part of a body must be buried, the idea of an unguarded corpse is an almost unthinkable lapse.
Within the Muslim tradition, the body is wrapped in a shroud and the head is positioned to face Mecca with the eyes and mouth closed.
He filmed himself this week as he was driving in his car.
Across the back seat his father, killed in one of those Israeli strikes, lay dead.
Biden embraces Netanyahu:U.S. president says Israel must again be 'safe place' for Jewish people
"We have no funeral cars, no ambulances," he said.
I know people can't attend the funeral.
No one can.
But please pray for him.
Its mission is to collect the remains of the dead, including their blood if they can, so they can be buried in accordance with Jewish religious law.
He was in New York during the 9/11 attacks.
He has responded to natural disasters in India.
He has rushed many times to the scene of suicide bombings to collect body parts.
Israel-Hamas war:She spent her life advocating for Palestinian rights.
Then Hamas came
They were missing fingers and eyes.
In another home, he found a pregnant woman lying face down in a pool of blood.
Cell phone videos, security footage, photographs from residents and accounts of witnesses who survived the initial attacks have also helped establish with some specificity the brutality of the Hamas attacks on civilians on Israel's southern border.
However, Israel's military has asked them to document it as part of the process of collecting evidence and in case it is helpful in identifying remains.
Hamas attacks:How Israeli police are trying to find the gunmen
On the grounds of the base were a series of refrigerated trucks and shipping containers.
Inside were dozens of filled body bags of various sizes − some very small.
The bereaved family typically hosts a meal and opens their home for three days for guests to visit and share their condolences.
Unsweetened bitter coffee is served.
Friends and family recount the life and qualities of the person deceased.
In Gaza, there is now little capacity to observe these rituals.
One of the first photos he took was of a paramedic performing CPR on a wounded man.
At least 16 Palestinian journalists have been killed since Oct. 7, according to the Palestinian Journalists Syndicate, a non-governmental professional organization.
"Who kills babies, who kills babies − free world, where are you?"
He stood in front of a medical stretcher on which lay six precious bundles.
Bloodied, bandaged and lifeless, their tiny bodies were covered in a fine gray dust from the exploded concrete and brick that killed them.
She said she wasn't able to participate in a brief ceremony at the site marking the deaths because she was worried about the safety of her family and had decided to flee south, close to Gaza's border with Egypt.
Communication into and out of Gaza is also exceptionally difficult because of diminishing electricity and virtually no internet access.
Thirty people, he said, were operated on without any anesthetic.
"For those that were killed we had to make a quick decision," he added.
WASHINGTON - After Rep. Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., was ousted as speaker earlier this month, acting speaker Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-N.C., was chosen from a succession list to be the interim, or temporary, speaker.
McHenry started serving in Congress when he was just 29 years old.
He’s since taken on several leadership roles and is seen as a moderate Republican compared to some of his colleagues in the House.
Rep. Emanuel Cleaver II, D-Mo., who arrived in Congress at the same time as McHenry, recalled McHenry’s progression as a lawmaker in an interview with Roll Call.
“When he first arrived, he was seen as a bomb thrower and someone who was looking for a fight,” Cleaver told the outlet.
Here’s a closer look at McHenry’s experience and voting record.
McHenry is serving his 10th term in Congress and represents the 10th congressional district in North Carolina.
He is a McCarthy ally and chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, a role that helped him negotiate the debt limit deal earlier this year.
“In addition, he was one of two Republican members McCarthy tapped to negotiate the debt limit deal with administration officials earlier this year,” he said.
One of the top issues surrounding the government shutdown fight last month was whether the U.S. government should give more aid to Ukraine.
McHenry has previously supported measures to fund Ukraine's military defense.
He said last year that “First and foremost, the U.S. must maintain a firm, long-term commitment to cutting off Russia from global trade and financial markets.”
On abortion, McHenry applauded the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade last year and said in a statement that it was “an important step forward to protect the right to life.”
“Today’s decision also marks a return to our constitutional norm of rights and powers being reserved to the states, and a federal government of limited and enumerated powers,” he said.
In 2018, former President Donald Trump said that McHenry had “the greatest name in politics.” He’s also endorsed McHenry previously for Congress.
McHenry said in a statement on the day of the Jan. 6, Capitol attack, that he supported Trump in both the 2016 election and the 2020 election.
I supported and worked to pass his agenda every step of the way—voting with President Trump more than any other member of North Carolina’s Congressional delegation.
However, he also said he could not violate his oath of office and was one of the lawmakers who voted to certify President Joe Biden’s 2020 election win.
When asked about Trump’s 2020 election indictment, McHenry told The Charlotte Observer that, “What we don’t want in America is a two-tier system of justice, where a former president, or the son of a president, or a president is treated differently.”
Six weeks before Hamas’ deadly attack on Israel, a deputy political advisor in the group did an interview with a Lebanese news outlet.
Tucked into it was a specific warning.
“We are closely discussing the prospects of this war with all relevant parties.”
At the time, his statements were couched as a caution.
Israel had plans including targeted killings of leaders of the Palestinian resistance group that controls Gaza, he said.
Those Israeli provocations never happened.
Yet by mid-October, an all-out war was under way.
Hamas led a surprise attack on Oct. 7, killing more than 1,300 people including more than 30 Americans and taking at least 200 hostages, and a mounting response from Israel now brings more bloodshed.
Already, Israel has struck a range of targets, and by mid-week announced at least six key Hamas operatives had been “eliminated.”
They’re pursuing him not just for his insider knowledge of the attack, but for his ties to others – possibly those “relevant parties” he cited in August.
The attack went far beyond what was expected from Hamas alone: A mass border invasion.
Withering rocket fire.
Precise raids on military surveillance, communications and intelligence hubs.
Those plans bear the hallmarks of sophisticated backers from the outside.
If Iran and Hezbollah were involved in the Oct. 7 attack – as security authorities now suspect – someone from Hamas coordinated their assistance.
More:Is Iran behind Hamas terrorist attacks?
What it would mean for US and Middle East security
“But I can tell you that Iran is heavily involved with everything that's happening in Gaza – the training, equipment, funding and method of fighting,”
“We are worried that the technology came from Tehran to Beirut and to Gaza.”
Now, he’s a prime target as Israel seeks out the strategists behind Oct. 7.
He is under the radar.
“We will attack them, we will dismantle them, dismantle their system.”
Officially, Iran has denied playing a role in the attack even as it congratulates Hamas.
President Joe Biden told 60 Minutes on Oct. 15 that there’s no evidence “at this point” that Iran was behind the attack.
Israeli officials have made similar comments, stressing that the investigation is in its early stages.
But U.S. and Israeli intelligence analysts say that if anyone could give the group the ability to launch such stunning land, air and sea attacks against the Israeli military, it would be Iran and its Revolutionary Guard.
And his role in raising money and plotting terrorist attacks for Hamas has been known to both governments for a generation.
Yet he has evaded authorities for years.
“He knows that if he steps anywhere close, we will kill him,” a former top Israeli intelligence official until earlier this year told USA TODAY.
Those included large-scale bombings and rocket attacks, according to the U.S.
Directorate of National Intelligence and the National Counterterrorism Center, which it oversees.
Upon his final release, he was forced out of Gaza for being a continuing threat to Israel and moved to the Syrian capital of Damascus to join Hamas leadership in exile there.
He spent time in Turkey, where he began building an operational Hamas presence, in Qatar, where Hamas’ political leadership resided, and Lebanon.
He publicly praised the murders, which sparked Hamas’ month-long war with Israel that year, as a “heroic operation,” State Department documents show.
In September 2015, the U.S. Treasury Department sanctioned him as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist, saying he served as “a key financier and financial facilitator for Hamas military cells.”
The move came amid intense pressure on Qatar by Washington to crack down on its longstanding role in providing safe haven for terrorists.
In the aftermath of the Oct. 7 attack, the FBI and other U.S. agencies have joined Israel in its response – and its investigation, according to Attorney General Merrick Garland and other Biden administration officials.
That includes the hunt for at least 13 Americans who may be still held hostage by Hamas, the dragnet for Hamas foot soldiers believed to be hiding inside Israel and the broader investigation into who orchestrated and led the sophisticated invasion, two U.S. intelligence officials told USA TODAY on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss ongoing investigations.
If the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks in the U.S. are any guide, it could be months or even years before authorities answer those questions in detail.
Iran has signaled a more aggressive approach to Israel, including a warning this week about potential Iranian action against Israel for its response in Gaza.
Hezbollah has issued similar warnings.
Iran’s suspected involvement in the planning of the Gaza raid has been widely reported.
Iran also has supported Hamas militarily, it said, “and has helped it design and produce a domestic missile and rocket system to match the capabilities and material available in Gaza.”
Neither did senior Trump administration Iran official Richard Goldberg when he mentioned the existence of a Lebanon-based intelligence center for the three groups during a public event Monday.
Hamas, Iran and Hezbollah, Goldberg said, “have coordinated a fusion cell in Beirut since 2021 where they put everybody together in a war room, an intel room operations room, they go in and out of Lebanon… and they coordinated it all.”
The former top Israeli security official confirmed to USA TODAY the existence of the joint Iran-Hezbollah-Hamas intelligence center in Beirut.
Goldberg, the Director for Countering Iranian Weapons of Mass Destruction for the White House National Security Council from 2019 to 2020, said he believed the strong cooperation between Hamas, Iran and Hezbollah helped them keep the plot away from Israeli intelligence, just like al-Qaeda kept the 9/11 plot away from the U.S.
“And so if you don't have any intel on the planning of the attack, it stands to reason you have no intel on Iran's involvement in said attack plans,” Goldberg said.
You’re not going to find the intel.
Rep. Brad Schneider (D-IL), a member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, also said all signs point to Iran, given its role in funding, training and equipping Hamas fighters.
“If you breed an attack dog, you train an attack dog, you equip an attack dog, maybe you're surprised that the dog breaks through the fence and attacks, but you're still responsible for that attack,” Schneider said.
“And Iran has been training Hamas, has been equipping Hamas, funding Hamas, and this has the fingerprints of (Iran) training and planning all the way through.”
Speaking to Al Jazeera, just after the attack, he described his view of the Israeli response to come.
As she got older, Hayes, who is Black, continued to turn to them because she felt employers perceived her as more professional when her hair was straight.
Now, Hayes is one of thousands of women who blame hair straightening products for damaging her reproductive health and is among those suing their manufacturers.
This week, the FDA said it will investigate the products, which research has connected to an increased risk of some types of cancer.
“It's about time that someone, a regulatory body, is looking at the dangers of these products,” he said.
The FDA proposed a rule that would ban formaldehyde and other formaldehyde-releasing chemicals from being used in hair-smoothing and straightening products sold in the United States.
The products have been used most extensively by Black women.
On hair treatments, the ingredients show up as formaldehyde, formalin or methylene glycol, according to the FDA, and are found in some hair relaxers and keratin treatment products.
Using the chemicals has been linked to long-term health concerns, such as increased risks of cancer, and can cause short-term risks such as breathing problems, the agency said.
Cancer concerns:FDA proposes ban on hair-straightening, smoothing products over cancer-causing chemicals
The FDA is soliciting public comment about the proposal, but it could be months before anything is decided.
The comment period typically lasts at least 60 days, though some have been as short as 10 days or as long as nine months.
If the agency issues a final rule, it is published in the Federal Register along with an explanation of regulatory requirements, the industrial impact of those requirements and any response to public comments.
The regulatory requirements also are published under Title 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
Former FDA associate commissioner Peter Pitts said federal law grants the agency oversight of some cosmetic products.
If the administration moves forward with its proposal, Pitts said the products could be removed from shelves within days, though it could take much longer.
It all depends on how aggressive the new rule is, he said.
Links between hair dye and chemical straighteners and an increased risk of breast cancer were made in a 2019 study published in the International Journal of Cancer.
In 2022, the National Institutes of Health published a study that found women who used hair-straightening chemicals had a higher risk of developing uterine cancer, and that Black women may be more affected because they use the products at a higher rate.
"We urge the FDA to investigate the potential health threat posed by chemical hair straightening products," the letter said.
He said hair straightening tools, such as an electronic flat iron or hot combs, can achieve similar looks, though they don’t last as long as relaxers do.
“We are, as Black women, under a lot of pressure to wear our hair a certain way,” she said.
Proposed federal legislation called the CROWN Act, versions of which have been adopted by several states, would prohibit discriminating against a person for their hair or hairstyle based on race or national origin.
A federal bill, sponsored by Rep. Bonnie Coleman, D-N.J., passed in the House in 2022 but has not been reintroduced this session of Congress.
Brown was among the bill’s sponsors.
“I wear my hair in braids,” she said.
“That was something important for me to put on display because of the public pressure many Black women receive to wear their hair.”
ARLINGTON, Texas – Postseason baseball is not supposed to be like this.
In a sport where you can’t simply go one-on-one, where a pitcher may simply choose not to throw you the ball in a spot you can hit it, where solid contact and 100-mph line drives are no guarantee of success, one player cannot determine the outcome of a game, the fate of a team.
They are now two games away from a third consecutive World Series appearance and six victories away from defending their championship after a 10-3 thrashing of the Texas Rangers in Game 4 of the American League Championship Series, a win that squared the ALCS at two games apiece.
Alex Bregman got the party started, a two-run, first-inning triple igniting a team-wide strafing of the Rangers’ pitching staff.
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
In eight postseason games, Alvarez is now batting .419 (13 for 31), reaching base at a .471 clip, and has driven in 13 runs.
It won’t appear on his playoff game log, but let the record reflect that the hitters in front and behind him in the lineup combined to drive in five runs.
The swagger is back, largely because of their cleanup hitter who often moves in silence but might give Bryce Harper a run as the most impactful hitter in the game.
“Having Alvarez hit like he’s been hitting, nothing can stop us right now.”
Thursday’s action offered plenty of evidence.
Dane Dunning, Heaney’s capable piggyback partner, started the inning issuing two walks and a single, and after striking out Alex Bregman, was not going to face Alvarez with the bases loaded.
So Cody Bradford, a soft-throwing but deceptive rookie lefty, was summoned for the impossible task.
But Alvarez was a different ask.
Alvarez clubbed it just to the right of dead center field, 111 mph off his bat and looking for all the world like it was his seventh homer in eight games this postseason.
Bradford backpedaled and looked, hoping for the best.
In this one, it was a go-ahead sacrifice fly.
It was 7-3 Houston.
And for him to come through like that time and time again for us, it's huge.
He’s found a groove in October, hitting four home runs, three of them at least 430 feet.
Even if there’s not much on the table when he comes up.
Um, why is it so difficult?
“He drives in all the runs.”
When told of his Cuban countryman’s gripe, Alvarez allowed a little grin.
“Like I always say, if they leave a pitch over the middle of the plate, and I’m able to make contact, I’m going to try to drive them in,” he says.
OK, so sometimes he’s pretty modest.
But he does have his pride, and a good memory.
When asked if this October was his most locked-in, he offered a mild rebuttal.
And 2022 wasn’t too bad.
Or his gargantuan go-ahead home run off Jose Alvarado in the sixth inning of Game 6 of the World Series, a shot that made it rain champagne hours later?
But he batted .192 last postseason, drawing six walks to 16 strikeouts.
Yet even at his less than best, he had a massive impact on Houston’s championship.
As for this year?
But he does that every day.
Not many guys can do that.
The other team doesn’t want you to beat him.
“At the same time, it’s inevitable.”
It’s starting to feel that way, even if Alvarez, 26, strangely slips under the radar.
Yet the Rangers were terrible those years.
You’d think the guy squeezing the life out of their 90-win team, unsullied by scandal, might attract more enmity.
“When you give hope to the Houston Astros and some fuel, some adversity too, we take that really well,” says McCormick.
“We had a huge amount of confidence coming here.”
It’s only growing.
They’ll also have the best player on the field, perhaps any field, batting cleanup.
No, Alvarez is not a one-man team.
Just one man who influences outcomes like few before him.
NEW YORK – The Rolling Stones will not go quietly.
Nearly 60 years since dropping their blues-steeped debut, the legendary rock band rooted by Mick Jagger and Keith Richards continues to make a glorious noise, continues to pique our attention with every utterance of a new tour and, simply, continues to matter.
The band’s latest album, “Hackney Diamonds,” their first new material since 2005’s “A Bigger Bang,” arrived Friday.
“Yes, yes, yes,” Jagger uttered as he roamed the corners of the small stage to greet the crowd of about 650 before offering a sly smile.
More:Inside Rolling Stones 'Hackney Diamonds' London album party with Fallon, Sydney Sweeney
What Jagger didn’t mention was the band was going to welcome a surprise guest to close their set – and really, how could there not be something special at a show this intimate?
– in the form of an absolutely kinetic Lady Gaga, who performs on “Hackney.”
The groove-infested “Shattered,” their 1978 seedy ode to New York, proved the ideal opener for the night.
But first Jagger, Richards, Wood, longtime bassist Darryl Jones, drummer Steve Jordan (who took the seat of the late Charlie Watts in 2021), keyboardist Matt Clifford and singer Chanel Haynes had a few other tunes to unleash.
Richards, all scarves and bandannas, ripped out the instant classic riff, filling in the notes between Jones’ rumbling bass lines.
Everyone on stage appeared to be steeped in joy.
Wood, who has endured a few recent bouts of cancer, grinned as he stepped up to solo during “Whole Wide World,” while Jones thundered behind his kit, already a master at Watts’ signature playing style of never hitting the high hat and snare drum simultaneously.
Jagger, as if it needs to be said, remains an indefatigable wonder at 80, his moves a blend of peacock strutting and karate chopping, his voice as distinctive and grainy as ever.
The band, however, saved its showstopper for the inevitable encore.
“Sweet Sounds Of Heaven,” a muscular gospel-blues standout on the new album, was already landing with visceral intensity thanks to Jagger singing like a preacher, drawing the crowd in with his gestures and falling to his knees.
She immediately confirmed she is a worthy sparring partner for Jagger as the pair circled one another, each approaching the other as prey.
After Lady Gaga tossed down the mic stand in a frenzied moment of singing, Jagger ceded the spotlight to her to close out the song with iron-lunged ferocity.
The two pros were left breathless from being completely possessed by the song, and as Jagger led her to the front of the stage to take a bow with the band, it solidified that not only do the Rolling Stones still matter, but their legacy continues to inspire.
More:U2 brings swagger, iconic songs to Sphere Las Vegas in jaw-dropping opening night concert
This was a Game 3 in the National League Championship Series, not a World Series Game 7.
This didn’t produce a title for the Arizona Diamondbacks over the powerful New York Yankees that made Gonzalez a hero in Arizona.
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
He couldn’t believe it.
Neither could the crowd of 47,075 at Chase Field.
You don’t want to take out a guy like that with so much momentum on our side.
I have a strategy for everything that's done.
Everything that's done has been well talked about.
It's not just analytics.
I know how quickly playoff baseball can change.
I am prepared to get second-guessed.
What’s he going to say?
Besides, it all worked out in the end.
He’s the only guy hitting for Arizona.
He is one of our best players for a reason.
He just has the heart of a lion.
Yet, he was on the on-deck circle when the inning ended.
The D-backs still believe, and if nothing else, maybe they created a little doubt that the Phillies won’t steamroll them on their way to a return trip to the World Series.
And I think we do.
We can compete with anybody in this league.
But not everything has remained the same.
The company’s footprint has gone up 45% since then, with 861 warehouses – including 591 in the U.S. – operating today.
Its share price has gone up over 25% so far this year, outperforming the benchmark S&P 500.
And revenue has more than doubled, from $99 billion in 2012 to $242.3 billion in the latest fiscal year.
“They are great for low-volume warehouses, but we don’t want to be in the low-volume warehouse business,” he said at the time.
Costco reversed its decision in 2019 and is now cracking down on checking membership cards at self-checkout lanes to prevent unauthorized card-sharing.
Costco in 2019 opened a $450 million poultry complex in Fremont, Nebraska to help keep its rotisserie chicken prices at $4.99.
The plant was estimated to save Costco about 35 cents per bird in 2015, or about $35 million annually.
Certain food court items, including the chicken bake and soda, have seen price hikes in recent months, according to Insider.
That’s because Sidney Powell, Trump’s former attorney, pled guilty Thursday to six misdemeanor charges related to efforts to overturn the 2020 presidential election results in Georgia.
Under the terms of the agreement, Powell will serve a six-year probation, pay a fine of $6,000 and testify at the trials of several co-defendants in the case.
She also agreed to write an apology letter to Georgia residents.
“The interesting part of that plea is that she will be testifying against Mark Meadows, against Rudy Giuliani, against Donald Trump,” Christie told reporters shortly after filling to put his name on the ballot in New Hampshire’s first-in-the-nation primary.
“You don't give a no-jail plea deal unless that person's got something very good to say that will help your case against the others.”
"You don't give a no-jail plea deal unless that person's got something very good to say that will help your case against the others."
More school buses across the country could be fitted with Wi-Fi after a vote Thursday by the Federal Communications Commission.
In a 3-2 vote along party lines, commissioners adopted a declaratory ruling allowing districts to use money from the E-Rate program, which helps schools and libraries buy affordable broadband, toward Wi-Fi and supported devices on buses.
Democrats on the commission and in Congress lauded the proposal as a way of supporting students, particularly those in rural areas, with lengthy commutes to and from school.
Greater access to Wi-Fi, they said, would help close disparities in homework completion and academic success.
Republicans, however, cautioned against what they saw as potentially wasteful government spending that they claimed could increase students’ access to unsupervised internet use.
“Call it Wi-Fi on wheels,” she said.
Digital divide:Rise of online learning gives students with broadband access at home a leg up.
“We have a lot of students who do not have any reliable internet in their homes,” he said.
Classrooms on wheels:Free Google Wi-Fi transforms rural school buses into rolling classrooms
Congressional Republicans opposed the proposal in recent weeks.
“We are able to limit the access to content that we do not want them using,” he said.
Keith Krueger, CEO of the education technology group the Consortium for School Networking, said a recent survey from his organization showed only 13% of districts say they provide Wi-Fi on school buses.
“From our perspective and the vast majority of educators, they see great value in recapturing time that students are commuting to school,” he told USA TODAY.
You can reach him by email at zschermele@usatoday.com.
Follow him on X at @ZachSchermele.
And now that Michigan is residing near the top of college football again, all the fangs are coming out.
Now, in a story reported first Thursday by Yahoo!
Sports and confirmed by the Big Ten, Michigan is under another inquiry for in-person scouting of opponents, which has been against the rules for nearly 30 years and is quite unnecessary these days, unless the goal is to glean extra information about an opponent's play-calls that teams often try to disguise on the sideline.
Now I know what you, the well-informed college sports fan, is thinking.
The answer is because NCAA enforcement is a lot like traffic cops.
They’re not going to catch everybody.
They may pick one speeding car to turn the siren on for over another for biased reasons.
But when they have you on the radar gun going 90 miles per hour on the highway, they’re going to write you a ticket — especially if you act difficult and indignant when they pull you over.
And given his proclivity toward Michigan Man self-righteousness, the rest of college football is snickering away.
Not really, but it is a willful violation in order to gain a competitive advantage.
And then to not be truthful or forthcoming about it with the NCAA?
That’s another bright red line that the NCAA has used many times to penalize coaches, because catching them in a lie is one of the few hammers they actually have.
This alleged scouting violation is even sillier.
Michigan is 7-0 and has won its games by 27, 28, 25, 24, 38, 42 and 45 points.
If, as The Athletic reported Thursday, the Big Ten has evidence of a “vast network” being used to steal signs, it's the most comical use of espionage since Dan Aykroyd and Chevy Chase paired up in “Spies Like Us.”
If you need to steal signs to beat Nebraska and Rutgers, you’re more con man than Michigan Man.
Before this story dropped, there was talk of another extension in the works.
Most people in college sports would look at that claim skeptically — not about the offer itself but the idea that somebody would choose to play for a school offering nothing but the standard scholarship when they could have pocketed $300,000 somewhere else, even if it was against the rules.
Why even put that out there other than to glorify Mr. “Do it the right way” while casting aspersions on competitors?
It’s not just unseemly, it’s phony.
Who is Chris Partridge?
Partridge was qualified for the job and is now in his second stint on the Michigan staff after working as the co-defensive coordinator and safeties coach the last three seasons.
But hiring the high school coach of the No.
1 prospect in the country and then landing that prospect from several states away is a gray-area move.
How long of a leap is it from the gray to outright rule-breaking — even if the rules are picayune?
Maybe not that long.
“They're obviously trying to gain a competitive advantage, and that’s their right,” he said.
I don’t know how it’s going to go down.
It sure is.
Lupita Nyong'o is opening up about being in "a season of heartbreak" amid a fresh breakup.
Though the "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever" actor knows "there are much more important things going on in the world right now," she felt compelled to share a "a personal truth and publicly dissociate myself from someone I can no longer trust," according to her Instagram post Thursday.
The two seemingly confirmed their relationship and went Instagram official in December, though according to People, it's unclear when the two began dating.
Her heartbreak, she added, is due to "a love suddenly and devastatingly extinguished by deception."
The Daily Mail published photos of the two at the Los Angeles concert on Oct. 18.
And so, I am choosing to face the pain, cultivating the courage to meet my life exactly as it is, and trusting that this too shall pass.
This too shall pass.
Warmest of hugs.
Your miracles are all around you.
'A therapeutic journey':Letitia Wright, Lupita Nyong'o on 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever'
As of Thursday, the post is no longer visible on her Instagram feed.
"And THEN... the Universe saw it fit to bring this Sunshine Human ☀️ into my orbit, and this day marks his introduction to life," she wrote on social media at the time, per the outlet.
After 31 long years of waiting, a woman from New York has stepped forward to share with local lottery officials she was the person who never claimed $12 million from a 1991 Lotto jackpot.
Janet Valenti, age 77, revealed that she was the rightful owner of a $12 million New York Lotto jackpot that sat unclaimed for over 30 years.
One small mistake led to the unfortunate fate of the ticket, and there was nothing she could do to retrieve it.
Valenti claimed she had the winning lottery ticket worth $12 million sitting on an end table next to her couch, among other lottery tickets, according to the Lottery Post.
She believed she had previously checked all the tickets on the table, so as she was preparing to leave her home with her two teenage children and mother to spend the weekend at a friend's house, she threw the tickets in the trash.
Over the weekend, she was unaware of her huge mistake.
When she returned, a friend informed her of a winning $12 million Lotto ticket sold in Staten Island.
Valenti discovered she had won after seeing the winning numbers in the paper.
Upon arriving home, she rushed to retrieve her ticket from the garbage, but could not find it.
"My next-door neighbor, who has never in her life, the whole time I lived there, ever put my garbage out for collection, she did," Valenti told the Lottery.
She couldn't go digging in the trash due to sanitation already picking up the garbage.
It was over, Valenti was out that $12 million.
The woman from Staten Island attempted to contact lawyers but was informed that the only way to claim the prize was with a physical lottery ticket.
Even obtaining surveillance footage from the retailer would be of no use.
"I was a wreck," Valenti recalled to the Lottery.
"I was sick for a long time over it."
On July 17, 1992, the $12 million Lotto jackpot went unclaimed and was returned to the state lottery fund.
This unclaimed prize holds the record for being the largest in New York's history.
Valenti was a single mother to her two teenage children, Kevin and Jennifer, at the time.
Her husband, Bruno, had passed away in 1984.
To cope with the incident, she turned to reading stories about "lottery curses", infamous stories of people whose lives took a turn for the worse after winning the Lottery.
This helped her from losing her mind over the situation.
"Given that kind of money, things can go bad," Valenti told the Lottery.
Who knows what would have happened if I'd had that money?
You read these stories, a lot of people win Lotto, they drop dead.
Despite her tremendous loss over 30 years ago, Valenti remains steadfast in her pursuit of playing the Lottery.
"The most I ever get is a free play or a couple of dollars," she said.
Someone won $12 million in Lotto on July 17, 1991, with a ticket purchased for $1 at J.N.J.
Despite holding the winning numbers (2, 3, 6, 43, and 51) the winner never claimed the prize.
"I think somebody, when they saw they'd won, died or never found out in the first place," she had said at the time.
Tickets can be purchased in-person at gas stations, convenience stores and grocery stores.
Some airport terminals may also sell lottery tickets.
Must be 18+, 21+ in AZ and 19+ in NE.
Not affiliated with any State Lottery.
Visit jackpocket.com/tos for full terms and conditions.
A trendy Barcelona bar decorated in pastel pink and green hues has been named the world’s best bar of 2023.
Don’t be fooled by the cozy interior, Sips can turn into a “a dark and sultry hideaway” as soon as the sun begins to set.
There is the off chance that any one of their “wondrous creations” may be served in a metal cast of two hands, or a glass, depending on how colorful the cocktail, of course.
This is the second year in a row that a Barcelona bar has taken possession of the top spot.
Honorees from 28 different cities around the world were recognized at a live awards ceremony in Singapore on Tuesday, marking the first time the ceremony has been held in Asia.
Double Chicken Please in New York City was named second best for the first time, while Handshake Speakeasy in Mexico City took third place.
The U.S. tied with England for most bars on the list, with a total of five U.S.-based bars included.
Three of the bars named are in New York City.
Mexico City follows the U.S. and London closely, with four bars making the list.
Argentina and Singapore were the countries with the third most number of winning bars with three wins each.
More:Oyster outrage: Woman's date sneaks out after she eats 48 oysters in viral TikTok video
The World’s 50 Best Bars List has been compiled annually since 2009 by U.K.-based business media company William Reed, the same group behind The World’s 50 Best Restaurants and The World’s 50 Best Hotels.
The goal of the list is to “celebrate the excellence of the international drinks sector and pay tribute to the visionary bartenders, enterprising bar owners and trailblazing brands that lead the charge in shaping cocktail culture around the world,” according to a news release by the company.
Galaxy Bar, Dubai, UAE
Jewel of the South, New Orleans
Locale Firenze, Florence
Panda & Sons, Edinburgh
The Cambridge Public House, Paris
The SG Club, Tokyo
A Bar with Shapes for a Name, London
Argo, Hong Kong
Sago House, Singapore
Wax On, Berlin
Satan’s Whiskers, London
Caretaker’s Cottage, Melbourne
Drink Kong, Rome
Salmon Guru, Madrid
Maybe Sammy, Sydney
Jigger & Pony, Singapore
BKK Social Club, Bangkok
Little Red Door, Paris
Handshake Speakeasy, Mexico City
Double Chicken Please, New York
World's Best Bars 2022 winners:US leads with 8; New York has 6 of them
ICYMI:Dungeon & Dragons-themed whiskey out this week: See the latest brands, celebs to release new spirits
The crowd at the historically Black Catholic university's Convocation Center rose to its feet for the 22-year-old graduating with a biology degree and a Spanish minor.
A tropical disease once seen almost exclusively among Americans returning from travel abroad now has a unique U.S. strain.
Health officials warn that a related, deadlier parasite seen in other countries could thrive in the U.S. due to these improved climatological conditions for the disease.
A related parasite also comes in undetected by way of one million dogs entering the country annually.
The U.S. doesn't have adequate screening in place for the parasite, which is something researchers hope to address.
Previous infections came to the U.S. when people traveling from warmer areas brought the disease back.
The U.S. doesn’t have federal reporting on the disease, making it difficult to understand its sudden prevalence in recent years.
Public health:Illinois reports first case of measles in the state in 4 years, health officials say
“It’s really a disease that belongs to other countries.”
The populations infected are mostly in areas with warmer climates such as the Mediterranean, the Middle East and Latin America.
The disease can disfigure people’s skin with ulcers that sometimes take weeks or months to show after a person has been bitten.
It can leave scarring that researchers say is recognizable and brings a social stigma in low-income countries.
Medical mystery:How is leprosy spreading domestically in the US?
Some experts point to armadillos.
The CDC findings are based on more than 2,000 cases across the U.S., Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
The man had small bumps on his ears.
About 59% of the cases involved patients who had not traveled abroad for 10 years.
“That is another interesting piece of the puzzle because it's going to be hard for us to keep an eye on it without a mechanism for national reporting.”
The focus of this week's presentation introduces another element for transmission: Dogs.
Researchers on Thursday planned to show a new tool to promote screenings at ports of entry.
Eduardo Cuevas covers health and breaking news for USA TODAY.
He can be reached at EMCuevas1@usatoday.com.
Out of all the personality conflicts in the reality TV world, why did God, ABC and/or Gerry Turner end the burgeoning "Golden Bachelor" battle between Kathy and Theresa so quickly?
It was only last week that Kathy plunged the previously collegial mansion into the delicious heart of darkness by mobilizing against Theresa, who played the perfect victim while intensifying Kathy's rage by raving constantly about her deep "connection" with Gerry.
Yet before you could say "Real Housewives of New Jersey," the brewing brouhaha ended abruptly in Thursday's Episode 4.
Savor these fleeting moments in a power episode that featured a pickleball battle for Gerry's affections, a bawdy Never Have I Ever game with ice cream punishment, three women leaving the mansion (one of her own volition) and — saving the best for last — a shirtless Gerry, 72, presenting a rose during a steamy hot tub canoodle.
Here's what happened in "The Golden Bachelor" Episode 4:
This was the cruelest month for therapist April, 65, who had no business going home this early.
In the next solo scene, she literally winked to the camera with a sly smile and sotto voce remark, "Actually, I am totally fine."
April won the women-only Never Have I Ever game with nonstop confessions that included detailed experiences with car sex: "Front seat, back seat, on the steering wheel," she shrugged between bites of ice cream penance.
Inexplicably, Gerry didn't give April a rose.
Retired executive assistant Sandra, 75, is still alive in every way, even if she was last seen on bed rest from the hearty partaking of ice cream during the Never Have I Ever game.
(Turns out she's lactose intolerant.)
But she pushed through the dairy-filled gauntlet because she's a gamer.
Case in point, Sandra missed her daughter's wedding to impress Gerry in the pickleball tournament.
(Kathy and hardcore pickleball enthusiast Ellen took the crown).
Gerry insisted Sandra make a joint FaceTime call to her just-wedded daughter.
Their FaceTime moment was beautiful, complete with relatable iPhone tech fumbling.
"We're too old for this," Sandra said with a smile.
Gerry rewarded Sandra, who was too ill for the ceremony, with an early rose.
Fitness instructor Leslie, 64, the self-professed muse to Prince's song "Sexy Dancer," was excused from pickle play after drawing the one-on-one Gerry date.
During their golden-light ATV jaunt, Gerry showed four-wheeler chivalry, riding behind Leslie to look after her.
But it wouldn't be a "Bachelor" season without a hot tub kiss.
Gerry did not disappoint, after the two gazed into each other's mutually beautiful blue eyes.
Without dousing his rose, the suddenly shirtless Gerry helped Leslie into the tub, which materialized in a picturesque field with Champagne.
Their post-rose clinch was PG-13 steamy, even with Gerry's right hand oddly stuck on the jacuzzi wall as if he was seeking the air-jets switch.
Retired educational consultant Kathy, 70, snapped right back into outrage mode after financial professional Theresa, 70, boasted of her first-date details (again) to the group and visiting former "Bachelorette" Trista Sutter.
"She could just be the one for Gerry," Kathy said to the camera in an astute moment.
"She just can't seem to find the 'off' button."
Theresa tried to patch things up with another apologetic heart-to-heart that ended with Kathy giving her "friendly advice" that would have spooked Tony Soprano.
"Zip it," said Kathy.
This became "Snip it" when Theresa tearfully recounted the exchange to Gerry.
But it worked.
Gerry was outraged, confronting Kathy with, "I'm beginning to sense a rift here that I'm not happy about!"
"I'm not the villain here," Kathy insisted.
But even she could see the game was up.
"Because of Theresa, I'm not getting a rose," she groused.
She was right about the rose.
Not often portrayed as a healthy model for personal expression, Kathy made a graceful exit, giving a final wave to the group that included Theresa.
She drove off in the black SUV with a brittle look of defiance.
"I am who I am and people either like me or they don't," Kathy said in her exit interview.
We think she was joking there.
Retired interior designer Nancy, 61, had a tender Episode 2 Gerry moment, but somehow sensed romantic futility.
She voiced her suspicions privately to Gerry that she wasn't going to make the cut.
"I'm really not going to dispute that," Gerry said, sounding like he was giving a statement from his legal counsel.
Power move for Nancy, with her boot cast from pickleball, to just drive off before the rose ceremony that saw April and Kathy leave.
Ellen: The pickleball ace won that showcase and heartily kissed Gerry afterward.
She enjoyed more Gerry kisses in a one-on-one moment.
Gerry had his eyes open for some.
Faith: Working it, but frets about her lack of Gerry time.
Susan: Gerry gave emphatic kisses and a rose quartz gift.
Leslie: That ATV date went deep.
Theresa: Kathy hates to be right about this.
There's something real between Gerry and Theresa.
Sandra: Gerry hasn't truly realized her greatness, but there's time.
Editor's note: Part one of a five-part USA TODAY series revealing why America hasn't solved its long struggle with Type 2 diabetes.
For chef Robin Ray, newly married with young stepchildren, the turning point came when a stabbing chest pain sent her rushing to the emergency room.
“I didn’t think you’d make it,” the doctor said.
The moments were turning points for all three to get serious about addressing their diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes, in which the body can’t properly regulate blood sugar, has become so common it’s almost considered inconsequential.
More than 1 in 10 Americans have the disease (though many don't know) and another nearly 4 in 10 are at risk for it.
In total, half of all adults and a quarter of teenagers have diabetes or pre-diabetes.
Its financial costs are astronomical.
The country spends more than $300 billion a year to address diabetes, accounting for $1 out of every $4 spent on health care.
And its personal tolls are even worse: heart attacks, amputations, blindness, kidney disease, double the risk of premature death.
It also causes what’s known as “diabetes distress,” the daily burdens and emotional toll of living with and managing a chronic ailment that can lead to regular dips in energy, foggy thinking and depression, and a sense of isolation.
The most frustrating aspect of Type 2 diabetes, experts say, is that it has long been largely preventable and controllable.
“We have made tremendous gains in understanding diabetes,” said Dr. Donald Berwick, a pediatrician and former administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Roughly 40% of people who died early in the coronavirus pandemic had Type 2 diabetes, a rate four times higher than people without the disease.
Even when elevated blood sugar levels are below the threshold for type 2 diabetes, the risk for heart disease jumps 30% to 50% compared with people with normal blood sugar levels.
(Type 1 diabetes, which accounts for 5% to 10% of diabetes, is caused by the immune system and is unrelated to diet or lifestyle.)
America’s failure to address Type 2 diabetes highlights larger problems with our food and medical systems, Berwick and other experts said.
A soda costs less than a bottle of water, a double cheeseburger and fries less than a carton of blueberries.
Patients wait months for medical appointments only to see the back of a white coat for the short time they’re allotted.
Treating disease costs society far more than preventing it but typically provides more profit for insurance companies, hospitals and the pharmaceutical industry.
The USA TODAY Health team spoke with scores of health care providers, researchers, community leaders and patients for this five-part series to understand why Type 2 diabetes continues to worsen in America despite known solutions.
The answer isn't simple.
It involves systemic problems facing everyone in society, not just those with diabetes: a food system designed to sell products; a medical system in which cutting off a leg is less expensive than saving it; the high cost of healthy living and the fact that breaking habits takes a lot more than just personal willpower.
This first story looks at what it takes for people to cope with or overcome the disease.
Then, we explore one community in a David vs. Goliath battle against a food system that fails to prioritize people's health.
More in series:Diabetes runs deep in rural Mississippi.
Locals have taken to growing their own solutions.
We next travel to Colorado, which has the lowest level of diabetes in the nation.
Yet even in this state, where hiking trails and gorgeous views abound, economic and other disparities make it easier for some people to avoid diabetes than others.
More in series:A diabetes disparity: Why Colorado's healthy lifestyle brand isn't shared by all
It's tough to manage a chronic illness in the face of high medical costs, scattered care and caregiver frustration and burnout, so we highlight that next.
More in series:The steep cost of Type 2: When diabetes dragged her down, she chose to fight
Finally, we explore solutions, addressing why it will take a combination of education, medication, medical devices and improved food access to solve this national problem.
More in series:Solutions exist to end the Type 2 diabetes dilemma but too few get the help they need
But it will take "sensible action" from across many sectors, including health care, science, nutrition, business, public health and politics to change the financial and other incentives that drive so many Americans toward sickness instead of health.
"If we do it incrementally or don't do it at all, we're all going to be toast in 50 years from diet-related illnesses and a depleted environment."
There’s no question personal responsibility plays a role in fighting diabetes.
They’ve reduced their dependence on daily medication and hope to have saved themselves the horrors of more amputations, blindness and dialysis.
They’ve extended their lives and improved the quality of that time.
But like many medical problems, the challenges of diabetes go well beyond individual responsibility and blame.
Agarwal recently led a series of studies in the journal The Lancet that looked at diabetes rates around the world.
Poverty, the studies showed, was a major driver of diabetes, along with racism and unequal access to healthy food and high-quality medical care.
Personal stories illustrate how these structural issues play out in the lives of so many Americans.
 “I’m healthy because of privilege – not diet, not exercise, not determination,” he said.
“It’s going to be all right after a while, as long as I keep this spirit,” he said.
Ray’s love for food began when she was 8 years old, watching Julia Child on TV.
During family gatherings, she would run around taking everyone’s dinner order.
Then she’d scurry back to the kitchen with a notepad full of scribbles.
Throughout her life, she made fried chicken, pork chops, baked mac and cheese, collard greens, and even a whole roasted chicken filled with wild rice and two sticks of butter – everything that made her soul sing.
In her world, food was home.
Food was family.
Food was love.
But that was some pretty tough love.
In 2002, Ray was diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes.
Her father, grandmother, aunts and uncles all had diabetes.
She knew what it meant.
“For you to tell me I can’t have ice blue raspberry Kool-Aid was like you shut down my world,” Ray said.
She didn't dwell on the diagnosis and continued with life.
Her culinary career took her to Italy, where she learned and fell even more in love with food.
She returned to St. Louis, got married and became a mom to her husband’s two children ‒ “beautiful bonus babies,” as she described them.
Through the years, she continued to express love through cooking and eating.
In 2015, a stabbing chest pain sent her to the emergency room.
Doctors assured Ray she hadn’t had a heart attack, but they warned that her life was on the line.
At 5-foot-2, she weighed 334 pounds and had an A1C, a measure of average blood sugar of 11%, well above the 6.5% cutoff to be considered diabetic.
Her diabetes – and her diet – were out of control.
She and her primary care doctor decided she would pursue weight loss surgery.
But she also decided to use her culinary prowess to transform her diet.
She reconfigured favorite foods, substituting healthier ingredients: Collard greens cooked in smoked fats or ham hocks turned into a kale, turnip and rutabaga recipe flavored with natural chicken broth fat, oils and seasonings.
She fostered her feelings into new recipes and brought them to North Sarah Food Hub, which partnered with Barnes-Jewish Hospital to make packaged, pre-made meals for St. Louis residents with diabetes and limited access to fresh food.
“I became excited about food again, and food became a joy.”
It isn’t always easy, of course.
Ray admits to an occasional cookie craving.
But now she takes the time to think about how her body processes that cookie and whether it’s worthwhile.
She hopes her cooking can help other people make the same transformation she did.
Her staff at North Sarah helps her create new recipes for others.
She wants to provide nourishment that allows people to avoid illness and medicine.
The lifetime risk of developing Type 2 diabetes if a parent has it is 40%.
If both parents have it, the risk jumps to 70%.
He knew he was at risk, but he pushed his luck, he said, by eating poorly during the pandemic and falling out of his exercise routine.
With the luxury of working from home, walking to the kitchen and bathroom was often the extent of his daily activity.
On Feb. 14, 2022 – Valentine’s Day – he went to an urgent care clinic, concerned his breathing trouble meant he had bronchitis.
His blood pressure measured 210 over 110, well above normal levels that top out at 120 over 80.
A chest X-ray showed fluid filling his lungs, leading to congestive heart failure.
The clinic sent him straight to a local emergency room, where he was diagnosed with a blockage of the left descending artery – a clogged artery made worse by diabetes.
If he had waited any longer, he would have had a massive heart attack, his doctor later told him.
After his release from the hospital, he went to the drugstore to fill his new prescriptions.
The pharmacist told him she couldn’t fill one because it would cost $1,000.
He’d have to wait until his insurance approved it.
“Please fill it,” he said.
She stressed the cost.
“Fill it,” he pleaded, putting the charge on his credit card.
Medication helped him lose 70 pounds in three months.
When his local drugstore ran out of the weight-loss drug, he easily drove to another pharmacy and then another to find what he needed.
His 100 hours of high-quality cardiac rehabilitation were fully covered by insurance.
He could devote all his energy to getting well because he didn’t have to focus on how to afford his care.
When they finally show up in the emergency room, “because they will,” they will cost the system far more, he said.
On the day Haynes stepped on a rusty nail in 2019, he walked all day as the nail pierced the sole of his sneaker and then his foot.
By the time he took off his shoe that night, his foot was infected.
He landed in the hospital for two months as doctors and nurses tried, mostly unsuccessfully, to get the infection and Haynes’ blood sugar under control.
By the time he was released, he knew enough about Type 2 diabetes to realize his daily blood sugar levels – typically in the mid-400s – were four times above what he had been told to shoot for.
But nothing he did or ate seemed to make a difference.
He had long since traded ribs for salads, beer for water.
His wife, Angela, barely noticed when James started wearing multiple pairs of socks, pouring powder on his feet and buying bigger shoes.
His feet tingled a lot, he said, but he was coping with it.
James ended up in the emergency room again, dehydrated and in need of antibiotics.
The doctor amputated the baby toe on his right foot, leaving a large open wound.
“I didn't like that we're not going to try to save anything, we're just going to start cutting.”
James was fading.
Antibiotics left him looking sickly, his voice so weak Angela could barely hear him.
“I felt like I was watching my husband slowly dying,” she said.
She thought it would take months to get James in to see the heart disease specialist, but the office called and asked if they could come the next day.
“We started looking forward to these visits because there was always hope,” Angela Haynes said, though she felt guilty they were taking up so much of the important doctor’s time.
Haynes had blockages in blood vessels on both legs.
Once he got the blood flowing again, Haynes began to feel better.
His flesh returned to its normal color.
The wound started healing at last.
Walking became easier.
Then disaster struck again.
On July 2, 2022, Haynes caught COVID-19.
"Everything went downhill after that," he said.
During his 13-day illness, the bacteria in his foot raged out of control.
Every week, a surgeon would come to the door of his hospital room and before even stepping all the way in ask Haynes whether he had decided to get his leg amputated.
I was born with this.
He was worried about how he’d get around, how he’d be able to work to support his family if he had only one leg.
No one took the time to explain why they thought the leg needed to come off or how he’d cope without it, Haynes said.
In late November, he was finally sent home in a wheelchair.
Back at the hospital, Haynes was told his foot was broken, essentially beyond repair.
He agreed to a below-the-knee amputation.
Released right before Christmas, he spent the next three weeks in bed wondering how he’d manage the rest of his life.
Finally, it looked as if his luck might be turning around.
With the leg gone, his diabetes improved.
His blood sugar dropped into the 120s or one-teens.
His blurry vision cleared up.
During his long hospital stay, he befriended nurses and learned about a program for people who needed prostheses.
The man who ran it called early in the year and said he had received a donated leg.
If it fit Haynes, he could have it while waiting for insurance to pay for a personalized one.
Miraculously, it did.
Haynes spent the next six months teaching himself to walk again.
The donor leg was heavy and uncomfortable.
He wasn't mobile enough to hold down a job.
One late spring night, picking up dinner at a nearby restaurant, he headed to the bathroom for a pit stop.
A sink had been leaking all day and Haynes slipped in the puddle, falling backward.
He's still recovering from the resulting wrist surgery.
He and Angela are living – barely – off her part-time salary as a secretary and a church organist.
Haynes has tried "at least three or four times" to receive government assistance, but they keep losing his paperwork, or not believing he's disabled, though he once checked himself out of the hospital and arrived at an appointment in his wheelchair to prove he didn't have a leg.
Still, he clings to his faith and the positive attitude he has long used to cheer up himself and others.
These are his secret weapons against diabetes and everything else life throws his way.
"I try to put a smile on other people's faces," he said.
"It keeps my day going."
This story is part of a reporting fellowship sponsored by the Association of Health Care Journalists and supported by the Commonwealth Fund.
Our goal remains the same: Provide book lovers with the best, most accurate snapshot of what people are reading by showing which titles are selling.
It is a master list, unbound by genre and format, of what’s selling broadly across the U.S.
Her novel "It Starts With Us" claimed the No.
1 spot in its first week, her highest debut ever, selling more than 800,000 copies on its first day of sales.
It was her fourth book to hit No.
1 in 2022.
The USA TODAY list is a ranking of the top-selling titles each week from a broad range of businesses including major chains, independent bookstores and online retailers.
It reflects combined sales of titles in print and electronic format, if available.
Our data team weighs and compiles those numbers to generate the week's 150 top-selling titles.
The rankings reflect sales from the previous Monday through Sunday.
The full list will publish online at 6 a.m. Wednesdays, with the top 50 titles publishing in print Thursdays.
The list, which began in 1993, went on hiatus in December.
It is the longest-running USA TODAY data journalism project.
In our continued commitment to bring readers more books coverage, USA TODAY is also excited to announce a new content partnership with The Novel Neighbor, an independently owned and operated bookstore in St. Louis.
They are expert booksellers and passionate readers who are deeply connected to what their community is reading.
With the partnership will come regular profiles of independent bookstores across the country, highlighting the important role of these businesses in their local communities.
Novel Neighbor will also be sharing expert book recommendations and fun takes on book trends.
We can't wait to see what you've been reading!
Hamas and Israel have been blaming each other for a deadly blast at a Gaza hospital complex.
President Joe Biden backed up Israel’s statements on Wednesday as he visited Tel Aviv.
Biden said he was “outraged and saddened” by the loss of life in Gaza City.
But he said U.S. intelligence indicated that Israel was not behind the explosion.
Here's a look at what happened, and what the different parties are saying:
Palestinians have been seeking refuge in and around hospitals from the Israeli bombardment of Gaza prompted by the Oct. 7 Hamas rampage that killed 1,400 people in Israeli territory.
More than 3,000 people have been killed and more than 12,500 have been injured in Gaza, according to its health ministry.
Keep up with developments from Gaza:Sign up for our Israel-Hamas War newsletter
The U.S. said Wednesday that its intelligence assessments indicated Israel was not behind the hospital explosion.
“While we continue to collect information, our current assessment, based on analysis of overhead imagery, intercepts and open source information, is that Israel is not responsible for the explosion at the hospital in Gaza yesterday,” National Security Council spokeswoman Adrienne Watson said in a statement.
Air Force Gen. Pat Ryder, the Pentagon press secretary, said separately that the Defense Department’s intelligence assessment is that Israel was not responsible for the explosion.
USA TODAY received more detail about the U.S. perspective from U.S. officials who were not authorized to speak publicly.
Imagery that shows the lack of a bomb crater and heat trails from rockets being fired inside Gaza have led officials to believe that the blast that killed hundreds at a hospital there Tuesday came from a rocket fired by Palestinian militants.
Sensors can detect the heat generated during the blast off a rocket or missile, a trail known a “heat signature.” Israeli airstrikes rely principally on joint direct attack munitions, precision-guided weapons developed by the Pentagon.
The bombs rely on global position system (GPS) guidance to strike targets with a high degree of accuracy in all weather conditions.
The evidence taken together has led these military officials to conclude that Israel did not attack the hospital, the officials said.
President Joe Biden said Wednesday, while visiting Israel, that Pentagon officials had shown him data that concluded Israel was not responsible for the explosion.
The explosion at the hospital has prompted anger and protests across the region directed at Israel and the United States.
The Israeli military denied involvement and released video, audio and other information to support its claim that the explosion resulted from a misfired missile from the Islamic Jihad, a militant group that sometimes cooperates with Hamas and is considered a terrorist organization by the U.S.
In a video posted to X, formerly Twitter, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) compares examples of craters caused by IDF ordnance to the damage near the hospital.
Israel Defense Forces posted a video claiming the rocket originated from Gaza.
The footage was posted on X with text that reads: "RAW FOOTAGE: A rocket aimed at Israel misfired and exploded at 18:59 − the same moment a hospital was hit in Gaza."
Hamas has blamed Israel for Tuesday's explosion, and its health ministry says the blast killed at least 500 people.
And they, the Israeli spokesperson of the army about a week ago made a statement in which he said evacuate the hospitals, the hospitals are target and in fact they hit one hospital a week ago.
Is there any kind of independent investigative team that can resolve the matter by cutting through the politics and examining the forensic evidence to find out who is responsible?
The short answer is yes, but with some caveats.
"You would need a 'dream team' of forensic scientists skilled enough to look at the evidence on the ground and that which has been put forward by all sides, including Israel, the Biden administration and Hamas."
Options might include the International Criminal Court, the U.N.-affiliated Commission of Inquiry, the International Commission of Jurists, and the Commission for International Justice and Accountability, but all have their challenges.
Learn more here: Could an independent inquiry help assess blame for Gaza strike?
Yes, but it's tricky.
Six weeks before Hamas’ deadly attack on Israel, a deputy political advisor in the group did an interview with a Lebanese news outlet.
Tucked into it was a specific warning.
“We are closely discussing the prospects of this war with all relevant parties.”
At the time, his statements were couched as a caution.
Israel had plans including targeted killings of leaders of the Palestinian resistance group that controls Gaza, he said.
Those Israeli provocations never happened.
Yet by mid-October, an all-out war was under way.
Hamas led a surprise attack on Oct. 7, killing more than 1,300 people including more than 30 Americans and taking at least 200 hostages, and a mounting response from Israel now brings more bloodshed.
Already, Israel has struck a range of targets, and by mid-week announced at least six key Hamas operatives had been “eliminated.”
They’re pursuing him not just for his insider knowledge of the attack, but for his ties to others – possibly those “relevant parties” he cited in August.
The attack went far beyond what was expected from Hamas alone: A mass border invasion.
Withering rocket fire.
Precise raids on military surveillance, communications and intelligence hubs.
Those plans bear the hallmarks of sophisticated backers from the outside.
If Iran and Hezbollah were involved in the Oct. 7 attack – as security authorities now suspect – someone from Hamas coordinated their assistance.
More:Is Iran behind Hamas terrorist attacks?
What it would mean for US and Middle East security
“But I can tell you that Iran is heavily involved with everything that's happening in Gaza – the training, equipment, funding and method of fighting,”
“We are worried that the technology came from Tehran to Beirut and to Gaza.”
Now, he’s a prime target as Israel seeks out the strategists behind Oct. 7.
He is under the radar.
“We will attack them, we will dismantle them, dismantle their system.”
Officially, Iran has denied playing a role in the attack even as it congratulates Hamas.
President Joe Biden told 60 Minutes on Oct. 15 that there’s no evidence “at this point” that Iran was behind the attack.
Israeli officials have made similar comments, stressing that the investigation is in its early stages.
But U.S. and Israeli intelligence analysts say that if anyone could give the group the ability to launch such stunning land, air and sea attacks against the Israeli military, it would be Iran and its Revolutionary Guard.
And his role in raising money and plotting terrorist attacks for Hamas has been known to both governments for a generation.
Yet he has evaded authorities for years.
“He knows that if he steps anywhere close, we will kill him,” a former top Israeli intelligence official until earlier this year told USA TODAY.
Those included large-scale bombings and rocket attacks, according to the U.S.
Directorate of National Intelligence and the National Counterterrorism Center, which it oversees.
Upon his final release, he was forced out of Gaza for being a continuing threat to Israel and moved to the Syrian capital of Damascus to join Hamas leadership in exile there.
He spent time in Turkey, where he began building an operational Hamas presence, in Qatar, where Hamas’ political leadership resided, and Lebanon.
He publicly praised the murders, which sparked Hamas’ month-long war with Israel that year, as a “heroic operation,” State Department documents show.
In September 2015, the U.S. Treasury Department sanctioned him as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist, saying he served as “a key financier and financial facilitator for Hamas military cells.”
The move came amid intense pressure on Qatar by Washington to crack down on its longstanding role in providing safe haven for terrorists.
In the aftermath of the Oct. 7 attack, the FBI and other U.S. agencies have joined Israel in its response – and its investigation, according to Attorney General Merrick Garland and other Biden administration officials.
That includes the hunt for at least 13 Americans who may be still held hostage by Hamas, the dragnet for Hamas foot soldiers believed to be hiding inside Israel and the broader investigation into who orchestrated and led the sophisticated invasion, two U.S. intelligence officials told USA TODAY on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss ongoing investigations.
If the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks in the U.S. are any guide, it could be months or even years before authorities answer those questions in detail.
Iran has signaled a more aggressive approach to Israel, including a warning this week about potential Iranian action against Israel for its response in Gaza.
Hezbollah has issued similar warnings.
Iran’s suspected involvement in the planning of the Gaza raid has been widely reported.
Iran also has supported Hamas militarily, it said, “and has helped it design and produce a domestic missile and rocket system to match the capabilities and material available in Gaza.”
Neither did senior Trump administration Iran official Richard Goldberg when he mentioned the existence of a Lebanon-based intelligence center for the three groups during a public event Monday.
Hamas, Iran and Hezbollah, Goldberg said, “have coordinated a fusion cell in Beirut since 2021 where they put everybody together in a war room, an intel room operations room, they go in and out of Lebanon… and they coordinated it all.”
The former top Israeli security official confirmed to USA TODAY the existence of the joint Iran-Hezbollah-Hamas intelligence center in Beirut.
Goldberg, the Director for Countering Iranian Weapons of Mass Destruction for the White House National Security Council from 2019 to 2020, said he believed the strong cooperation between Hamas, Iran and Hezbollah helped them keep the plot away from Israeli intelligence, just like al-Qaeda kept the 9/11 plot away from the U.S.
“And so if you don't have any intel on the planning of the attack, it stands to reason you have no intel on Iran's involvement in said attack plans,” Goldberg said.
You’re not going to find the intel.
Rep. Brad Schneider (D-IL), a member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, also said all signs point to Iran, given its role in funding, training and equipping Hamas fighters.
“If you breed an attack dog, you train an attack dog, you equip an attack dog, maybe you're surprised that the dog breaks through the fence and attacks, but you're still responsible for that attack,” Schneider said.
“And Iran has been training Hamas, has been equipping Hamas, funding Hamas, and this has the fingerprints of (Iran) training and planning all the way through.”
Speaking to Al Jazeera, just after the attack, he described his view of the Israeli response to come.
How do you protect innocent civilians while conducting effective urban military operations against an enemy who is integrated into the civilian population and entrenched in a location’s infrastructure?
Israeli civilian and military decision-makers face this question anew after Hamas’ unprecedented attack from Gaza into southern Israel on Oct. 7.
The explosion at a Gaza hospital on Tuesday that killed hundreds of people points up the dangers faced by civilians in an active war zone.
Israel’s initial answer to the question of how to avoid civilian casualties in Gaza was to tell more than a million Palestinian residents to flee their homes and head south.
Barring an 11th-hour mass exodus from northern Gaza, Israel will face the possibility of further civilian casualties.
Fighting urban battles amid civilian populations is certainly an issue U.S. decision-makers have grappled with during military operations over the two decades since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
And there are lessons about protecting civilians that Israel could take from America's recent experience.
Among them: Consider potential civilian losses when planning airstrikes, seek improved methods of collecting and deploying intelligence, and provide safe passage for civilians away from war zones.
So far, more than 1,400 Israeli civilians and nearly 4,000 Palestinian civilians have been killed in the latest conflict.
Despite the ferocity of the Hamas attack and the Israeli response, the moral obligation to reduce civilian harm cannot be ignored.
Urban battles are not unusual occurrences in the Middle East.
Our research on that ISIS conflict, conducted with an eye toward reducing civilian harm, suggests that military effectiveness can be retained while protecting civilians and reducing damage to civilian infrastructure.
Operating in densely populated urban environments is incredibly difficult even for experienced military units such as the Israel Defense Forces, which have operated in Gaza before.
Hamas, not unlike ISIS, has a history of using civilian infrastructure as a defense against Israeli military operations.
Organizations like ISIS and Hamas know their adversaries are committed to reducing civilian harm and take advantage of this adherence to international law and norms.
In Syria, ISIS tactical facilities were often located near civilian infrastructure, requiring individual strike decisions to consider ways to minimize civilian harm.
Such considerations could help reduce civilian casualties in Gaza as well, though civilian deaths and infrastructure damage can never be eliminated, even with precision weapons.
Urban fighting in a location you do not control, especially when reliant upon air support, also makes it difficult to collect, verify and share real-time intelligence.
This also is now true in the Gaza Strip, one of the most densely populated geographies in the world.
I've seen firsthand the oppression:I'm a Palestinian American.
I almost gave up hope people will see the humanity in us.
An enhanced focus on the task of gathering and leveraging intelligence is critical, despite the many challenges facing the Israeli intelligence services in Gaza.
This was critical for evacuations of civilians and reducing civilian deaths.
This leaves residents of Gaza trapped and unable to escape the aerial bombardment from Israel.
Israel’s new demand that civilians flee applies to northern Gaza, but southern Gaza lacks the infrastructure to support the additional civilians, who would still remain trapped.
The United States regularly encourages all partners to limit civilian harm during conflict, including in current hotspots such as Ukraine.
One of the distinctions between the international community and organizations such as Hamas and ISIS is its commitment to reducing and limiting civilian harm during conflict.
The brutal Hamas invasion of Israel and the resulting conflict in Gaza have opened the floodgates for hate incidents – both in real life and online, targeting Jewish people and Muslims alike – over the last two weeks.
In Chicago, a man fatally attacked a 6-year-old boy and wounded his mother on Saturday because they were Muslims, police say.
America’s synagogues and Jewish community centers are on high alert, while Jewish targets have been attacked in several countries across the world.
It’s the week in extremism.
As USA TODAY reported this week, bigotry and violence against Palestinian Americans is also reportedly spiking across the country.
Threats have been made against Palestinian American communities in Dearborn, Michigan, Los Angeles, New York and Portland, among other cities.
The Anti-Defamation League is keeping a running tally of incidents of anti-Semitism and violence against Jewish communities across the globe.
Last week, USA TODAY reported on a surge in online hatred directed at both Jews and Muslims.
That’s how many hate crime incidents were reported in 2022, according to the FBI’s deeply flawed Uniform Crime Reports.
Warning: This article contains graphic descriptions of death.
JERUSALEM − They don't agree on a lot of things.
They agree on this: what they have seen and had to do, no one should have to see or do.
Two weeks into the conflict that began when members of Hamas massacred civilians in rural communities and at a music festival on Israel's border with the Gaza Strip, Israelis and Palestinians have been collecting, weeping over and burying their dead with as much dignity as they can in trying, unpredictable and dangerous circumstances.
In Israel, where some 1,400 civilians and soldiers have died and where all Jews are by religious tenet supposed to be buried immediately after death − a few days at most − this has involved emergency responders going to great lengths to recover victims which they have discovered in scenes of unspeakable horror, sometimes in locations where fighting is still taking place.
In Gaza, where at least 3,500 Palestinians have been killed and large parts of the territory controlled by Hamas is in ruins as a result of Israel's bombing campaign, this has meant families resorting to makeshift graveyards dug in empty lots and authorities storing bodies in ice cream freezers as morgues run full, doctors and witnesses say.
'I won't condemn Hamas':Some Palestinians find it hard to denounce attacks on Israel
On both sides of the Israel-Gaza border, faith traditions define the rules of burial.
For Jews, who believe the dead must be watched until buried, and that every part of a body must be buried, the idea of an unguarded corpse is an almost unthinkable lapse.
Within the Muslim tradition, the body is wrapped in a shroud and the head is positioned to face Mecca with the eyes and mouth closed.
He filmed himself this week as he was driving in his car.
Across the back seat his father, killed in one of those Israeli strikes, lay dead.
Biden embraces Netanyahu:U.S. president says Israel must again be 'safe place' for Jewish people
"We have no funeral cars, no ambulances," he said.
I know people can't attend the funeral.
No one can.
But please pray for him.
Its mission is to collect the remains of the dead, including their blood if they can, so they can be buried in accordance with Jewish religious law.
He was in New York during the 9/11 attacks.
He has responded to natural disasters in India.
He has rushed many times to the scene of suicide bombings to collect body parts.
Israel-Hamas war:She spent her life advocating for Palestinian rights.
Then Hamas came
They were missing fingers and eyes.
In another home, he found a pregnant woman lying face down in a pool of blood.
Cell phone videos, security footage, photographs from residents and accounts of witnesses who survived the initial attacks have also helped establish with some specificity the brutality of the Hamas attacks on civilians on Israel's southern border.
However, Israel's military has asked them to document it as part of the process of collecting evidence and in case it is helpful in identifying remains.
Hamas attacks:How Israeli police are trying to find the gunmen
On the grounds of the base were a series of refrigerated trucks and shipping containers.
Inside were dozens of filled body bags of various sizes − some very small.
The bereaved family typically hosts a meal and opens their home for three days for guests to visit and share their condolences.
Unsweetened bitter coffee is served.
Friends and family recount the life and qualities of the person deceased.
In Gaza, there is now little capacity to observe these rituals.
One of the first photos he took was of a paramedic performing CPR on a wounded man.
At least 16 Palestinian journalists have been killed since Oct. 7, according to the Palestinian Journalists Syndicate, a non-governmental professional organization.
"Who kills babies, who kills babies − free world, where are you?"
He stood in front of a medical stretcher on which lay six precious bundles.
Bloodied, bandaged and lifeless, their tiny bodies were covered in a fine gray dust from the exploded concrete and brick that killed them.
She said she wasn't able to participate in a brief ceremony at the site marking the deaths because she was worried about the safety of her family and had decided to flee south, close to Gaza's border with Egypt.
Communication into and out of Gaza is also exceptionally difficult because of diminishing electricity and virtually no internet access.
Thirty people, he said, were operated on without any anesthetic.
"For those that were killed we had to make a quick decision," he added.
After 75-year-old Bay View, Wisconsin, resident Paul Bailey won a gun auction through GunBroker.com in August, he received a UPS tracking number for the package and awaited his new gun's arrival.
The crowd at the historically Black Catholic university's Convocation Center rose to its feet for the 22-year-old graduating with a biology degree and a Spanish minor.
TAMPA, Fla. — Jared Goff iced up back in June.
Or, more accurately, he let his teammates do it for him.
Then let’s start with the quarterback.
Not that jewels make a quarterback.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Week 7 of the 2023 NFL schedule comes in light, six teams (Bengals, Cowboys, Jets, Panthers, Texans and Titans) breaking for byes.
But a decent slate of games kicks off Thursday with the New Orleans Saints hosting the AFC South-leading Jacksonville Jaguars.
No international games this week, so Sunday starts at 1 p.m.
ET with a juicy matchup in Baltimore, the Ravens facing the Detroit Lions in a battle of first-place squads.
The "Sunday Night Football" nightcap is the biggie, the Miami Dolphins (5-1) visiting the Philadelphia Eagles (5-1) – decked out anew in Kelly Green – in the latest candidate for game of the year.
Who's 6-1 on Monday?
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Gannett may earn revenue from sports betting operators for audience referrals to betting services.
Sports betting operators have no influence over nor are any such revenues in any way dependent on or linked to the newsrooms or news coverage.
Terms apply, see operator site for Terms and Conditions.
If you or someone you know has a gambling problem, help is available.
Call the National Council on Problem Gambling 24/7 at 1-800-GAMBLER (NJ, OH), 1-800-522-4700 (CO), 1-800-BETS-OFF (IA), 1-800-9-WITH-IT (IN).
Must be 21 or older to gamble.
Sports betting and gambling are not legal in all locations.
Be sure to comply with laws applicable where you reside.
That left a lot of explaining for his media session before Wednesday’s practice.
Survive long enough as an NFL quarterback and there will be weeks like this.
Heat like this, with hot-take analysts suggesting the quarterback take a seat on the bench.
The Falcons (3-3) lost an eight-point game against Washington after two of their final three drives ended with picks by the second-year quarterback.
The other possession was rather ugly, too; the ball was turned over on downs that included a sack and two incompletions.
Was it accuracy or the play design?
Bad decisions or bad routes?
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
So, there’s little parts in that entire game – not only with myself but with the whole offense.
In rolling with a young quarterback, the Falcons knew there would be some turbulence along the way with this learning curve.
And the defense has improved, allowing them to stay in games.
Arthur Smith, the Falcons coach and play-caller, has fingerprints on this, too.
The Falcons’ operational process during the final minutes was a mess.
Atlanta probably uses as many personnel packages as any team in the league, which can help create matchup advantages but also requires frequent substitutions.
In any event, this stuck out as the issues piled up on Sunday.
Asked about the operational issues, Smith fired back with arithmetic.
"Two-thousand plays the last two years," Smith said.
They are all different.
I wouldn’t call that some catastrophic trend.
Now they shouldn’t happen.
But they’re all different, why they happened.
You identify the problem.
It’s what happened lately.
The mishaps on Sunday came with the game on the line.
"We can play this game all day," defended Smith, in his third season at the helm.
What about New York?"
"We’ve won a lot of games handling those situations," Smith added.
We’ve got to get it fixed.
This isn’t a trend, a runaway story.
Acknowledge what happened.
Smith pointed to the turnovers, maintaining that NFL teams this season have won just 6% of the games when committing three turnovers.
"Go back to Houston, and those guys executed pretty damn good," Smith said.
He summed it up as a matter of paying better attention to detail, yet he also acknowledged the challenges with communication….especially as the play-clock winds down.
It goes back to communication.
"He’s even-keeled," Pitts said.
It's possible the NFL has never looked cooler.
That was perfectly evident Sunday, when the Tampa Bay Buccaneers became the most recent team to throw it back, breaking out their beloved – beloved?
But that throwback comeback will hardly be the last – and if you don’t already know what’s coming in Weeks 7 and 8, you’ll be thrilled to see other classic uniforms coming out of mothballs.
Even better, some fresh fashion-forward alternates are also coming down the pike.
Naturally, not every team is successfully leveraging the new opportunities the league has afforded with the use of secondary helmets and alternate and/or retro color schemes.
So let’s take this haberdashery interlude to do a deep dive on NFL couture and rank the alternate uniforms from best to worst:
But Kelly should always be an option in Philly’s palette, and its 13-year absence has been far too lengthy.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Of heroes come and gone.
On this bridge between eras, it’s up to all of us to pass the torch.
This is not a throwback.
It’s our heart and soul.
It’s a very nice offset to the attention-grabbing highlighter-green alternates.
“Old gold,” black and white looks good in virtually any combination – aside from those regrettable gold jerseys they tried in 2002 – whether in a callback to the team’s earliest looks from the 1960s or the monochrome white or black combos utilized in the current era.
They’re now 3-0 in the “White Bengal” presentation – which finally includes a white helmet – after it debuted last year and returned in Week 3 against the Rams.
But the Titans have finally gone back to their roots and will even be shoving it in the faces of their H-Town replacements, the Texans, in Week 15.
"It's been a long time coming," said Hall of Fame Oilers QB Warren Moon, who also hopes the Titans will get to wear the jerseys in Houston someday in appreciation of those fans.
They finally came to their senses and brought back their slick J-E-T-S logo from the 1980s in the “Legacy White” package they’ve already used to honor the “New York Sack Exchange” twice this season – including opening night.
After that, let’s maybe consider an entirely radical logo – which actually incorporates the silhouette of a jet fighter – and slap that on your crowns while scrapping the dopey Stealth Black helmet introduced in 2022.
When it comes to the extra uniform – forgettable throwbacks or gray Color Rush – they’ve done alternate in pretty much the most forgettable ways.
Very cool way to commemorate what’s already becoming a memorable season between the lines for the NFC North leaders, not to mention the franchise’s 90th year as the Lions.
You could argue – and I have – no club has better unis.
Not only that, since moving back to LA and updating their closets in 2020, they’ve given themselves so many mix-and-match scenarios, in addition to the royal blue and navy (with corresponding helmet lightning bolt) Color Rush options.
(For the record, love the navy and white.)
Let’s commend them for maximizing the use – three appearances this season – of the retro red helmets and original logo with the black, white and gold striping mix meant to honor both the University of Georgia and Georgia Tech.
At least we won’t be subject to those vile gradient alternate jerseys in 2023.
Little reason to mess with something that’s practically perfect, but their deviations work well.
The “Steel Curtain” era throwbacks won’t pop off the screen, but the 1970s number font style is the giveaway.
Pittsburgh’s all-black Dark Knight look is among the best alternates going – especially when you consider the mistake it would be to revive some of the club’s awful appearances from yesteryear, bumblebees, shoulder swatches and whatnot.
Sunday afternoon, they’re going to roll out their new “Indiana Nights” one-off for 2023.
Couple of thoughts here.
They’ve added black helmets because Indy fans allegedly demanded them, and they play into the nocturnal theme – fine … aside from the fact the Colts have zero prime-time games this year.
Otherwise, this is fairly boss.
The secondary logo – with the state of Indiana serving as the center of the “C” for Colts on the shoulder is a plus.
But the “heather pattern” used for the blue-on-blue uniform – golfers will recognize it immediately – really distinguishes this get-up.
Never too far afield, their alternates provide truly nice subtleties.
And keep your eyes peeled for the perfectly pleasing and pristine purple-and-gold alternates.
It’s not quite as slick as the retro Jets, but Sunday night marked this season’s first usage of the block GIANTS logo – with the white Color Rush road treatment – Big Blue used for the final quarter of the 20th century.
But the Fins will be kitted in their original unis in Week 8 and again in Week 16.
They’ll continue wearing the duds – with shaded jersey numbers – the 1994 Super Bowl champions made famous, sporting the red version twice this season and the white roadies once.
Their 2020 rebrand has aged fairly well so far – doesn’t hurt when you win the Super Bowl in your new threads.
Let’s issue belated credit for this season’s very clean uniform reboot, the whites (with a new dash of silver) especially evocative of their long-gone days in St. Louis.
The alternate all-blacks, plus helmet, that debuted in Week 5 still seem extraneous.
But, fine, whatever.
Cardinals can only be so badass.
Their latest rebrand has gone so well … that new ownership is already mulling yet another one.
But the alternate black uniforms topped with the black lids are the least-objectionable aspect – the usage of the D.C. flag on the right shoulder (in burgundy and gold) and back of the helmet the deftest touch.
They're one of several old-school organizations that’s never embraced hindsight or foresight flair especially well.
The green jerseys with gold numbers paired with green pants in recent years have been a marked step forward … but another could be taken with a fresh second helmet to top it off.
Never been a huge fan of their 1960s-era throwbacks, whether home or away – and they’ll sport both this season.
In Monday night’s win, they topped it with their alternate white-shelled helmet adorned with the current star insignia.
They added a black helmet to the wardrobe last year and have evidently decided it would look better atop their “Panther Blue” jerseys than as part of a monochrome blackout.
Low bar, but agreed … not that it’s likely to help them win a game.
What is it with 1995 feline expansion teams?
Thankfully, the Jags are finding their way back from the black-and-gold, two-toned wilderness.
But nothing inspiring, or especially objectionable, in their black and (mostly) teal look at present.
They’ve got multiple ways to mix and match their various (dark) colors, the best alternate the purple on purple with gold jersey numbers.
The original logo Baltimore used from 1996 to ’98 was one of the busier ones in NFL history … and might be fun to break out periodically for nostalgic purposes – especially if we could see those ugly black pants with the fat white stripe from the days of Ravens yore.
The NFL’s youngest franchise is also the only one to never change its crest.
Tradition – yay.
But last year, the Texans really stepped out by adding a metallic “Battle Red” helmet to go with the alternate jerseys branded the same way.
This ranking is more a penalty that they’re not doing more than interspersing the alternate red jersey and pants.
Let’s mix that grazing bison from the AFL days into heavier rotation and work up another lid – meaning something more imaginative than just taking the red shells from the 1990s Super Bowl teams out of mothballs.
For years, pretty much everything they’ve touched has turned to horse scat.
Extend that to their attempt at merging their history with an edgy look.
It returns in Week 16 if you were fortunate enough to miss it the first time.
Let’s acknowledge there isn't much to do historically for a franchise that opted for a hideous color scheme and no primary logo.
While on some level we appreciate the Browns’ decades-long holdout on helmet symbology, couldn’t we bend that rule in the alternate space?
Stick with the winged University of Michigan knockoffs – yes, the Bears briefly wore them first in the 1930s – and call it a day.
In my most recent overarching uniform power rankings, their iconic look ranked No.
And, as expressed elsewhere, it’s sometimes foolish to mess with magnificence.
But the Silver and Black are being ranked last here mostly to put them on notice while serving a complacency penalty.
The white Color Rush and white throwback jersey (with silver numbers) they’ve utilized in recent years are totally ... fine.
But there’s a real opportunity to take their sinister look to a new, Darth Vader-caliber level a few times a year.
Black helmets with a chrome Raiders shield?
Seriously, Mark Davis, what are we waiting for here?
Commit to uniform excellence!
Pulling on the red pants is as frisky as they get, so no alternates or throwbacks to assess.
And a team based in K.C.
As far as anything in the pipeline?
“I think we have a very distinct brand with the red and white, and I don’t anticipate steering away from that any time soon,” owner Clark Hunt revealed this year, saying he also wanted to honor the wishes of his later father – AFL and team founder Lamar Hunt – who wanted uniform continuity.
Follow USA TODAY Sports' Nate Davis on X, formerly Twitter @ByNateDavis.
Indianapolis Colts quarterback Anthony Richardson will indeed undergo shoulder surgery that will end his rookie season after just four games.
Richardson suffered a reported Grade 3 AC joint sprain in his shoulder during a Week 5 win over the Tennessee Titans and was placed on injured reserve last week.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
He threw for 329 yards on Sunday against Jacksonville, but committed four turnovers in a 37-20 loss.
Joel A. Erickson of the Indianapolis Star, part of the USA TODAY Network, contributed to this story.
Former Vice President Mike Pence isn’t one of them.
“It’s not a time for on-the-job training,” he told a crowd of New Hampshire voters at a town hall sponsored by the USA TODAY Network last week, repeating an argument he’s made time and again on the 2024 campaign trail.
“I’m running for president because, and I do say this with all humility, I’m the most qualified, tested and ready conservative seeking the Republican nomination”
Pence has pitched a more traditional brand of conservatism than other candidates in the race that's focused on Republican values, fiscal responsibility and a strong U.S. military presence.
But that argument doesn’t appear to be resonating with voters in the Granite State, or across the country.
A recent Suffolk University survey, conducted in partnership with The Boston Globe and USA TODAY, showed Pence at just 1% in New Hampshire.
At the national level, Pence is doing slightly better.
A Morning Consult survey on the race, fielded between Oct. 13 and 15, showed Pence at 6% – over 40 points behind Trump.
He's also trailing GOP contenders like former United Nations Ambassador Nikki Haley, Florida Gov.
So, how is Pence attempting to win over voters?
Here’s a look at the priorities he outlined in New Hampshire that would impact Americans coast to coast if the former vice president is elected to the White House.
When it comes to balancing the federal budget and reducing the national debt, Pence has called for reforming mandatory spending programs like Social Security and Medicare – at least for some Americans.
“I’d say to everybody that’s got hair the same color as me, this doesn’t affect you ... we’re not going to make changes to the deal,” the one-time talk radio host told voters in New Hampshire.
For Americans under age 40, however, Pence said he would opt to privatize Social Security by allowing young workers to invest their payroll taxes into savings accounts.
He insisted that the plan would give American workers twice what they earn from Social Security.
The idea has been floated before by members of the Republican Party, most prominently during former President George W. Bush's administration.
But it has never garnered enough support in Congress to become a reality for Americans.
As the war between Israel and Hamas rages on, Pence in New Hampshire pledged to unequivocally support Israel, calling the country “our most cherished ally.”
“We’ll make it clear to Hezbollah and Lebanon, to Iran and any other powers in the region, that everybody needs to stand down,” Pence said.
“We’re going to defend Israel.”
During the Trump administration, Pence helped negotiate the Abraham Accords, a bilateral agreement signed by Israel, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain in 2020 to normalize relations.
However, at the town hall, Pence noted that facilitating further peace talks likely wouldn’t be a priority under his administration, given the ongoing war.
“It feels to me like real progress is going to have to take a second chair to Israel doing what it needs to do,” he said.
Pence offered similarly strong words on other issues of U.S. national security, including ongoing efforts to bolster Ukraine in its war against Russia.
When asked about his views on allocating U.S. taxpayer dollars to aid foreign conflicts, he argued that it’s among the most powerful ways America can stave off future aggression by countries like China.
“China has made no secret of the fact that they would like to grab Taiwan,” Pence said.
The Chinese government views the East Asian island as an extension of its territory and in recent years has ramped up military activity around its shores.
Describing the growing superpower as “the greatest economic and strategic threat facing the U.S.,” Pence told New Hampshire voters that, as president, he would push to implement tariffs on Chinese goods and expand U.S. military presence in the South China Sea to defend American interests in the region.
A strong defense strategy would pave the way toward “a peaceful future with China and progress for the Chinese people,” he said.
That’s because Sidney Powell, Trump’s former attorney, pled guilty Thursday to six misdemeanor charges related to efforts to overturn the 2020 presidential election results in Georgia.
Under the terms of the agreement, Powell will serve a six-year probation, pay a fine of $6,000 and testify at the trials of several co-defendants in the case.
She also agreed to write an apology letter to Georgia residents.
“The interesting part of that plea is that she will be testifying against Mark Meadows, against Rudy Giuliani, against Donald Trump,” Christie told reporters shortly after filling to put his name on the ballot in New Hampshire’s first-in-the-nation primary.
“You don't give a no-jail plea deal unless that person's got something very good to say that will help your case against the others.”
"You don't give a no-jail plea deal unless that person's got something very good to say that will help your case against the others."
Even if things feel uncertain in Washington right now, there are still some traditions that remain on the campaign trail: holding babies, attending state fairs and going to New Hampshire.
A civic pilgrimage: The crowded field of 2024 Republican White House hopefuls are chatting with people at diners, coffee shops and bookstores.
Some are trekking to the state capital in Concord to sign their name at a historic desk to be on the ballot, while others are sharing their messages through several town halls and other stops.
‘Weed themselves out’: But voters aren’t necessarily welcoming this group of candidates, according to seven USA TODAY reporters who traveled to New Hampshire.
Instead, these crucial voters are sending a clear message to Republican candidates: Some of you need to drop out.
"Let some weed themselves out, and those that rise to the top, you know, we’ll wait it out and see."
Read more here: N.H. voters weighing 2024 GOP presidential candidates want some to drop out
Israel-Hamas War newsletter: Sign up to get the latest news and analysis on the conflict in your inbox.
After 31 long years of waiting, a woman from New York has stepped forward to share with local lottery officials she was the person who never claimed $12 million from a 1991 Lotto jackpot.
Janet Valenti, age 77, revealed that she was the rightful owner of a $12 million New York Lotto jackpot that sat unclaimed for over 30 years.
One small mistake led to the unfortunate fate of the ticket, and there was nothing she could do to retrieve it.
Valenti claimed she had the winning lottery ticket worth $12 million sitting on an end table next to her couch, among other lottery tickets, according to the Lottery Post.
She believed she had previously checked all the tickets on the table, so as she was preparing to leave her home with her two teenage children and mother to spend the weekend at a friend's house, she threw the tickets in the trash.
Over the weekend, she was unaware of her huge mistake.
When she returned, a friend informed her of a winning $12 million Lotto ticket sold in Staten Island.
Valenti discovered she had won after seeing the winning numbers in the paper.
Upon arriving home, she rushed to retrieve her ticket from the garbage, but could not find it.
"My next-door neighbor, who has never in her life, the whole time I lived there, ever put my garbage out for collection, she did," Valenti told the Lottery.
She couldn't go digging in the trash due to sanitation already picking up the garbage.
It was over, Valenti was out that $12 million.
The woman from Staten Island attempted to contact lawyers but was informed that the only way to claim the prize was with a physical lottery ticket.
Even obtaining surveillance footage from the retailer would be of no use.
"I was a wreck," Valenti recalled to the Lottery.
"I was sick for a long time over it."
On July 17, 1992, the $12 million Lotto jackpot went unclaimed and was returned to the state lottery fund.
This unclaimed prize holds the record for being the largest in New York's history.
Valenti was a single mother to her two teenage children, Kevin and Jennifer, at the time.
Her husband, Bruno, had passed away in 1984.
To cope with the incident, she turned to reading stories about "lottery curses", infamous stories of people whose lives took a turn for the worse after winning the Lottery.
This helped her from losing her mind over the situation.
"Given that kind of money, things can go bad," Valenti told the Lottery.
Who knows what would have happened if I'd had that money?
You read these stories, a lot of people win Lotto, they drop dead.
Despite her tremendous loss over 30 years ago, Valenti remains steadfast in her pursuit of playing the Lottery.
"The most I ever get is a free play or a couple of dollars," she said.
Someone won $12 million in Lotto on July 17, 1991, with a ticket purchased for $1 at J.N.J.
Despite holding the winning numbers (2, 3, 6, 43, and 51) the winner never claimed the prize.
"I think somebody, when they saw they'd won, died or never found out in the first place," she had said at the time.
Tickets can be purchased in-person at gas stations, convenience stores and grocery stores.
Some airport terminals may also sell lottery tickets.
Must be 18+, 21+ in AZ and 19+ in NE.
Not affiliated with any State Lottery.
Visit jackpocket.com/tos for full terms and conditions.
A trendy Barcelona bar decorated in pastel pink and green hues has been named the world’s best bar of 2023.
Don’t be fooled by the cozy interior, Sips can turn into a “a dark and sultry hideaway” as soon as the sun begins to set.
There is the off chance that any one of their “wondrous creations” may be served in a metal cast of two hands, or a glass, depending on how colorful the cocktail, of course.
This is the second year in a row that a Barcelona bar has taken possession of the top spot.
Honorees from 28 different cities around the world were recognized at a live awards ceremony in Singapore on Tuesday, marking the first time the ceremony has been held in Asia.
Double Chicken Please in New York City was named second best for the first time, while Handshake Speakeasy in Mexico City took third place.
The U.S. tied with England for most bars on the list, with a total of five U.S.-based bars included.
Three of the bars named are in New York City.
Mexico City follows the U.S. and London closely, with four bars making the list.
Argentina and Singapore were the countries with the third most number of winning bars with three wins each.
More:Oyster outrage: Woman's date sneaks out after she eats 48 oysters in viral TikTok video
The World’s 50 Best Bars List has been compiled annually since 2009 by U.K.-based business media company William Reed, the same group behind The World’s 50 Best Restaurants and The World’s 50 Best Hotels.
The goal of the list is to “celebrate the excellence of the international drinks sector and pay tribute to the visionary bartenders, enterprising bar owners and trailblazing brands that lead the charge in shaping cocktail culture around the world,” according to a news release by the company.
Galaxy Bar, Dubai, UAE
Jewel of the South, New Orleans
Locale Firenze, Florence
Panda & Sons, Edinburgh
The Cambridge Public House, Paris
The SG Club, Tokyo
A Bar with Shapes for a Name, London
Argo, Hong Kong
Sago House, Singapore
Wax On, Berlin
Satan’s Whiskers, London
Caretaker’s Cottage, Melbourne
Drink Kong, Rome
Salmon Guru, Madrid
Maybe Sammy, Sydney
Jigger & Pony, Singapore
BKK Social Club, Bangkok
Little Red Door, Paris
Handshake Speakeasy, Mexico City
Double Chicken Please, New York
World's Best Bars 2022 winners:US leads with 8; New York has 6 of them
ICYMI:Dungeon & Dragons-themed whiskey out this week: See the latest brands, celebs to release new spirits
Want a break from cooking this Thanksgiving?
This fast-food chain has your back.
Dolly to perform NFL halftime show:Dolly Parton will be Dallas Cowboys' Thanksgiving Day halftime performer
The turkey comes seasoned with salt and spices including paprika, dried onions and dried garlic, according to Popeyes.
One turkey costs $99 plus tax and feeds eight to 12 people, Popeyes says.
Where to watch 'It's the Great Pumpkin, Charlie Brown'
Delivery started on Oct. 9 and shipments take one-to-three business days, Popeyes says.
To order it online click here.
You can also visit your local Popeyes restaurant for pickup or to order one.
Looking to save time on side dishes too?
Visit Popeyes.com to order sides including mashed potatoes, Mac n cheese and even dessert.
The deal is available while supplies last in the continental United States except in Alaska, Hawaii, the Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico.
Reach her at nalund@usatoday.com and follow her on X @nataliealund.
For some, giving gifts is a way to show how well you know the birthday honoree.
If you, your friend or loved one is born in November, you'll want to know each of its symbols if you want to give the perfect November birthday gift.
People born in November can have one of two astrological signs: Scorpio (born between November 1 and 21) or Sagittarius (born between November 22 and 30).
The chrysanthemum also represents those born in November.
But what about November's birthstone?
Each month has at least one gemstone.
Here's what you need to know about November's birthstones, including their colors, symbolism and more.
Topaz comes in an array of colors, such as blue, yellow, orange, pink, violet, red and brown.
The name is believed to derive from the Sanskrit word "tapas," meaning "fire", according to the Geological Institute of America, which is fitting since one of the gem's best known forms is yellow.
Another popular topaz variety is blue.
Topaz is mostly mined in Brazil and northwestern Pakistan, states GIA.
Other countries that mine topaz include Namibia, Nigeria, Madagascar, Mexico, Myanmar, Sri Lanka and the U.S.
Historically, pink-orange topaz was popular among royalty.
This is no surprise since the stone is often referred to as "Imperial topaz."
The nickname is said to originate from the Russian royal family's usage of the stone, according to GIA.
Another justification is thanks to Brazilian Emperor Pedro II being gifted the gem in 1881.
This birthstone is believed to symbolize wealth and health.
The ancient Greeks thought topaz brought strength.
For centuries in India, wearing topaz above your heart meant a long life, beauty and intelligence.
Yellow topaz, in particular, is said to attract wealth since its color "represents the riches of gold", according to IGS.
Besides being the birthstone for November, blue topaz is given for the fourth wedding anniversary, while Imperial topaz is for the twenty-third wedding anniversary.
Its name originates from the French word "citron," meaning "lemon," states IGS.
The gem can be found in Bolivia, Spain, Madagascar, Mexico and Uruguay.
The stone is associated with happiness and joy, according to IGS.
It is seen as a "success stone" and is said to bring prosperity.
April | May | June | July | August | September
USA TODAY is exploring the questions you and others ask every day.
From "What are angel numbers?"
Head to our Just Curious section to see what else we can answer for you.
There’s no contest: people love condiments.
From ketchup, to mayo to mustard, condiments are a way to enhance flavors and textures that make an already great dish even better.
We love to spread our favorite condiments on sandwiches, hot dogs, burgers and even pizza.
(By now you’re either enraged or nodding along.)
Diets have often demonized condiments because they can add calories, sugar and fat to a dish.
But we want to hone in on one condiment in particular – mustard.
Should mustard be lumped in with all condiments or does mustard offer unique benefits?
They are low in calories, sugar and fat, which makes them an excellent addition to a dish, especially if the goal is weight management.
Ben-Asher explains, “Mustard can be utilized as a condiment which is low in calories and can help with weight management/control by enhancing flavor as an alternative to many high-calorie sauces, marinades and dressings.”
One serving (1 tbsp) of yellow mustard, for example, has 9.2 calories, and negligible fat and sugar.
One serving (1 tbsp) of honey mustard contains 69.5 calories, 6 grams of fat, and 2.4 grams of sugar.
These statistics do not make honey mustard off limits, it’s just something you need to be mindful of.
It turns out that mustard is packed with helpful nutrients.
Ben-Asher says, “Mustard provides nutritional value as well by its mineral composition of selenium and magnesium, which are important for many systemic functions.”
The powerful potential of mustard:How to use the condiment as an ingredient instead
According to the Harvard T.H.
Chan School of Public Health, selenium is a trace mineral that is vital for the creation of various enzymes and proteins that help make DNA and protect cells from damage.
Additionally, the NIH explains that magnesium is important for muscle and nerve function, regulation of blood sugar levels and blood pressure, and even the creation of DNA.
Like many nutritious foods, mustard contains antioxidants.
Turns out, this information is true.
It contains some compounds that have anti-inflammatory properties which can be beneficial for liver health.
The mustard seeds contain omega-3 fatty acids, which can reduce inflammation and support liver function.
We’ve learned that most types of mustard are low in calories, fat and sugar, so it seems to be like one of those foods we can enjoy.
It can be utilized as a low-calorie condiment to add flavor to foods without having a considerable impact on daily caloric intake.
However, it’s important to consider for some individuals that intake may need to be limited or avoided.
Although rare, mustard allergies can occur and if any adverse reactions are experienced – it should not be consumed.
Hot dogs:It's grilling, BBQ season.
But wait: Are hot dogs bad for you?
Taking supplements can be scary, especially when you don’t really know what is inside.
Melatonin is no different, especially because it is regulated as a dietary supplement, which is given considerably less oversight than medications, according to the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NIH).
In fact, some melatonin supplements may not reflect the label accurately, according to the NIH.
A study in 2017 tested different melatonin supplements and found that the amount of melatonin in the product did not match what on the product label.
So, is melatonin safe?
Here are your unanswered questions, answered.
Melatonin is a natural hormone that your body produces to help regulate the sleep/wake cycle, according to Dr. Hal Alpert, telemedicine consultant for Blue Sleep.
Melatonin levels are highest at the age of three, and they steadily decrease with age.
For example, a 70-year-old will have about 25% of the melatonin level that a teenager has, according to Alpert.
That being said, if a person's natural melatonin levels are not very high, the supplement can assist them to fall asleep quicker at the beginning of the night, said Alpert.
“There's no evidence that supports that.”
However, just like every supplement, there are some side effects that can be caused by melatonin.
How long does melatonin last?
While it is rare to have any side effects from the popular supplement, it is possible.
Risks are involved with higher dosages, said Alpert.
It is best to start lower and go higher if needed, with 10 milligrams being the maximum safe amount.
Melatonin can also interfere with other drugs, so it is important to talk to your physician about the medication you are on and the safety of using melatonin as well, said Alpert.
Read more:What to know about melatonin's side effects
Here at Just Curious, we're looking into all of your questions.
From "How old is Google?"
Did you know that roughly 1 in 3 adults have insomnia?
According to the Cleveland Clinic, 10% of adults fit the criteria for an insomnia disorder.
Many people who suffer from insomnia and sleep disorders turn to supplements like melatonin to help them fall asleep faster, but does it work?
Find out how long melatonin lasts in your system, how long it takes to work and how much melatonin you should take for the best night's sleep.
“So, it would stay in your system around four to five hours.”
Is melatonin safe?
Melatonin should be taken about two to four hours before your desired sleeping time, said Dr. Hal Alpert, a telemedicine consultant at Blue Sleep.
Additionally, it is best not to drive for at least five hours after taking melatonin due to its lasting sedative effects.
“[Melatonin] is a hormone that signals that it's time to go to sleep and light exposure, particularly blue light from computers, cell phones, and fluorescent lights will inhibit the release of melatonin,” explained Alpert.
“That is why for people who have insomnia it is best not to use these devices for at least four hours or so before bedtime.”
A starting dose of melatonin can be as low as .1 to .3 milligrams and the usual over-the-counter dosage is one to three milligrams in adults, said Alpert.
“The maximum safe dose is up to 10 milligrams, but it's shown that once you get to three milligrams, the higher doses don't get you to sleep any faster than the three-milligram dosage,” explained Alpert.
Risk factors:Are there melatonin side effects?
Here at Just Curious, we're looking into all of your questions.
Make sure to check out USA TODAY's Just Curious section for more trivia, tidbits and information you might want to know.
“People throw rocks at things that shine.”
That lyric flashed through my head as I read a recent opinion column claiming that Taylor Swift “has yet to make a significant mark as a philanthropist,” and that her estimated $4 billion Eras Tour earnings are a chance for the singer to champion left-leaning causes in honor of her fans.
Swift has a mind of her own, and she’s not afraid to use it.
Her approach to philanthropy is no exception.
Map out Swift’s philanthropy and one finds the singer’s empathetic approach to giving is deeply personal and powerful, transcending political divides.
That includes her support of friends, cancer patients, sexual assault survivors, disaster relief organizations and food banks along her Eras Tour.
The list goes on.
'Eras' movie shows women have options:In 'Eras Tour' movie, Taylor Swift shows women how to reject the mandate of one identity
Take her steady support of friends who have fallen on hard times.
What’s more, after Swift won a countersuit against former country music DJ David Mueller, who groped her during a red-carpet event in 2013, “The Man” singer pledged money to the Joyful Heart Foundation, a nonprofit that helps counsel sexual assault survivors.
Perhaps the most personal of Swift’s charitable giving, however, is her ongoing support of those fighting cancer, just as both of Swift’s parents have battled cancer – an experience Swift writes about in “Soon You’ll Get Better,” a deep track on her "Lover" album.
Swift rose to fame as a country singer, securing the admiration of more moderate women who found escape in songs like “Love Story” and “Ours,” in which Swift sings about prioritizing love, marriage and the allusion of family life over a depressing 9-to-5 cubicle job.
Yet, since her transition to pop superstardom and amassing a global following, Swift has done a remarkable job of staying true to her progressive values without overly politicizing her brand.
Her focus, instead, is on connecting with her fans – whether from a stage or a hospital room.
What if nothing else matters?
What’s more, it’s reasonable to assume that a singer savvy enough to question the legitimacy of FTX, a now bankrupt cryptocurrency exchange, has already mapped out her philanthropic goals.
In fact, Swift could already be donating to the left-leaning groups that some people want her to give to, but – for a variety of reasons – does so privately, which is her prerogative and part of her constitutional right to free speech.
Whatever direction Swift decides to tack with her charitable giving – now or in the future – her decision likely will be personally driven, intentional and an extension of her already significant mark on the world of philanthropy.
And, most important, the decision will be entirely her own.
How do you protect innocent civilians while conducting effective urban military operations against an enemy who is integrated into the civilian population and entrenched in a location’s infrastructure?
Israeli civilian and military decision-makers face this question anew after Hamas’ unprecedented attack from Gaza into southern Israel on Oct. 7.
The explosion at a Gaza hospital on Tuesday that killed hundreds of people points up the dangers faced by civilians in an active war zone.
Israel’s initial answer to the question of how to avoid civilian casualties in Gaza was to tell more than a million Palestinian residents to flee their homes and head south.
Barring an 11th-hour mass exodus from northern Gaza, Israel will face the possibility of further civilian casualties.
Fighting urban battles amid civilian populations is certainly an issue U.S. decision-makers have grappled with during military operations over the two decades since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
And there are lessons about protecting civilians that Israel could take from America's recent experience.
Among them: Consider potential civilian losses when planning airstrikes, seek improved methods of collecting and deploying intelligence, and provide safe passage for civilians away from war zones.
So far, more than 1,400 Israeli civilians and nearly 4,000 Palestinian civilians have been killed in the latest conflict.
Despite the ferocity of the Hamas attack and the Israeli response, the moral obligation to reduce civilian harm cannot be ignored.
Urban battles are not unusual occurrences in the Middle East.
Our research on that ISIS conflict, conducted with an eye toward reducing civilian harm, suggests that military effectiveness can be retained while protecting civilians and reducing damage to civilian infrastructure.
Operating in densely populated urban environments is incredibly difficult even for experienced military units such as the Israel Defense Forces, which have operated in Gaza before.
Hamas, not unlike ISIS, has a history of using civilian infrastructure as a defense against Israeli military operations.
Organizations like ISIS and Hamas know their adversaries are committed to reducing civilian harm and take advantage of this adherence to international law and norms.
In Syria, ISIS tactical facilities were often located near civilian infrastructure, requiring individual strike decisions to consider ways to minimize civilian harm.
Such considerations could help reduce civilian casualties in Gaza as well, though civilian deaths and infrastructure damage can never be eliminated, even with precision weapons.
Urban fighting in a location you do not control, especially when reliant upon air support, also makes it difficult to collect, verify and share real-time intelligence.
This also is now true in the Gaza Strip, one of the most densely populated geographies in the world.
I've seen firsthand the oppression:I'm a Palestinian American.
I almost gave up hope people will see the humanity in us.
An enhanced focus on the task of gathering and leveraging intelligence is critical, despite the many challenges facing the Israeli intelligence services in Gaza.
This was critical for evacuations of civilians and reducing civilian deaths.
This leaves residents of Gaza trapped and unable to escape the aerial bombardment from Israel.
Israel’s new demand that civilians flee applies to northern Gaza, but southern Gaza lacks the infrastructure to support the additional civilians, who would still remain trapped.
The United States regularly encourages all partners to limit civilian harm during conflict, including in current hotspots such as Ukraine.
One of the distinctions between the international community and organizations such as Hamas and ISIS is its commitment to reducing and limiting civilian harm during conflict.
As usual, it’s a great day to not be former president and current criminal defendant Donald J. Trump.
Sidney Powell – his former legal adviser, fellow champion of the gargantuan and ongoing “rigged election” lie and co-defendant in the sweeping Georgia election interference case – pleaded guilty Thursday and agreed to testify against others involved in the alleged conspiracy.
The word “others” is important, as it may well include Trump, the far-and-away leading GOP presidential primary candidate who, one imagines, is presently hurling all available ketchup at the walls of his Mar-a-Lago pout room.
Powell was known among Trump fanatics and election conspiracy theorists as the person who would “release the Kraken” and unleash unassailable evidence the election was rigged, righteously returning Trump to the White House.
In a Nov. 24, 2020, Fox Business interview with Lou Dobbs, Powell said of the election, "There's no way there was anything but widespread election fraud here."
She has now pleaded guilty to six misdemeanor counts of conspiracy to commit intentional interference of election duties and been sentenced to six years of probation.
She also has to pay some fines and write an apology letter to the people of Georgia, which is quite the thing when you consider the unbridled conviction with which she lied to the American public, often via Fox News appearances, about the 2020 presidential election being “stolen” from Trump.
Trump's Georgia arrest isn't an anomaly:Take a good look at Trump's booking photo, Republicans.
That's your GOP.
Powell's unhinged conspiracies were featured prominently in Dominion Voting Systems successful lawsuit against Fox News, and she's facing her own $1.3 billion defamation lawsuit from the company as well.
It appears the Kraken may not be all she was cracked up to be.
Worse yet for the MAGA crowd, said Kraken will now be released in Trump’s direction.
In a Nov. 14, 2020, tweet, Trump hailed Powell as part of his “truly great team” of lawyers.
Powell was part of an election conspiracy news conference held at the Republican National Committee headquarters on Nov. 19, 2020, an event made famous largely because Giuliani was sweating so profusely that hair dye ran down the side of his face.
At the news conference, Powell said: “What we are really dealing with here and uncovering more by the day is the massive influence of communist money through Venezuela, Cuba and likely China and the interference with our elections here in the United States.”
People with even a pinky toe still dipped in the pool of reality knew at the time that was nonsense, but it's clear from her guilty plea that Powell knew it was nonsense as well.
She went to meet with Trump at the White House on Dec. 18, 2020, and talked about declaring a national emergency and having the president order the military to seize certain voting machines.
And you know he will.
It’s easy to write Powell off as a conspiratorial crackpot, but they were all conspiratorial crackpots, and she marched side by side with Giuliani and Trump.
So the Kraken pleading guilty does three significant things:
For all her zany nonsense – which was featured over and over on Fox News in the wake of the 2020 election, helping brainwash a sizable swath of the populace – Powell was sane enough to know when to save her own hide.
Asked by the judge Thursday whether she believes “there are enough facts that support this plea of guilty,” Powell responded: “I do.”
That’s one of the first honest things she has said in a long time.
And it pulls the curtain all the way back on the scam Trump and his cronies have been running since the day he lost the 2020 election.
One of the most worrying results was that not everyone is seen as having the same freedom to speak their minds on college campuses.
People said conservatives had the least freedom to speak, but they perceived problems of exclusion beyond just one group.
Asian people also were seen as having less freedom of expression than other groups, and respondents said campuses did the worst at providing an inclusive environment for conservatives, visiting speakers, Asian people and transgender people.
We see related problems for campus expression as people respond to the tragedies of the Israel-Hamas war.
Many students don’t feel free to express their views, and some universities risk chilling discussions on their campuses by taking collective positions, sending the message that there is one “official” stance and other opinions are not welcome.
That is a troubling trend in our polarized times.
We face huge challenges as a society, and we can’t address them fully if people at colleges and universities – our greatest engines of new thinking and innovation – do not feel free to challenge each other and pursue ideas and breakthroughs wherever they lead.
Sadly, just as the need for new knowledge and discovery becomes more acute, universities have been riddled with challenges to free inquiry from all ideological factions.
We find ourselves in something of a moral panic, from which neither the left nor the right is immune.
But we also see signs that the tide is turning, and fast.
Our survey found heartening public support for many aspects of free expression, including bipartisan resistance to state restrictions on what professors at public universities can teach.
Among the encouraging stands that universities are taking on free expression, Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, this year rejected a call for mandatory trigger warnings for potentially offensive course content.
In Northern California, Stanford Law Dean Jenny Martinez, who wrote an articulate defense of free expression after the disruption of a talk by U.S.
Circuit Judge Kyle Duncan, was appointed provost of the university.
Many schools – including our own – are launching new free inquiry and expression initiatives, while others have adopted the “Chicago Principles” on free expression.
Biden is too old.
Such bold moves are critical, but they go only so far.
To realize the potential of free inquiry we need an active shift in campus culture.
The project of free inquiry and expression is about much more than solitary acts of expression – it’s about unlocking the power of discovery and knowledge in the context of an academic community to address major challenges and promote the flourishing of knowledge.
Freedom of expression on college campuses is not the same as an absence of personal constraint on speech, nor is it grounded primarily on the First Amendment.
Universities are crucibles of truth-seeking, for faculties and students alike.
To advance that ideal, they must be places where students and scholars are challenged by alternative viewpoints.
Universities have it in their power to take concrete steps to build stronger cultures of free inquiry and expression, including:
Despite the challenges to free inquiry, we remain enthusiastic about the breakthroughs of human ingenuity and discovery that our colleges and universities will yet make possible.
They can’t happen soon enough.
Combining the remarkable burgeoning activity across the higher education landscape with the creativity and passion of Generation Z makes for a very bright future.
Doubling down on free inquiry and expression is the key.
Without it, universities will lose all that makes them distinctive.
There’s no contest: people love condiments.
From ketchup, to mayo to mustard, condiments are a way to enhance flavors and textures that make an already great dish even better.
We love to spread our favorite condiments on sandwiches, hot dogs, burgers and even pizza.
(By now you’re either enraged or nodding along.)
Diets have often demonized condiments because they can add calories, sugar and fat to a dish.
But we want to hone in on one condiment in particular – mustard.
Should mustard be lumped in with all condiments or does mustard offer unique benefits?
They are low in calories, sugar and fat, which makes them an excellent addition to a dish, especially if the goal is weight management.
Ben-Asher explains, “Mustard can be utilized as a condiment which is low in calories and can help with weight management/control by enhancing flavor as an alternative to many high-calorie sauces, marinades and dressings.”
One serving (1 tbsp) of yellow mustard, for example, has 9.2 calories, and negligible fat and sugar.
One serving (1 tbsp) of honey mustard contains 69.5 calories, 6 grams of fat, and 2.4 grams of sugar.
These statistics do not make honey mustard off limits, it’s just something you need to be mindful of.
It turns out that mustard is packed with helpful nutrients.
Ben-Asher says, “Mustard provides nutritional value as well by its mineral composition of selenium and magnesium, which are important for many systemic functions.”
The powerful potential of mustard:How to use the condiment as an ingredient instead
According to the Harvard T.H.
Chan School of Public Health, selenium is a trace mineral that is vital for the creation of various enzymes and proteins that help make DNA and protect cells from damage.
Additionally, the NIH explains that magnesium is important for muscle and nerve function, regulation of blood sugar levels and blood pressure, and even the creation of DNA.
Like many nutritious foods, mustard contains antioxidants.
Turns out, this information is true.
It contains some compounds that have anti-inflammatory properties which can be beneficial for liver health.
The mustard seeds contain omega-3 fatty acids, which can reduce inflammation and support liver function.
We’ve learned that most types of mustard are low in calories, fat and sugar, so it seems to be like one of those foods we can enjoy.
It can be utilized as a low-calorie condiment to add flavor to foods without having a considerable impact on daily caloric intake.
However, it’s important to consider for some individuals that intake may need to be limited or avoided.
Although rare, mustard allergies can occur and if any adverse reactions are experienced – it should not be consumed.
Hot dogs:It's grilling, BBQ season.
But wait: Are hot dogs bad for you?
In excerpts of her upcoming memoir, shared by People, Britney Spears wrote that she became pregnant with Justin Timberlake’s baby and had an abortion because he wasn’t ready to become a father.
Spears’ statements underscore the benefits that male partners receive from having access to abortion care — an often overlooked aspect of reproductive health in light of Roe v. Wade’s downfall last year that, if ignored in society and politics alike, perpetuates the idea that abortion is solely a women’s issue.
“Abortion is a highly stigmatized form of healthcare, and women almost always bear the brunt of the stigma and shame around abortion,” said Bethany Everett, an associate professor of sociology at the University of Utah.
Everett, who studies the social and political implications of reproductive health, said Spears' claim that Timberlake did not want to become a parent suggests he was aware that a child could “derail his career,” a reality that “men rarely publicly acknowledge” but is critical to recognize in a post-Roe world.
Timberlake has yet to publicly respond to Spears’ comments.
Andréa Becker, a medical sociologist and postdoctoral research fellow with the University of California San Francisco’s Advancing New Standards in Reproductive Health program, said this example is “consistent with the literature,” in that “men don’t necessarily have to come forward and tell their abortion stories if they don’t want to, even though it would benefit them immensely.”
This pattern is due in part to a lack of research analyzing how access to abortion impacts male partners, a shortfall that Becker said “reinforces the way we talk about birth control, condom use and pregnancy avoidance as a woman’s responsibility and issue.”
“We just forget about the sperm involved in creating a pregnancy,” Becker said.
As a result, stigmas associated with abortion disproportionately impact women.
Data show that 1 in 5 men in the U.S. have been involved in abortion, which researchers say is likely an undercount.
Meanwhile, research has found that some men are hesitant to admit their involvement with abortion.
In a 2022 study, men were less likely to disclose the fact they were involved in an abortion during face-to-face interviews compared to an online survey.
In one of the few studies to analyze how abortion impacts male partners, Everett found that men who impregnated someone as a teenager were more likely to pursue post-high school education and graduate from college when the pregnancy ended in abortion compared to those that ended in live birth.
More on maternal health care inequities:Inequities in maternal health care access are not new.
They have deep roots in history.
“When men don’t speak up, the burden of having to make decisions about unplanned pregnancies and access to abortion falls exclusively on women — and that’s an equity issue,” said Dr. Brian Nguyen, an associate professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Southern California’s Keck School of Medicine.
Nguyen runs a research group called the EMERGE Lab that conducts studies aimed at ensuring men recognize their responsibility in women’s reproductive health and gender equity.
While questions still abound about what role male partners should have in the abortion landscape, it’s important to recognize the general lack of knowledge about abortion in the U.S., particularly among some men, Becker said.
Consequently, research shows many policy decisions now in place threaten the lives of women and girls who would benefit from abortion care, especially for people of color, migrants, people with disabilities, and those living on low incomes or in rural areas.
“They can donate to abortion funds and reproductive health care organizations, and, importantly, with the consent of their partners, acknowledge how abortion access has benefited them.”
This is the third story in a series exploring grief, how people face it, cope with it and heal from it.
Click here to read the first installment: This family went through an unimaginable tragedy.
How YouTube helped.
And here for the second: At 25 she found out she had the breast cancer gene.
Now, she's grieving motherhood.
Lisa Bowman had everything going for her − until she didn't.
The now 56-year-old was the global chief marketing officer for United Way.
United Way, an education, economic mobility and health-focused nonprofit, recruited her.
What should've been a dream job spiraled into a nightmare: she alleged she was sexually harassed at work, and more than 20 former employees of the company said "sexual harassment, discrimination and retaliation is commonplace," at the company, according to a 2021 HuffPost report.
The nonprofit fired Bowman in January 2020, months after she reported the harassment.
Multiple claims have been filed with the EEOC; United Way told USA TODAY it doesn't comment on matters of employment.
The CEO of United Way resigned as the chaos swirled.
But Bowman didn't just lose her job.
She lost much more.
"The loss of my job was really that loss of my identity," she says.
Grief doesn't apply to death alone.
And all can coexist.
(You can share yours with us at the bottom of this article).
"There's room enough in the world for all these losses, and one doesn't take away from the other," says David Kessler, grief expert and founder of Grief.com.
Bowman says her grief affected her as a woman: "When I talk about the grief over the loss of a job, I think for women, as we fight so hard sometimes to get to executive levels, and those C-suite positions, when we get there, that job becomes an integral part of our identity," she says.
"And so we identify very closely with our role."
She attempted to push through her grief – a "fake it 'til you make it" mentality – the same way she dealt with it at 26 following the death of her mother.
I'm missing out on all of those things, because of this loss of a job.
And that in and of itself – it's grief.
Bowman confided in friends and family in lieu of professional help.
While none could relate to her quandary, they listened to her.
Heard her cry.
Bowman previously had a 15-year stint in executive-level marketing roles at UPS but now freelances.
"It's made it very, very difficult for me to find employment," she says.
Another kind of grief: missed opportunities.
Bowman's grief is not more or less than any other type of grief.
"There's a context to think about it, as sometimes we approach grief like it's a pie," Kessler says.
But I need a lot of it because my spouse died.
Plus, "the emotions can be the same, regarding all kinds of loss," says Amy Morin, psychotherapist and the host of a podcast.
"Someone who lost their job may feel sad, anxious, and a bit disoriented, which might be the same feelings someone experiences when they lose a friend or relative."
Read next:At 25 she found out she had the breast cancer gene.
Now, she's grieving motherhood.
Today, Bowman's grief hasn't dissipated.
It's just that you get used to carrying it.
Sad:Her son died, and she felt alone.
In her grief, she found YouTube.
Catching a flight across the country or just having some trouble sleeping?
Many people turn to melatonin supplements in these instances for extra help catching some Z’s.
While melatonin does not have huge risk factors tied to it, every supplement can bring side effects if too high of a dose is taken or if used instead of prescribed medicines, according to the National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements.
Whether you are using the supplement to avoid jet lag or fight insomnia, or just want to sleep better, these are the side effects of melatonin and what to watch out for.
Side effects from melatonin are rare, but there is more risk involved when taking higher doses, explained Dr. Hal Alpert, telemedicine consultant for Blue Sleep.
Here are some of the side effects to be aware of:
If a person were to take much too high of a dosage, the following could occur, according to Alpert:
Additionally, melatonin can interact with other drugs, so it is important to know when to avoid melatonin depending on any other conditions, said Alpert.
“Melatonin can decrease the effectiveness of drugs for epilepsy and immune suppressive drugs,” said Alpert.
“You should avoid using melatonin in pregnant women, breastfeeding women, seizure disorders [and] depression.”
Melatonin can sometimes either raise or lower your blood pressure and make bleeding more likely if you’re on blood thinners, according to Alpert.
Here at Just Curious, we're looking into all of your questions.
From "Is melatonin bad for you?"
NEW YORK – The Rolling Stones will not go quietly.
Nearly 60 years since dropping their blues-steeped debut, the legendary rock band rooted by Mick Jagger and Keith Richards continues to make a glorious noise, continues to pique our attention with every utterance of a new tour and, simply, continues to matter.
The band’s latest album, “Hackney Diamonds,” their first new material since 2005’s “A Bigger Bang,” arrived Friday.
“Yes, yes, yes,” Jagger uttered as he roamed the corners of the small stage to greet the crowd of about 650 before offering a sly smile.
More:Inside Rolling Stones 'Hackney Diamonds' London album party with Fallon, Sydney Sweeney
What Jagger didn’t mention was the band was going to welcome a surprise guest to close their set – and really, how could there not be something special at a show this intimate?
– in the form of an absolutely kinetic Lady Gaga, who performs on “Hackney.”
The groove-infested “Shattered,” their 1978 seedy ode to New York, proved the ideal opener for the night.
But first Jagger, Richards, Wood, longtime bassist Darryl Jones, drummer Steve Jordan (who took the seat of the late Charlie Watts in 2021), keyboardist Matt Clifford and singer Chanel Haynes had a few other tunes to unleash.
Richards, all scarves and bandannas, ripped out the instant classic riff, filling in the notes between Jones’ rumbling bass lines.
Everyone on stage appeared to be steeped in joy.
Wood, who has endured a few recent bouts of cancer, grinned as he stepped up to solo during “Whole Wide World,” while Jones thundered behind his kit, already a master at Watts’ signature playing style of never hitting the high hat and snare drum simultaneously.
Jagger, as if it needs to be said, remains an indefatigable wonder at 80, his moves a blend of peacock strutting and karate chopping, his voice as distinctive and grainy as ever.
The band, however, saved its showstopper for the inevitable encore.
“Sweet Sounds Of Heaven,” a muscular gospel-blues standout on the new album, was already landing with visceral intensity thanks to Jagger singing like a preacher, drawing the crowd in with his gestures and falling to his knees.
She immediately confirmed she is a worthy sparring partner for Jagger as the pair circled one another, each approaching the other as prey.
After Lady Gaga tossed down the mic stand in a frenzied moment of singing, Jagger ceded the spotlight to her to close out the song with iron-lunged ferocity.
The two pros were left breathless from being completely possessed by the song, and as Jagger led her to the front of the stage to take a bow with the band, it solidified that not only do the Rolling Stones still matter, but their legacy continues to inspire.
More:U2 brings swagger, iconic songs to Sphere Las Vegas in jaw-dropping opening night concert
Tyler Perry is ready to show fans who he is in a new documentary.
On Tuesday, Prime Video released the trailer for "Maxine's Baby: The Tyler Perry Story" which dives into the 54-year-old's upbringing and journey becoming one of this generation's most successful filmmakers.
The synopsis for the film said the "entertainment behemoth," who opened at the top spot at the domestic box office in 2010 for four consecutive years, was once just "a man working humbly to heal his childhood trauma by transforming his pain into promise."
The Emmy-winner has previously shared of his difficult upbringing.
In an Oct. 6 Instagram post, he shared a clip of a 2018 interview where he opened up about once being "devastated, broke, hungry, homeless."
The project also focuses on the death of his mother Willie Maxine Perry in 2009, whose health declined as he faced massive career success.
According to an Amazon Studios news release, the documentary dives into "the inner-world of a man, whose story has never fully been told, as he becomes a father and a media mogul with a mission to pave his own road to the top."
"The product is a profound lesson on remembering where you came from to know where you want to go," the news release reads.
Out of all the personality conflicts in the reality TV world, why did God, ABC and/or Gerry Turner end the burgeoning "Golden Bachelor" battle between Kathy and Theresa so quickly?
It was only last week that Kathy plunged the previously collegial mansion into the delicious heart of darkness by mobilizing against Theresa, who played the perfect victim while intensifying Kathy's rage by raving constantly about her deep "connection" with Gerry.
Yet before you could say "Real Housewives of New Jersey," the brewing brouhaha ended abruptly in Thursday's Episode 4.
Savor these fleeting moments in a power episode that featured a pickleball battle for Gerry's affections, a bawdy Never Have I Ever game with ice cream punishment, three women leaving the mansion (one of her own volition) and — saving the best for last — a shirtless Gerry, 72, presenting a rose during a steamy hot tub canoodle.
Here's what happened in "The Golden Bachelor" Episode 4:
This was the cruelest month for therapist April, 65, who had no business going home this early.
In the next solo scene, she literally winked to the camera with a sly smile and sotto voce remark, "Actually, I am totally fine."
April won the women-only Never Have I Ever game with nonstop confessions that included detailed experiences with car sex: "Front seat, back seat, on the steering wheel," she shrugged between bites of ice cream penance.
Inexplicably, Gerry didn't give April a rose.
Retired executive assistant Sandra, 75, is still alive in every way, even if she was last seen on bed rest from the hearty partaking of ice cream during the Never Have I Ever game.
(Turns out she's lactose intolerant.)
But she pushed through the dairy-filled gauntlet because she's a gamer.
Case in point, Sandra missed her daughter's wedding to impress Gerry in the pickleball tournament.
(Kathy and hardcore pickleball enthusiast Ellen took the crown).
Gerry insisted Sandra make a joint FaceTime call to her just-wedded daughter.
Their FaceTime moment was beautiful, complete with relatable iPhone tech fumbling.
"We're too old for this," Sandra said with a smile.
Gerry rewarded Sandra, who was too ill for the ceremony, with an early rose.
Fitness instructor Leslie, 64, the self-professed muse to Prince's song "Sexy Dancer," was excused from pickle play after drawing the one-on-one Gerry date.
During their golden-light ATV jaunt, Gerry showed four-wheeler chivalry, riding behind Leslie to look after her.
But it wouldn't be a "Bachelor" season without a hot tub kiss.
Gerry did not disappoint, after the two gazed into each other's mutually beautiful blue eyes.
Without dousing his rose, the suddenly shirtless Gerry helped Leslie into the tub, which materialized in a picturesque field with Champagne.
Their post-rose clinch was PG-13 steamy, even with Gerry's right hand oddly stuck on the jacuzzi wall as if he was seeking the air-jets switch.
Retired educational consultant Kathy, 70, snapped right back into outrage mode after financial professional Theresa, 70, boasted of her first-date details (again) to the group and visiting former "Bachelorette" Trista Sutter.
"She could just be the one for Gerry," Kathy said to the camera in an astute moment.
"She just can't seem to find the 'off' button."
Theresa tried to patch things up with another apologetic heart-to-heart that ended with Kathy giving her "friendly advice" that would have spooked Tony Soprano.
"Zip it," said Kathy.
This became "Snip it" when Theresa tearfully recounted the exchange to Gerry.
But it worked.
Gerry was outraged, confronting Kathy with, "I'm beginning to sense a rift here that I'm not happy about!"
"I'm not the villain here," Kathy insisted.
But even she could see the game was up.
"Because of Theresa, I'm not getting a rose," she groused.
She was right about the rose.
Not often portrayed as a healthy model for personal expression, Kathy made a graceful exit, giving a final wave to the group that included Theresa.
She drove off in the black SUV with a brittle look of defiance.
"I am who I am and people either like me or they don't," Kathy said in her exit interview.
We think she was joking there.
Retired interior designer Nancy, 61, had a tender Episode 2 Gerry moment, but somehow sensed romantic futility.
She voiced her suspicions privately to Gerry that she wasn't going to make the cut.
"I'm really not going to dispute that," Gerry said, sounding like he was giving a statement from his legal counsel.
Power move for Nancy, with her boot cast from pickleball, to just drive off before the rose ceremony that saw April and Kathy leave.
Ellen: The pickleball ace won that showcase and heartily kissed Gerry afterward.
She enjoyed more Gerry kisses in a one-on-one moment.
Gerry had his eyes open for some.
Faith: Working it, but frets about her lack of Gerry time.
Susan: Gerry gave emphatic kisses and a rose quartz gift.
Leslie: That ATV date went deep.
Theresa: Kathy hates to be right about this.
There's something real between Gerry and Theresa.
Sandra: Gerry hasn't truly realized her greatness, but there's time.
ARLINGTON, Texas – Postseason baseball is not supposed to be like this.
In a sport where you can’t simply go one-on-one, where a pitcher may simply choose not to throw you the ball in a spot you can hit it, where solid contact and 100-mph line drives are no guarantee of success, one player cannot determine the outcome of a game, the fate of a team.
They are now two games away from a third consecutive World Series appearance and six victories away from defending their championship after a 10-3 thrashing of the Texas Rangers in Game 4 of the American League Championship Series, a win that squared the ALCS at two games apiece.
Alex Bregman got the party started, a two-run, first-inning triple igniting a team-wide strafing of the Rangers’ pitching staff.
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
In eight postseason games, Alvarez is now batting .419 (13 for 31), reaching base at a .471 clip, and has driven in 13 runs.
It won’t appear on his playoff game log, but let the record reflect that the hitters in front and behind him in the lineup combined to drive in five runs.
The swagger is back, largely because of their cleanup hitter who often moves in silence but might give Bryce Harper a run as the most impactful hitter in the game.
“Having Alvarez hit like he’s been hitting, nothing can stop us right now.”
Thursday’s action offered plenty of evidence.
Dane Dunning, Heaney’s capable piggyback partner, started the inning issuing two walks and a single, and after striking out Alex Bregman, was not going to face Alvarez with the bases loaded.
So Cody Bradford, a soft-throwing but deceptive rookie lefty, was summoned for the impossible task.
But Alvarez was a different ask.
Alvarez clubbed it just to the right of dead center field, 111 mph off his bat and looking for all the world like it was his seventh homer in eight games this postseason.
Bradford backpedaled and looked, hoping for the best.
In this one, it was a go-ahead sacrifice fly.
It was 7-3 Houston.
And for him to come through like that time and time again for us, it's huge.
He’s found a groove in October, hitting four home runs, three of them at least 430 feet.
Even if there’s not much on the table when he comes up.
Um, why is it so difficult?
“He drives in all the runs.”
When told of his Cuban countryman’s gripe, Alvarez allowed a little grin.
“Like I always say, if they leave a pitch over the middle of the plate, and I’m able to make contact, I’m going to try to drive them in,” he says.
OK, so sometimes he’s pretty modest.
But he does have his pride, and a good memory.
When asked if this October was his most locked-in, he offered a mild rebuttal.
And 2022 wasn’t too bad.
Or his gargantuan go-ahead home run off Jose Alvarado in the sixth inning of Game 6 of the World Series, a shot that made it rain champagne hours later?
But he batted .192 last postseason, drawing six walks to 16 strikeouts.
Yet even at his less than best, he had a massive impact on Houston’s championship.
As for this year?
But he does that every day.
Not many guys can do that.
The other team doesn’t want you to beat him.
“At the same time, it’s inevitable.”
It’s starting to feel that way, even if Alvarez, 26, strangely slips under the radar.
Yet the Rangers were terrible those years.
You’d think the guy squeezing the life out of their 90-win team, unsullied by scandal, might attract more enmity.
“When you give hope to the Houston Astros and some fuel, some adversity too, we take that really well,” says McCormick.
“We had a huge amount of confidence coming here.”
It’s only growing.
They’ll also have the best player on the field, perhaps any field, batting cleanup.
No, Alvarez is not a one-man team.
Just one man who influences outcomes like few before him.
This was a Game 3 in the National League Championship Series, not a World Series Game 7.
This didn’t produce a title for the Arizona Diamondbacks over the powerful New York Yankees that made Gonzalez a hero in Arizona.
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
He couldn’t believe it.
Neither could the crowd of 47,075 at Chase Field.
You don’t want to take out a guy like that with so much momentum on our side.
I have a strategy for everything that's done.
Everything that's done has been well talked about.
It's not just analytics.
I know how quickly playoff baseball can change.
I am prepared to get second-guessed.
What’s he going to say?
Besides, it all worked out in the end.
He’s the only guy hitting for Arizona.
He is one of our best players for a reason.
He just has the heart of a lion.
Yet, he was on the on-deck circle when the inning ended.
The D-backs still believe, and if nothing else, maybe they created a little doubt that the Phillies won’t steamroll them on their way to a return trip to the World Series.
And I think we do.
We can compete with anybody in this league.
And now that Michigan is residing near the top of college football again, all the fangs are coming out.
Now, in a story reported first Thursday by Yahoo!
Sports and confirmed by the Big Ten, Michigan is under another inquiry for in-person scouting of opponents, which has been against the rules for nearly 30 years and is quite unnecessary these days, unless the goal is to glean extra information about an opponent's play-calls that teams often try to disguise on the sideline.
Now I know what you, the well-informed college sports fan, is thinking.
The answer is because NCAA enforcement is a lot like traffic cops.
They’re not going to catch everybody.
They may pick one speeding car to turn the siren on for over another for biased reasons.
But when they have you on the radar gun going 90 miles per hour on the highway, they’re going to write you a ticket — especially if you act difficult and indignant when they pull you over.
And given his proclivity toward Michigan Man self-righteousness, the rest of college football is snickering away.
Not really, but it is a willful violation in order to gain a competitive advantage.
And then to not be truthful or forthcoming about it with the NCAA?
That’s another bright red line that the NCAA has used many times to penalize coaches, because catching them in a lie is one of the few hammers they actually have.
This alleged scouting violation is even sillier.
Michigan is 7-0 and has won its games by 27, 28, 25, 24, 38, 42 and 45 points.
If, as The Athletic reported Thursday, the Big Ten has evidence of a “vast network” being used to steal signs, it's the most comical use of espionage since Dan Aykroyd and Chevy Chase paired up in “Spies Like Us.”
If you need to steal signs to beat Nebraska and Rutgers, you’re more con man than Michigan Man.
Before this story dropped, there was talk of another extension in the works.
Most people in college sports would look at that claim skeptically — not about the offer itself but the idea that somebody would choose to play for a school offering nothing but the standard scholarship when they could have pocketed $300,000 somewhere else, even if it was against the rules.
Why even put that out there other than to glorify Mr. “Do it the right way” while casting aspersions on competitors?
It’s not just unseemly, it’s phony.
Who is Chris Partridge?
Partridge was qualified for the job and is now in his second stint on the Michigan staff after working as the co-defensive coordinator and safeties coach the last three seasons.
But hiring the high school coach of the No.
1 prospect in the country and then landing that prospect from several states away is a gray-area move.
How long of a leap is it from the gray to outright rule-breaking — even if the rules are picayune?
Maybe not that long.
“They're obviously trying to gain a competitive advantage, and that’s their right,” he said.
I don’t know how it’s going to go down.
It sure is.
Trevor Lawrence has earned a rest.
Playing through a left knee injury suffered four days earlier, the Jacksonville Jaguars quarterback was efficient – if not effervescent – but made his biggest play when his team needed it most.
Jacksonville (5-2) extended its AFC South lead while joining the Kansas City Chiefs and Miami Dolphins as the conference’s only five-win clubs.
Lawrence completed 20 off 29 passes for 204 yards and, despite the bum knee, ran for a team-high 59 yards on eight carries.
But Moreau couldn’t hang on, and Carr couldn’t convert on his final chance on fourth down as New Orleans dropped to 3-4.
― Nate Davis
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
NFL NEWSLETTER: Sign up now to get football news delivered to your inbox
Jaguars: The Jaguars gave up a 24-9 lead in the fourth quarter, but were able to survive the Saints’ late rally.
The Jaguars broke a four-game losing streak against New Orleans.
Prior to Thursday night, Jacksonville’s last victory versus the Saints was on Dec. 21, 2003.
The Jaguars are currently in first place in the AFC South.
Jacksonville is 5-2 for the first time since 2007.
His play diagnosis and nose for the football was on display Thursday night.
The Jaguars running back tallied 77 yards from scrimmage (53 rushing yards and 24 receiving yards) and two touchdowns in the win.
He led the Saints in carries, catches, rushing yards and receiving yards in the loss.
Derek Carr, Saints offense: The Carr-led Saints offense was booed multiple times Thursday night.
Carr and his wide receivers weren’t on the same page for much of the contest.
Credit to Carr and the Saints offense, they did rally back in the fourth quarter with two touchdowns to tie the game at 24 apiece.
But three field goals through the first three quarters wasn’t good enough.
Carr finished 33-of-55 passing for 301 yards.
He had one touchdown and one interception.
The Saints quarterback also appeared to injure his groin area late in the game.
Saints' third-down efficiency: The Saints were 3-18 on third downs.
The team’s third-down inefficiency probably cost them the game.
Saints' poor red zone offense: The Saints went 2-5 in the red zone.
New Orleans’ red zone struggles played a big role why they lost at home.
The most critical red zone mishap came on third down with 30 seconds in remaining in the fourth quarter when tight end Foster Moreau dropped a wide open game-tying touchdown.
Moreau’s drop was a microcosm of the Saints' red zone struggles on Thursday night.
― Tyler Dragon
Saints tight end Foster Moreau dropped a would-be game-tying touchdown in the back on the end zone with 30 seconds remaining in the fourth quarter.
The back-breaking drop proved to be costly for the Saints.
The Jaguars were able to get in victory formation after the Saints turned the ball over on downs.
New Orleans finished the game 2-5 in the red zone.
― Tyler Dragon
Christian Kirk caught a short pass over the middle from Trevor Lawrence and took it 44 yards to the house.
Kirk made the entire Saints defense look slow after he caught the football and ran up field for the score.
The Jaguars reclaimed the lead, 31-24, after the score.
Kirk has six catches, 90 yards and a touchdown in the game.
― Tyler Dragon
The Saints scored on just three plays after Jacksonville turned the ball over on downs.
Two of New Orleans’ three plays went to wide receiver Michael Thomas, including a great diving catch for a 17-yard touchdown.
It was Thomas’ first touchdown of the season.
The Saints scored a two-point conversion after the touchdown to tie the contest 24 apiece.
New Orleans has scored touchdowns on two of its last three possessions after being held out of the end zone for three quarters.
― Tyler Dragon
A little more than two years ago, Jaguars QB Trevor Lawrence fronted the first round of a 2021 NFL draft that included four other passers: Zach Wilson, Trey Lance, Justin Fields and Mac Jones.
There was little debate at the time that Lawrence, the No.
1 overall pick, was a generational prospect and the best of this bunch, but few could have envisioned he could well be the only one of those quarterbacks to reach a second contract with the team that drafted him.
A win tonight would be Lawrence's 18th in the NFL; the other four 2021 first-round QBs have a combined 35 victories.
Lawrence's one Pro Bowl nod so far (2022) also matches the rest of the class, Jones earning one as a rookie but nowhere close since.
― Nate Davis
New Orleans was finally able to reach pay dirt.
The Saints are 4-5 on fourth downs in the game.
― Tyler Dragon
Derek Carr’s forced pass turned disastrous.
― Tyler Dragon
The Saints home fans have seen enough field goals.
― Tyler Dragon
Hill has two carries for 12 yards so far tonight.
― Nate Davis
The Saints entered tonight's game with the NFL's sixth-ranked scoring defense.
The Raiders never ranked better than 20th in that category during QB Derek Carr's nine seasons with the franchise.
― Nate Davis
The Saints were booed multiple times in the first half after their offense failed to score a touchdown.
New Orleans only scored three points off two Jacksonville turnovers.
― Tyler Dragon
Tonight is the first time the Saints' new-look backfield has been completely available.
But not a banner night thus far offensively.
In fact, the Saints have only scored 19 points in the six quarters since they demolished the Patriots 34-0 in Week 5.
Carr has completed 11 of 21 passes for 100 yards.
― Nate Davis
The Jaguars called a fake punt on fourth-and-2.
Jacksonville’s special teams unit snapped the football and the punter Logan Cooke threw a perfect pass to Tim Jones for a 13-yard gain.
The fake punt set up a successful 43-yard field goal by Brandon McManus.
Jacksonville has a 17-6 lead.
― Tyler Dragon
The Saints are 0-2 in the red zone in the first half.
Derek Carr and the Saints converted a fourth-and-3 to keep their possession going, but their drive stalled again in the red zone.
The Saints again had to settle for a field goal.
― Tyler Dragon
So is Ridley Batman or Robin?
Ridley has yet to be targeted in this game.
― Nate Davis
Two first quarter fumbles haven’t slowed down the Jags.
After holding New Orleans to a field goal after a muffed punt, the Jaguars went 75 yards down the field in seven plays to reach the end zone for the second time.
Jacksonville’s touchdown came on a nifty misdirection jet sweep.
The Saints are down 14-3.
― Tyler Dragon
But Jacksonville’s defense was able to keep New Orleans out of the end zone.
The Saints converted one first down and had first and goal from the 6-yard line, but their touchdown efforts failed on three attempts inside the 10-yard line.
― Tyler Dragon
The Saints got quick reprieves from their missed field goal.
New Orleans took over at its own 41 ... but didn't need long to go three-and-out.
New Orleans recovered and is back in business.
― Nate Davis
The Saints rookie kicker missed two field goals last week, and he missed his first field goal attempt in Week 7.
― Tyler Dragon
The only other rushing touchdown surrendered by New Orleans this season was a 1-yard run by Packers QB Jordan Love.
― Nate Davis
The Saints defense hadn’t allowed an opening drive touchdown all season, until Week 7.
Trevor Lawrence and the Jaguars marched down the field on a 10-play, 75-yard touchdown drive in just over five minutes.
Jacksonville converted six first downs on its opening drive.
Lawrence completed five of six passes for 60 yards.
― Tyler Dragon
Jaguars vs. Saints begins at 8:15 p.m.
ET on Oct. 19.
Jaguars at Saints will be streaming exclusively on Amazon Prime Video and will be broadcast in local markets only.
The Jaguars announced that Trevor Lawrence was active for Thursday night's matchup with the Saints.
Jaguars' inactive players:
Saints' inactive players:
Lorenzo Reyes: Saints 21, Jaguars 17
This is a tricky one, with the status of Jaguars quarterback Trevor Lawrence up in the air.
But with the quick turnaround with the Thursday game, I would expect Lawrence to be hindered — if he can go at all.
If you’re leaning Saints, it might not be bad to jump on this sooner rather than later, assuming the line moves if Lawrence is ruled out.
Tyler Dragon: Jaguars 24, Saints 20
Jacksonville’s won three straight games.
New Orleans has dropped three of its last four.
Trevor Lawrence’s knee injury is a concern, but the team expects him to play.
The quick turnaround favors New Orleans.
However, Derek Carr and the Saints are still trying to figure themselves out offensively.
Victoria Hernandez: Jaguars 23, Saints 21
The Jaguars are tried and true on the road and showed last week that their success in London wasn’t a fluke.
Jordan Mendoza: Saints 16, Jaguars 14
Trevor Lawrence’s health is a big concern, and the Saints defense has only given up more than 20 points once this season.
The New Orleans offense isn’t great, but they hold down Jacksonville enough for a close win.
... it's been a minute.
In fact, nearly two decades since it happened and is famous for one of the wildest finishes in league history.
That game occurred Dec. 21, 2003, in a game that became known as the "River City Relay."
It occurred in Duval County in Week 16 and was a must-win affair for New Orleans' playoff hopes.
Then ... New Orleans kicker John Carney sailed the extra-point attempt wide ride.
Jags 20, Saints 19 ... no playoffs in The Big Easy.
― Nate Davis
... was also in New Orleans — and in prime time.
It was Aug. 23, 2021 — preseason — a game the Saints won 23-21 on a Monday night.
On that evening, then-rookie QB Trevor Lawrence showed his inexperience, taking a huge hit on a third-down run but surviving it.
And then-coach Urban Meyer was clearly agitated throughout the night, managed the game like it counted in the standings and seemed crushed by the loss — among the attributes that would scuttle his only season as an NFL head coach before he could reach the end of it.
― Nate Davis
... and the game actually counted?
It was his final game at Clemson, the Sugar Bowl on New Year's Day 2021.
― Nate Davis
Looking to wager?
Check out the best mobile sports betting apps offering NFL betting promos in 2023.
According to the top NFL betting apps, Jaguars quarterback Trevor Lawrence (+1800) boasts some of the best NFL MVP betting odds in 2023.
The Jaguars (+2200) also have some of the best early Super Bowl betting odds.
Not interested in this game?
Our guide to NFL betting odds, picks and spreads has you covered with "Sunday Night Football" odds, "Monday Night Football" odds and more.
If you’re new to sports betting, don’t worry.
We have tips for beginners on how to place a bet online.
Saints vs. Jaguars | Ravens vs. Lions | Bears vs.
Raiders | Colts vs. Browns | Patriots vs. Bills | Giants vs.
Falcons | Rams vs. Steelers | Seahawks vs. Cardinals | Broncos vs. Packers | Chiefs vs. Chargers | Eagles vs. Dolphins | Vikings vs. 49ers
Take a look at how all 32 teams stack up heading into Week 7.
How do Week 6 losses by the previously undefeated 49ers and Eagles shake things up?
But that throwback comeback will hardly be the last, plus some fresh fashion-forward alternates are also coming down the pike.
Nate Davis does important work by ranking the NFL's alternate uniforms.
We have a complete list at every position:
Do you like football?
Then you'll enjoy getting our NFL newsletter delivered to your inbox
Get the latest news, expert analysis, game insights and the must-see moments from the NFL conveniently delivered to your email inbox.
Sign up now!
We occasionally recommend interesting products and services.
If you make a purchase by clicking one of the links, we may earn an affiliate fee.
USA TODAY operates independently, and this doesn’t influence our coverage.
Gannett may earn revenue from sports betting operators for audience referrals to betting services.
Sports betting operators have no influence over nor are any such revenues in any way dependent on or linked to the newsrooms or news coverage.
Terms apply, see operator site for Terms and Conditions.
If you or someone you know has a gambling problem, help is available.
Call the National Council on Problem Gambling 24/7 at 1-800-GAMBLER (NJ, OH), 1-800-522-4700 (CO), 1-800-BETS-OFF (IA), 1-800-9-WITH-IT (IN).
Must be 21 or older to gamble.
Sports betting and gambling are not legal in all locations.
Be sure to comply with laws applicable where you reside.
The holiday season is fast-approaching, and beginning next month Universal's theme parks will have plenty of ways to get in the spirit.
Universal Orlando Resort’s festivities will begin in mid-November, where visitors “can experience a mix of merry and mischief brought to life from holiday classics to experiences inspired by pop culture icons,” according to a news release.
Universal Studios Hollywood will kick off its celebrations later that month.
With fan favorites returning and some new features, here’s what guests can expect.
Holiday festivities run from Nov. 17-Dec. 31 at Universal Orlando Resort, and Nov. 24-Jan. 1 at Universal Studios Hollywood.
Meanwhile, Universal’s Holiday Parade featuring Macy’s will fill Universal Studios Florida with festive floats and performances, culminating in a cameo from Santa Claus and the lighting of a Christmas tree measuring 80 feet high.
Guests can see “The Magic of Christmas at Hogwarts Castle” there, too, lighting up the school with a projection show starting every night at dusk.
Holiday travel 2023:How to book the cheapest flights, according to experts
All holiday activities at Universal Studios Hollywood are included with park admission.
Universal Orlando Resort's holiday offerings are included with admission as well, but some, like Universal’s Holiday Tour, cost extra.
You can reach him at ndiller@usatoday.com.
The U.S. State Department issued a worldwide travel advisory on Thursday, urging Americans overseas to exercise increased caution.
The travel advisory cited “increased tensions in various locations around the world, the potential for terrorist attacks, demonstrations or violent actions against U.S. citizens and interests.”
The State Department recommended U.S. citizens stay vigilant in locations popular with tourists, and sign up for the Smart Traveler Enrollment Program, which can provide information and make it easier to locate them in an emergency.
"The U.S. Department of State has no higher priority than the safety and security of U.S. citizens overseas," a State Department spokesperson told USA TODAY in an emailed statement.
The warning comes as thousands have been killed in the Israel-Hamas war.
At least 3,785 people had been killed in Gaza as of Thursday, according to the Gaza Health Ministry, including more than 1,500 children.
Over 1,400 people have been killed in Israel, most of whom were civilians.
Learn more: Best travel insurance
Live updates:Hamas commander killed in air strike as Israel bombs 'safe zones' in Gaza:
Many Americans have been evacuating the region, including on a Royal Caribbean International cruise ship that carried U.S. nationals from Haifa to Limassol, Cyprus, earlier this week.
You can reach him at ndiller@usatoday.com.
Whether you're traveling for business or pleasure, flying can be stressful, but it doesn't have to be.
There are tips and tricks to getting through airport security faster, and these days many airports have incredible amenities — making downtime between connecting flights all the merrier.
However, sometimes it's not the flying that's formidable but all the planning required before the trip.
With that in mind, we answer some of your most-pressing questions by sharing the relevant rules and regulations set forth by the Transportation Security Administration (TSA).
If you aren’t aware of TSA rules for packing medication and vitamins, it can cause a real headache at airport security.
What you can throw in your carry-on bag or pack in checked luggage depends on the quantity and the type, from powders and liquids to prescription medication and over-the-counter remedies.
Read more: TSA rules for traveling with vitamins, supplements and medication
Learn more: Best travel insurance
The simple answer is yes, but whether you can put it in your carry-on bag depends on how you apply your signature scent — and how much you’re packing.
TSA rules vary for packing liquids, aerosols, and gels in your carry-on bag and checked luggage.
Familiarize yourself with the TSA protocol before packing your precious products, so they don’t get tossed out at airport security.
That would stink.
Read more: TSA regulations for bringing perfume and cologne on the plane
If it’s less than 12 ounces in the original container, you’re in the clear for your carry-on bag, but there are plenty more factors to consider.
For instance, what if it’s not in the original packaging?
Are there limits to how much I can put in my checked bag?
We decipher all the TSA rules and regulations for packing protein in powder and liquid form in carry-on and checked bags.
Read more: Will TSA let me take protein powder on the plane?
Navigating air travel with kids in tow can be challenging, so it pays to know the TSA requirements for traveling with minors.
For instance, do kids need ID to fly?
The rules vary by airline and whether you’re flying domestic or international.
Read more: Everything you need to know about TSA requirements for minors
A TSA lock can go miles to help keep your belongings safe and your bags damage-free, should airport security flag your checked luggage for further inspection.
A TSA-approved lock can be opened by airport security officers with a universal master key, avoiding the need to cut through traditional locks to inspect a bag’s contents.
Many luggage companies now design suitcases with built-in TSA locks, but you can buy them separately too.
Read more: The scoop on TSA locks and how to reset them if you forget the combination
UPDATE: This story has been updated with news that within hours of publication of USA TODAY's investigation, MSU suspended Coach Mel Tucker without pay.
Two years ago, one of the nation’s star college football coaches and a prominent rape survivor teamed up to fight the culture of sexual violence in sports.
Their partnership should have been a force for good.
Instead, it has devolved into scandal, with the activist accusing the coach of the same misconduct that both of them preached against.
Accusing him is Brenda Tracy, a rape survivor who has made educating athletes about sexual violence her life’s work.
Over eight months, they developed a professional relationship centered on her advocacy work.
Tucker invited Tracy to campus three times – twice to speak to his players and staff and once to be recognized as an honorary captain at the team's spring football game.
But their relationship was upended during a phone call on April 28, 2022, Tracy says in a complaint she filed with the university’s Title IX office in December that remains under investigation.
According to her complaint, Tracy sat frozen for several minutes while Tucker made sexual comments about her and masturbated.
His violation, she said, reopened 25-year-old wounds from her rape by four men – two Oregon State University football players, a junior college player and a high school recruit.
“The idea that someone could know me and say they understand my trauma but then re-inflict that trauma on me is so disgusting to me, it’s hard for me to even wrap my mind around it,” she told USA TODAY.
“It’s like he sought me out just to betray me.”
In his statements to the Title IX investigator, Tucker acknowledged masturbating on the call but said Tracy grossly mischaracterized the episode.
According to him, they had consensual “phone sex.”
Michigan State hired an outside Title IX attorney to investigate the complaint.
She finished her investigation in July.
A formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated the school’s policy banning sexual harassment and exploitation is scheduled for Oct. 5 and 6, during the Spartans’ bye week.
The stakes are high for everyone.
Tracy says Tucker is following through on a threat to ruin her career and reputation by painting her as a woman who mixes professional and personal relationships and files false reports.
She fears he will undo her legacy.
Tucker, who signed one of the most lucrative contracts in college sports history two years ago, could lose out on the roughly $80 million he is owed if Michigan State fires him for cause, which would be a stunning fall from the elite ranks of college coaches.
Reached by USA TODAY on his cellphone Saturday night, Tucker hung up after a reporter mentioned the case.
Hours after USA TODAY published its investigation, the university suspended Tucker without pay, pending a resolution of the Title IX case.
“This step, suspending Mel Tucker without pay, is … necessary and appropriate for today's circumstances,” Interim President Teresa Woodruff said at a Sunday evening press conference.
“These actions are not taken lightly.”
USA TODAY typically does not identify people who allege sexual harassment.
Tracy agreed to be identified and shared more than 1,200 pages of case documents.
Title IX, the federal law banning sex discrimination in education, requires schools to investigate allegations of sexual harassment that took place in the context of a school program or activity.
Such claims are inherently difficult to adjudicate because of many of the factors at issue in this case: a lack of eyewitnesses and recordings, the passage of time and the thorniness of litigating consent.
Adding to the uncertainty, the institution tasked with sorting out the facts is perhaps best known for missing repeated opportunities to stop one of the most prolific sexual abusers in American history.
Gymnastics and campus physician accused of sexually assaulting more than 300 female athletes under the guise of medical treatments.
He has been sentenced to a minimum of 100 years in prison.
Amid its efforts to rebuild trust among students, employees, alumni and the East Lansing community, Michigan State's leaders must now decide whether the face of its prestigious football program is guilty of sexually harassing one of the country’s most influential advocates against gender-based violence.
For some, how the university navigates the crisis will send a clear message about its commitment to progress.
“This goes beyond coach Tucker and Brenda Tracy,” said Jennifer Gomez, a Boston University professor who researches the effects of interpersonal trauma and violence.
“What happens here has the potential to be very healing or very harmful for lots and lots and lots of other people.”
Tracy and Tucker met in August 2021 during her first visit to Michigan State, after a mutual acquaintance introduced them.
Standing before a packed auditorium in the Spartans’ football operations building, Tracy told a gut-wrenching story of turning her pain into purpose two decades after filing a police report saying she had been gang-raped as a 24-year-old mother of two.
At the end, she challenged the “good men” in the room to use their privilege and influence to educate themselves and call out bad behavior.
By then she had delivered versions of the speech more than 100 times to at least 40,000 athletes and coaches.
Michigan State paid her a $10,000 speaking fee.
Tucker was in his second season as head coach.
A former University of Wisconsin-Madison defensive back, he had spent two decades coaching defenses for 10 college and NFL teams before landing the top job at the University of Colorado in late 2018.
Michigan State lured him away a year later by doubling his salary.
Mel Tucker's career at Michigan State: A timeline
Tucker and Tracy “hit it off” immediately, they would both later tell the Title IX investigator.
They bonded over their love of Jordan sneakers, shelves of which lined Tucker’s office walls.
Tucker had been moved by her speech, and she had been a big hit with players, he told the investigator.
They discussed her coming back to campus in the future.
Tracy left East Lansing feeling she had found a champion in Tucker, she told the investigator.
He seemed engaged with her cause, leading his players in signing her pledge to, among other things, obtain “ongoing, affirmative consent” before engaging in sexual acts with another person.
During that time, the two also talked on the phone at least 27 times, Tracy’s phone bills show – an average of once every two weeks for a half hour.
They often spoke at night to accommodate their work schedules, they said.
They chatted about their jobs and eventually more personal matters, such as their families, mental health and daily lives.
In November, Michigan State signed him to an unprecedented 10-year, $95 million deal that came fully guaranteed, even if it fired him for poor performance.
The only way he could lose out on the money, the contract said, was if he materially breached it, was convicted of a crime or engaged in “conduct which, in the University’s reasonable judgment, would tend to bring public disrespect, contempt or ridicule on the University.”
It was around then that Tucker, who had been married for more than two decades, started becoming interested in Tracy romantically, they both told the investigator.
Whether Tracy reciprocated is where their accounts diverge.
Tucker told the investigator that he and Tracy developed a romantic connection and talked openly about it.
They frequently made flirtatious comments about each other’s looks and bodies, Tucker said.
Tracy told him she wanted a “sugar daddy” who would pay her a monthly amount to be his girlfriend, he said, and that she would be “all over” him if he wasn’t married.
Tucker said they had acknowledged their mutual desire for a romance but agreed it would be “too messy” because of his marriage and the physical distance between them.
By contrast, Tracy told the investigator that Tucker’s romantic interest in her was entirely one-sided.
She said she came to feel he was less interested in her cause than in her.
Tucker messaged her photos of herself that he had found on her Instagram page, making comments such as, “This is the one,” or complimenting her eyes, Tracy said.
Once, Tucker called Tracy via FaceTime.
He was in bed, shirtless.
He talked about his unhappy marriage, describing himself as “more or less single.” Then, during a Nov. 9, 2021, call, she said he asked her, “If I wasn’t a football coach and if I wasn’t married, would you date me?”
Tracy said she responded that she would not because they worked together – one of several times she recalled trying to set boundaries.
She said she made clear to Tucker on a Dec. 1 call that they would only be friends, and he seemed to agree.
Then, after the spring game, Tucker called her four times, phone records show.
Tracy said he repeatedly asked her to meet him alone, without her assistant, and even suggested slipping into her hotel through a back door so no one would see him.
She said no.
Twelve days later came the call.
Tracy was in her home office in Oregon.
Tucker, who was in a hotel in Florida, called her at 12:39 a.m. EST, phone records show.
The call lasted 36 minutes.
According to Tucker, he became aroused when Tracy made a comment about needing to hit the gym more to look better without clothes on.
“Unequivocally, there’s no doubt about it,” Tucker told the investigator, case documents show.
“She was the one who said we’ll do it.”
Tracy denies all of that.
The call started off normal, she said.
But when she sent Tucker a photo of them together from the spring game, she said he responded by commenting on her buttocks and calling himself an “ass man.”
She remembered Tucker’s voice getting deeper and weirder as he continued talking about her buttocks.
She asked him what he was doing, and he said he had a “hard dick” and was touching himself.
“You’re touching yourself?” Tracy asked, according to the investigation report.
Tucker responded, “Yes.”
Tracy said she thought to herself, "Oh my god, this is happening, and I can’t stop it."
Eventually she said something along the lines of, “If you do this, I don’t ever want to hear about it, we are only friends, that’s it.”
When he finished, Tracy said, Tucker told her, “Thank you, good night, sweetheart.” She responded, “Yeah,” and he hung up.
Then she sat at her desk for a while, staring at her phone and crying.
Three months passed between the call and the next time Tracy and Tucker spoke.
At first, Tracy tried to pretend to herself that nothing had happened.
Tucker, however, was not responding to her text messages.
And he abruptly canceled her in-person training, planned for July 25, three days before it was supposed to take place.
A team staffer told her they had double-booked, but Tracy believed she knew the real reason.
When Tracy finally got Tucker on the phone about a week later, he was angry, she said, accusing her and her assistant of gossiping about his marital problems.
Tracy recalled that Tucker made comments such as, “I can’t trust you,” “If you say anything about this, I’ll hear about it,” and “I’ll be fine, it’s you that I am worried about.” She viewed it as a threat to destroy her reputation if she spoke out about him.
Tucker at one point told her he had done nothing wrong.
According to Tracy, she started to say, “Well, something…” referring to his masturbation, and Tucker interrupted, saying, “But nothing happened.”
Tucker recalled the Aug. 2 phone call much differently.
He told the investigator that Tracy apologized to him for discussing his marriage with her assistant, and he accepted.
Although they ended the call on good terms and discussed postponing her visit until next year, Tucker said he had lost trust in Tracy.
The training was never rescheduled, and they never spoke again.
Tracy initially stayed quiet about Tucker for the sake of her career, she said.
Ultimately, she decided that if she let it slide, she wouldn’t be the person she claimed to be – the one who encourages people to speak up about sexual misconduct and hold others accountable.
She filed her complaint in December – eight months after the call.
In dry and bureaucratic language, the record of that complaint begins: “The specific allegations of prohibited conduct against Respondent are as follows …” A notification was delivered to Tucker the following day.
Tucker was “absolutely shocked,” he would tell the university’s investigator.
In subsequent correspondence, he and his attorney suggested Tracy’s motive: She held a vendetta against Spartans athletics because of its history of sexual misconduct scandals and falsely accused him for financial gain.
“To say that I have learned from this situation is an understatement,” Tucker wrote in a letter to the investigator on March 22.
“I will never again allow myself to be duped by kindness.”
A former Indiana sex crimes prosecutor who now heads a private practice, she also previously worked in the Title IX offices at Michigan State and the University of Michigan.
Jacqueline Swanson, Tracy’s attorney who is also her friend, turned over a copy of the notes she took from their conversation on a yellow legal pad.
She shared a screenshot of a Dec. 2 text message in which Tracy told her she had just spoken with Tucker, who had agreed they could only be friends.
“I’m glad it didn’t get weird,” Tracy wrote.
Tracy provided phone bills and emails that corroborated her timeline of events and showed Tucker had been calling her from his personal cellphone.
Tracy said no.
In January, they sent a 12-page letter to the school arguing it lacked jurisdiction to investigate Tucker's “purely personal” relationship with Tracy.
“How far does MSU intend to go in policing the private conduct of its employees, and how does it expect its 20,000+ employees to react when they find out that they no longer have private lives outside the reach of their employer?”
Michigan State was not persuaded.
The alleged conduct would be covered by school policy, it concluded, because it took place in the context of Tracy’s work as a vendor for the school and affected their ongoing business relationship.
The case would go forward.
Tucker sat down for his interview on March 22.
He said he wanted to be transparent and set the record straight.
For instance, Tucker claimed he had made the phone sex call from home in East Lansing – not in a Florida hotel.
He had just returned from a trip to Florida, he said, where he had been doing charity work unrelated to his employment with the school.
An expense report Tucker submitted to Michigan State for his hotel and meal costs showed the trip's purpose was “administrative” and did not involve any personal travel.
The costs were paid by the Spartan Fund, the athletic department’s fundraising arm; he had flown to Florida on a donor’s private plane.
The information, Tucker said, made him question how Tracy “goes about her business.”
“I’m perplexed that Mel Tucker would respond to a complaint of sexual harassment by involving me or ESPN.”
Tucker did not identify any witnesses who could support his version of events, including his associate, whom he said he had promised anonymity.
That same associate, Tucker said, told him that Alvarado, Tracy’s assistant, had been gossiping about his marriage – a claim Alvarado denied.
Along the way, she had learned that one potentially rich source of evidence was missing: Both Tracy and Tucker had deleted their text messages with each other.
Tucker would tell her that he deletes his messages regularly because he receives so many; Tracy said she did so in a panic after their last phone call, feeling she needed to cut all ties with him.
At the hearing, planned for October, both sides will have the opportunity to present evidence and make arguments.
Another outside Title IX attorney hired by the school will then decide whether the evidence shows that Tucker likely violated school rules.
Among the witnesses who will be missing from Tracy’s witness list is her assistant and best friend, Alvarado.
She died in a car accident in June.
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
It was a private event thrown by the school to promote its migrant student services program, which provides financial aid and support to farmworkers seeking college degrees.
After the April 28, 2022, tour, disclosed in records obtained by USA TODAY this week, Tucker met with community leaders and alumni.
That night, Tucker would make the now-infamous phone call from his hotel room in nearby Naples, during which he is accused of masturbating and making unwanted sexual comments to Brenda Tracy, a prominent rape survivor and activist he had hired to speak to his team about sexual violence.
Yet, when Tucker met with the university’s outside investigator in March for his interview in the sexual harassment case against him, he insisted the trip was not work-related – a claim the investigator would disprove in her report.
It’s just one example of Tucker failing to keep his story straight at the most consequential moment of his career.
With his job, reputation and the roughly $80 million left on his contract at stake, Tucker repeatedly made false statements to the investigator and misled her about basic facts, such as his location during the phone call and the date it occurred, a USA TODAY review of more than 1,200 pages of case documents found.
Michigan State suspended Tucker without pay on Sept. 10, hours after Tracy went public for the first time with her story in USA TODAY.
On Monday, the school informed Tucker it plans to fire him for cause based on the conduct he had admitted to and the embarrassment he had caused the school.
Investigation:Michigan State football coach Mel Tucker accused of sexually harassing rape survivor
Although Tucker denied sexually harassing Tracy, he acknowledged masturbating on the call, saying he and Tracy had been in a romantic relationship and had consensual “phone sex.” Tracy said Tucker’s romantic interest in her was completely one-sided and that she had tried to set boundaries multiple times during their yearlong business partnership.
Per his contract, Tucker has until Tuesday to make a case for keeping his job.
Regardless, a formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated school policies against sexual harassment and exploitation is expected to proceed on Oct. 5 and 6.
He accused the school of conducting a “sham” hearing and having “ulterior motives.” Yet even in these written statements, the central details of his story changed entirely.
Tucker, who previously hung up on a reporter who called him on his cellphone asking about the case, did not respond to a message seeking comment for this story.
Tracy declined to comment for this story.
“Very often you’re weighing credibility based on little bits and pieces of information.”
“I believe a fact finder could assess these pieces of evidence about credibility and make a determination that Brenda is more credible than Mel,” she said.
“In my experience, a clear sign of a lack of credibility is generally taken very seriously.”
The school had informed him of Tracy’s complaint on Dec. 22, the day after she filed it.
Tucker was the only holdout.
Rather than tell his side of the story right away, Tucker and his attorney spent three months trying to stop the investigation, case documents show.
They wrote legal arguments urging Michigan State to drop the case and twice approached Tracy’s attorney proposing a settlement agreement.
Tracy said no, and the school pressed forward.
Only a handful of text messages remained; he and Tracy both told the investigator they had deleted their texts with each other in the months after the April 2022 phone call.
In his interview, which lasted 3 ½ hours, Tucker questioned whether Tracy had mixed up the date of the call.
He said he recalled being at his home in East Lansing when it occurred, but his own records showed that he had been in Florida on April 28, attending a charity function that was “absolutely not a University-sponsored event.”
His seven-page account told a different story – that he had called her while he was “alone in a hotel room.”
But by then she knew what he told her in the interview was untrue: she had already obtained records proving he had not been home in East Lansing.
An expense report he had submitted to the university for reimbursement of his hotel and meals shows Tucker flew to Naples, Florida, to attend a golf fundraiser hosted by The Greg H. Montgomery Jr. Foundation for Ultimate Growth, which raises awareness for suicide prevention.
It showed he stayed at the Hilton from April 27 to 29, that the trip’s purpose was “administrative” and that it did not involve personal travel.
He had flown there on a donor’s private plane.
The event was titled “Working to make dreams a reality,” according to an agenda obtained from the university by USA TODAY through a public records request.
The agenda features Tucker’s name prominently.
Tucker posted photos from the tour on his Twitter account.
That Tucker was on a university-sponsored work trip during the incident was a contributing factor in the university’s determination that it had jurisdiction to investigate, the investigation report shows.
Tucker’s lists of calls and text messages also were missing an important detail: They did not show any communication with Tracy on April 28.
He acknowledged in the interview, however, that he had not reviewed the lists before submitting them and that they may have been incomplete.
Tucker and Tracy did not speak in the three months after the April 28 call.
Meanwhile, their assistants were planning Tracy’s third visit to campus – an in-person training with coaches and players scheduled for July 25.
Tucker canceled that training three days before, the investigation report shows.
When Tracy spoke to him by phone on Aug. 2 seeking to find out why, she would tell the investigator in her interview that Tucker insinuated he would harm her career if she spoke about his conduct.
He never rescheduled her visit, and they never spoke again.
The cancellation became a key focus of the investigator – one of a series of alleged incidents that taken together would meet the definition of sexual harassment, which can include pressuring someone into engaging in sexual behavior for an employment benefit and threatening that rejecting such behavior will carry a negative consequence.
Tucker tried to distance himself from the cancellation in a public statement on Sept. 11, the day after Michigan State suspended him without pay.
“I never cancelled any presentation,” he wrote.
But that statement contradicts what he told the investigator.
Such timing would not make sense, he added, because most of his new players would not yet be on campus.
Tucker also told the investigator why he canceled the visit, blaming it on a scheduling conflict.
He said he had recently hired a mental conditioning coach, Ben Newman, who needed to implement his new program on short notice.
There was limited time in fall camp, Tucker said, and he didn’t want to “overwhelm” the players.
He said he decided to yield the time to Newman.
He had been meeting with them weekly since June 6, the records showed but held no meetings between July 15 and July 28.
One of Tucker’s assistants, who is a witness in the case, also told the investigator that Tucker asked him via text message to cancel it.
He said he was never instructed to reschedule.
Tucker confronted Tracy about the alleged gossiping during the Aug. 2 phone call, they both told the investigator.
Tracy said he berated and bullied her, repeatedly saying he could not trust her.
She said she told him she did not know what he was talking about.
During the Aug. 2 call, Tracy said she pressed Tucker to identify his source – the associate.
In her report, she wrote that he said he had “given (his) word that (he) wouldn’t divulge their name.”
Tucker never revealed the associate’s name to the investigator, nor did he identify anyone who could support his version of events.
In his Sept. 11 public statement, however, he lamented that the hearing would not afford him the opportunity to “offer any substantive evidence of innocence.”
It was not the only claim he attributed to his anonymous associate.
It turned out to be yet another falsehood.
“Neither the organization nor Tracy is or has been the target of any investigative reporting.”
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
Contributing: USA TODAY reporter Steve Berkowitz.
The bullets came in plywood crates.
Any given box was about the size of a small microwave oven.
The printed label stuck to each one demonstrated a militaristic brevity.
“CARTRIDGES FOR WEAPONS, INERT PROJECTILE,” next to a bright yellow hazmat sticker, “EXPLOSIVES.”
Inside the boxes: drab green steel cans of .50-caliber ammunition.
Each round was giant, more than 5 inches long, built to be fired from a gun so big it is typically bolted to a truck.
The bullets were clipped together in long strands for rapid, machine-gun fire.
By the time Bill Brown got to the boxes, they sat double-stacked eight high atop wooden pallets inside a Missouri warehouse.
The pallets went on, row after row.
Three million bullets in all.
It was enough ammunition to feed a single machine gun – if fired nonstop at its rated speed eight hours a day, seven days a week – for almost six months.
Brown’s job was to get it out of there and toward the Ukrainian front lines.
The faster, the better.
“War is bad,” Brown said.
There would be virtually no public record of this Ukrainian arms shipment.
As a weapons dealer, Brown’s company would deliver the bullets under a system known as a direct commercial sale.
Instead, it was part of a shadowy system of brokers, exporters, arms dealers and country-to-country transfers that has become one part of the race to meet demand on distant battlefields.
President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said the effort was delayed in part by the wait for more arms.
Most of America’s $44 billion in documented support to Ukraine came in the form of old U.S. military stock, donated directly by the federal government.
In general, commercial sales over $14 million, and sales of military-grade weaponry like mortars or missiles, require State Department approval and congressional notification.
But other aid comes via private sales.
More than 14,000 U.S. entities are registered to conduct defense trade activities.
Their deals are monitored by an alphabet soup of agencies including Departments of Homeland Security, Commerce, Defense and the Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
Trade secrecy clauses in federal law mean this flow of gear, weapons and ammunition is almost never revealed to the public.
Brown, who works for a small Nevada-based logistics company called Battle Born Munitions, provided USA TODAY with a rare look behind the curtain of these private sales.
Details about the shipment were verified by his employer and the European government that made the purchase.
State Department officials declined to answer questions about the specific shipment Brown described.
This March sale and the secret number of other shipments like it fuel Ukraine’s fight against a Russian invasion.
Those sales also release an unknown amount of weaponry into the world.
What becomes of that weaponry after it’s sold – and especially after it’s delivered – is difficult to track.
As Brown surveyed the warehouse in Missouri, a crew steered forklifts and skid lifts among the stacks of plain wooden boxes.
From high in the trusses, suspended lamp fixtures bathed the boxes in artificial daylight.
Brown lifted his camera and started snapping photos.
In just a few hours, he and his cargo would be boarding a jumbo jet.
From Ukraine:War crimes in Ukraine may be unprecedented.
So is the country's push for swift justice.
The bullets had once been bound for Saudi Arabia.
Lot number SMQ19K401L026 had rolled off the assembly line in 2019 at Lake City Army Ammunition Plant near Kansas City.
Lake City, owned by the government and run by a contractor, sprawls across nearly 4,000 acres of green Missouri farmland.
Roads curve past World War II-era bunkers known as igloos, spaced out amid the countryside – far enough apart that an explosion in one won’t trigger a chain reaction in the others.
Lake City has been pumping out ammunition almost without pause since 1941.
It is the largest small-arms manufacturing plant in the world.
And in 2019, Saudi Arabia was stocking up on weapons during the Trump administration, fueling the war in Yemen and other conflicts that drew criticism from congressional Democrats.
The plant manufactures .50-caliber ammunition on a rolling basis, for both military and commercial buyers.
That’s a testament to just what a legend the bullet – and the gun that shoots it – has become.
In 2019, the technology was already a century old.
The .50 caliber was the brainchild of American gunsmith John Browning during World War I.
Built to respond to German anti-tank rifles, the M2 was first tested in 1918, and it entered widespread service in 1923.
It earned the nickname “Ma Deuce” and has served in combat ever since, bolted to trucks, ships, planes and handheld stands on the battlefield.
The .50-caliber rounds – named for their diameter, about half an inch – can easily hit targets more than a mile away.
At closer ranges, they will blast through solid concrete or armored vehicles.
The gun can fire at a sustained rate of about 40 shots per minute.
Military setups use strings of “linked” ammunition to feed into machine guns.
Spaced out after every fourth bullet, so-called tracer rounds have small pyrotechnic charges that illuminate the line of fire, aiding in targeting.
The gun’s longevity and versatility made it popular for militaries the world over.
But this particular batch of bullets wouldn’t end up being sold to Saudi Arabia.
The Biden administration put a temporary freeze on sales to the Saudi government in 2021 as it reviewed weapons deals approved under Donald Trump.
Instead, Brown said, the bullets were sold to a U.S. ammunition provider, only to be held up again.
Ultimately, they were mothballed.
Then, in spring 2023, the bullets found a buyer, or actually two: first Battle Born; ultimately, the Netherlands.
The European country, a NATO ally, needed a big supply of ammunition.
It wouldn’t be keeping the bullets but giving them to Ukraine.
Its purchase, essentially a donation, would count toward the country’s required NATO contribution.
Brown had a line on exactly what they needed.
It was sitting in the warehouse in Missouri.
He arrived in March to personally oversee the shipment.
As he prepped for delivery, Brown dropped tiny black tracking devices onto several of the pallets.
Just $55 apiece, the units use GPS and cell signals to keep tabs on the load.
The idea was to ensure it wouldn’t fall into the wrong hands.
But packing up the bullets was just the beginning.
As with anything that’s deadly and made of metal, the shipping costs can be extreme.
Forty-five to 60 days on a ship?
Brown – or Chief Bill, as he prefers – is a no-nonsense 35-year veteran of the U.S. Army and former helicopter pilot.
He retired as a chief warrant officer and lives in Orlando.
Now 59, he still spends a lot of time on the road – 10 international trips this year.
He says his arms logistics work takes him to places most Americans would rather avoid – near the Syrian border or to unstable regions of Iraq.
He’ll travel halfway around the world, he quips, “have some soup, and go back to Warsaw to head home.” The trips aren’t really about the destinations.
They’re about the cargo.
On that spring day in Missouri, forklifts carefully loaded 107 pallets of the ammo onto 18 flatbed semitrailers.
They’d all make the eight-hour drive to O’Hare International Airport.
In Chicago, two Boeing 747-400s operated by National Airlines would be ready for the freight.
Four pallets each were stacked and shrink-wrapped to create “air pallets” or “cookie sheets” weighing 12,800 pounds.
Each plane could carry up to 17 of the pallets that ran the length of each plane secured by white cargo netting.
Flight records Brown provided show the two planes departed about seven hours apart, one in early afternoon, one after dark.
The flight would take nine hours.
Brown wasn’t going to the Netherlands, even though it was the buyer.
The planes were bound for Rzeszów, Poland.
The ancient city sits at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains in southeastern Poland.
It has a gleaming modern airport next to a major east-west freeway.
From there, it’s barely 60 miles to the border with Ukraine.
It was an expensive journey.
The trucking company’s bill for those 18 semis?
Chartering the two 747s?
But this shipment of .50-cal rounds was profitable for Battle Born Munitions, according to Brown.
The company purchased the 3 million rounds from Northrop Grumman at a bargain and resold them for more than double the price.
(In subsequent interviews, representatives at BBM disputed the specific totals Brown mentioned, saying the accurate figures were protected by “various commercial and government non-disclosure agreements.” They did not dispute the other specifics of the deal he provided.)
Retail prices for .50-caliber ammunition run roughly $5 per bullet.
At that rate, the whole shipment would have been worth $15 million.
The pricing might also be elastic.
The Dutch mark up the price of the bullets and count it toward their NATO contribution, pegged to a percentage of gross domestic product, Brown said.
The Netherlands has contributed about $15 billion to NATO this year, or about 1.7% of its GDP and just under the NATO mandate of 2%.
Representatives of the Dutch military confirmed the shipment to USA TODAY but declined to comment further about the pricing or details.
The war in Ukraine has only increased the demand for private deals.
The State Department signed off on more than $154 billion in commercial arms deals directly to foreign countries in 2022, a 48% increase from the previous year.
Direct commercial sales represent a modest portion of the contribution to Ukraine compared with the $44 billion donated by the U.S., but they still amounted to more than $600 million in sales from U.S. companies to the Ukrainian government last year alone.
That doesn’t include sales to other countries that also support Ukraine – sales like the one Brown described.
Jim Bartlett, an attorney with expertise in the specialized international arms transactions, said private U.S. businesses are playing a small but important role in the conflict.
“American companies are happy to export defense articles to foreign buyers approved by the U.S. State Department,” Bartlett said.
Those sales also come with risks.
Direct sales face fewer regulatory controls, oversight and enforcement, said Robert Nichols, an international military sales expert and attorney at the law firm Nichols Liu.
“You can imagine the range of characters involved in supplying a war effort,” Nichols said.
So far, the Department of Justice has indicted just a handful of arms brokers over deals related to the war in Ukraine.
They allegedly lied to Commerce Department agents and told them the parts were bound for Turkey.
Both pleaded not guilty to the charges this summer.
A State Department spokesman declined to provide details of enforcement actions but said, “The United States takes seriously our responsibility to protect American military and dual-use technologies and prevent their diversion, including through strong enforcement actions.”
NATO said it oversees allied arms deliveries, and that those arms generally reach Ukraine.
NATO itself technically only provides non-non-lethal aid, like fuel, medical supplies and generators.
Brown, of Battle Born, says he fields calls weekly from “clowns” without the proper licensing, whom he reports to the State Department for potential violations.
Some raise red flags when they approach him about transactions that include payment via diamonds or gold.
He prefers traditional wire transfers with approved sales partners since he knows government officials are watching.
He validates the contracts and checks certificates for the final users.
That’s part of why he traveled with the ammunition.
He would be meeting a Dutch military official for the official handoff.
“My job is to keep us all out of jail,” Brown said.
The two 747s touched down in Poland, one before the sun, the other in late morning.
Brown exchanged paperwork with a young Dutch military staffer who signed for the delivery, he said.
They traded military patches as souvenirs.
They snapped a photo together.
The bullets bought by the Netherlands would never touch Dutch soil.
U.S. aid:Billions from the US flows to Ukraine.
Here's where it comes from, and how it adds up
Despite playing a small role proportionately in the war, $600 million in direct commercial sales can buy a lot of small weaponry.
Put another way: It’s hard to sneak away an F-16 or a missile launcher the size of a tractor-trailer.
But a bunch of guns or a pallet of ammo?
Much easier to resell.
After Russia invaded Ukraine in 2014, the Small Arms Survey, a Swiss arms research project, estimated that within a year, battlefield seizures and other forms of diversion led to 300,000 small arms and light weapons going missing, including 100,000 in Crimea alone.
When small arms go missing, they can go missing into another country, maybe one led by a despot or even a terrorist organization.
The U.S. government says diversion of American donations has been widely absent so far in Ukraine.
That could be a combination of intensive “end-use-monitoring” programs and the reality of the battlefield, where supplies are rapidly put to use.
But even if not now, unused ammo could be resold someday.
“These are commodities with very long shelf lives.”
Florida-based Global Ordnance, another State Department-licensed exporter, is a competitor in the direct weapons sales business.
General counsel Bryan Van Brunt said the company has extensive protocols in place to track shipments and make sure the end-users are federally approved, though he declined to provide specifics about those systems.
Brown, with Battle Born Munitions, says the company employs a mix of simple and sophisticated tracking technology to ensure his shipments are tracked to end users.
The black GPS devices he dropped onto his cargo tracked the ammo all the way across the globe.
But that system only works as long as Brown is actually tracking.
“Technically, my role ends when I deliver it to NATO,” he said.
Sometime after the 747s touched down in Poland, along with signing the paperwork and snapping a selfie with the Dutch official, Brown found the tiny black GPS trackers and lifted them off the pallets.
Ukrainian trucks would arrive at the airport to pick up the ammunition.
They would point toward the border, and onward to Lviv, and some distant battlefield.
Brown would point in the opposite direction.
Just like one of his quips: Fly in, have soup, get home.
He headed toward Warsaw, with the GPS trackers in his bag.
Contact him at npenz@usatoday.com or @npenzenstadler, or on Signal at (720) 507-5273.
The geography professor didn’t hide his clown fetish or the fact that he sometimes indulged his urges by recruiting students as subjects.
He posted regularly about it on social media.
He submitted his resignation the same day their story was published.
His interactions with students and open discussion of his fetish happened in both mainstream and tailored digital spaces.
He popped into Facebook groups geared toward new students and niche forums on websites like Reddit.
He posted videos on YouTube.
Over the years, two students reported him to campus police; others complained online.
He left Kent State University after pleading no contest to something different: a theft charge that involved entering his peers’ offices without permission and taking a USB drive.
Nicholls State, for example, told USA TODAY Network reporters it does not routinely check social media for new hires.
The money was appealing but the interactions soured.
“I thought maybe they could prevent anything bad from happening since other girls would go with him.”
She said there was never any followup from campus police – or anyone else.
The two who expressed public concerns on social media told USA TODAY they never heard from their campus officials either.
She said she would pass along that reporters were trying to reach him.
He said his contract was not renewed because he was the target of a “grade inflation task force.”
She has seen the pattern often in her work maintaining a database of publicly documented sexual misconduct by faculty and staff.
As for grad students?
“I don’t on purpose,” she said, “because that’s information that almost never comes out.”
He was working toward his doctorate and researched fading businesses.
His work about shopping malls in the Rust Belt won several awards.
Like many graduate students, he also taught classes.
“I will literally pay you!”
What’s more, she figured out that he was a graduate student, a fact she said he didn’t disclose in his posts.
It arrived at midnight and contained no message, although writing on his shirt read: “I'm not a failure.”
“It’s definitely burned into my mind.”
He would send “get to know you” messages, the police report said, and then ask the student if she was “interested in having her face painted for one of his class projects.”
“She does not have any concerns for her safety, but just wanted this documented,” the police report read.
In July 2017, another student had retweeted a message from Kent State’s Twitter account that asked for Kent State love stories.
She said she tweeted to draw officials’ attention to it and moved on but now wishes she had reported it officially.
College campuses are supposed to offer students special protections from sexual harassment even when it falls short of criminal behavior.
Title IX, often associated with equity in women’s sports, also addresses “sex-based harassment, which encompasses sexual assault and other forms of sexual violence” at schools that receive federal funding.
Colleges infrequently and unevenly enforce the rule, however.
A 2022 USA TODAY investigation found just one of every 12,400 students was suspended in connection with sexual misconduct.
The student who shared her story online said the only response she received was from a graduate student in the geography department, who contacted her on Oct. 1, 2018.
In an email, he wrote that he had seen her post and suspected he knew which faculty member had asked her about face painting.
“I brought it to the attention of some of our faculty because I was pretty sure I knew who it was, but they were certain it wasn’t that individual and that you probably just meant geology,” he wrote.
He went on to reference another student being “approached in (at least by just looking at your tweet) a much more aggressive way.” The grad student asked the undergraduate for more information, but, she told USA TODAY, she didn’t respond.
She said she started drafting a reply, but a year had passed.
She wanted to move on.
Kent State would not say whether any actions were taken after the students’ reports, but Eric Mansfield, a spokesman for the university, said the police department confirmed that the students who filed police reports were provided with “university resources, which would include other non-criminal avenues to pursue (Counseling Services, Title IX, Center for Sexual and Relationship Violence Services, etc.)
Mansfield also said that the university monitors social media but that colleges “can’t always see or track every mention on social media.”
A blotter item in the local newspaper shows police obtained an arrest warrant in connection with a third-degree felony burglary charge.
“Also, we do not comment on personnel matters.”
In more recent years, Buckley has become critical of the law and how schools interpret it.
He told the Columbus Dispatch in 2010 that “the law needs to be revamped.”
Survivors of sexual violence and students accuse universities of using the law to avoid negative media coverage.
Students with a history of bad behavior may jump from one school to another without the public ever knowing about their histories.
One case involved Brandon Austin, who was accused of sexual assault at Providence College in 2013 while on the school’s basketball team.
But Providence College initially said Austin was suspended for violating the school’s code of student conduct and declined to share further details with the Providence Journal, citing federal privacy laws.
Austin denied wrongdoing and was not charged with a crime.
Austin was able to transfer to the University of Oregon, where he was again accused of sexual assault, along with other players.
Police investigated the claims, and the local district attorney declined to press charges.
And it doesn’t apply when a student is “seeking or intending to enroll” at another college.
He blamed the overuse of the law on fear of being sued.
While most U.S. employers conduct background screening, according to trade group data, those inquiries typically focus on criminal history.
Social media receives far less attention even though that is where people are most likely to share their unguarded thoughts.
Undertaking a full review of a person’s social media presence is more difficult than just checking an applicant’s Facebook page.
Does an applicant have an account on X, formerly Twitter?
How about an account with Discord, an online platform frequented by gamers, where leaked Pentagon documents were recently shared?
Or what about a Telegram account, a messaging platform popular among white nationalists?
Further complicating things, it’s common on sites like Reddit for users to adopt usernames and describe experiences with little to no ties to reality.
A little digging, however, can turn up a lot of dirt.
His time as a student and instructor at Kent State is absent.
That is the same handle used on Reddit by someone with a special interest in face paint.
Other posts mention a “clown fetish.” In a forum titled “Creepy,” he wrote, “I convince pretty girls to let me paint their faces,” along with a photo with multiple women in white face paint.
That and other similar posts remained live for years until they were taken down after the Nicholls students published their story in late March.
USA TODAY Network reporters captured screenshots before they disappeared.
With dates in 2019, the posts feature a young woman wearing a Kent State T-shirt.
The material would have been available to administrators at Northern Illinois before the start of the fall 2019 semester.
Joe King, a spokesman for Northern Illinois, said departments hiring new graduate students are “not required to check social media or investigate a disciplinary history.” He added some departments may reach out to the graduate students’ former advisers.
But there are signs the behavior continued.
She said she declined to do it but was aware that other Northern Illinois students had participated.
She asked, had anyone complained?
Many students would find a reason to complain, as Nicholls State student journalist Sally-Anne Torres learned firsthand.
It started in January when one of her fellow reporters picked up an odd rumor: a professor was offering extra credit for students willing to paint their faces like clowns.
Initially, Torres dismissed it because it seemed too unusual and there weren’t a lot of leads to follow.
He blamed his departure on giving too many A’s.
That seemed suspicious to Torres.
“It wasn’t just this innocent thing that a lot of these girls thought it was,” Torres said.
Some, she said, were followed on Twitter by him while others opted into an extra credit assignment he offered.
The women told Torres he sometimes giggled and laughed as they painted their faces in his office.
It seemed unusual at the time, Price said, because his friend wasn’t in the class.
It became more concerning to him on reading the student newspaper’s report.
“I feel frankly disgusted and disappointed that Nicholls couldn’t do a proper background check on this professor, because this is unacceptable,” Price said.
Ramos learned that the person behind the account was likely a professor at the university.
She posted about the behavior in January 2022, but nothing came of it.
On March 27, the same day the student newspaper published its piece, Ramos posted screenshots of her discoveries on Twitter with the message, “Found a Nicholls state university professor on Reddit.”
“I wish the university had acted sooner because all this information was public on the internet,” she told USA TODAY.
No one from the university, she said, has ever reached out.
He can be reached at CCampo@gannett.com.
President Joe Biden argued in an Oval Office address that U.S. leadership abroad and congressional aid to Israel and Ukraine is essential.
Also in the news: Jim Jordan is giving it a third go at becoming House speaker on Friday and Hollywood film and TV actors near their 100th day of strike.
Is Wi-Fi on the school bus for ... doing homework ... or watching TikToks?
Now here we go with Friday's news.
The president has made his case for the U.S. backing Israel and Ukraine in their respective wars with Hamas and Russia.
In an address to the public Thursday night, Biden sought to drive home the value of continued U.S. support for the close allies to a war-weary public less than a day after his visit Israel to meet with the country's prime minister.
Here's more from USA TODAY on the Israel and Hamas war.
You can sign up for our weekday briefing on the conflict here:
Lawmakers looked like they were coming close to a deal after Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, backed a plan empowering Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-N.C., as speaker until January to get the House moving again.
McHenry has already been serving as an interim speaker with limited powers, and Jordan has lost two speaker elections on the House floor.
But after an hours-long, closed-door meeting, House Republicans appeared to reject the plan, putting the lower chamber − and the nation − back at square one.
What's the weather today?
Check your local forecast here.
A second co-defendant with Donald Trump in the Georgia election conspiracy case, Sidney Powell, pleaded guilty Thursday to a half-dozen misdemeanors dealing with a conspiracy to interfere in the 2020 election.
Powell is the second co-defendant to plead guilty in the case, after Scott Hall.
There is no end in sight for film and TV actors who are striking in what has become the longest work stoppage in the industry's history.
The strike by the Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists hits its 100th day on Saturday, while writers are busy back at work after ending their strike.
Negotiations unraveled earlier this month, when studios said discrepancies with actors' demands were too significant to find common ground.
The actors union decried their opponents’ “bullying tactics” and said they were wildly mischaracterizing their offers.
The prolonged strike means films and TV shows will remain sidelined indefinitely, as buzzy films like "Killers of the Flower Moon" hit theaters.
Ready or not, winter is coming − but how bad is it going to be?
Federal forecasters from NOAA's Climate Prediction Center gave us their answer Thursday in an annual winter outlook.
NOAA said the U.S. winter of 2023-24 will probably be dominated by the effects of what could be a powerful El Niño.
That means a mild, dry winter is likely on tap for much of the northern tier of the U.S., while the southeastern U.S. should see a wetter-than-average winter.
The Rolling Stone's latest album, “Hackney Diamonds,” their first new material since 2005’s “A Bigger Bang,” arrived Friday.
Want to send Nicole a note?
Shoot her an email at NFallert@usatoday.com or follow along with her musings on Twitter.
Support journalism like this – subscribe to USA TODAY here.
Associated Press contributed reporting.
Six weeks before Hamas’ deadly attack on Israel, a deputy political advisor in the group did an interview with a Lebanese news outlet.
Tucked into it was a specific warning.
“We are closely discussing the prospects of this war with all relevant parties.”
At the time, his statements were couched as a caution.
Israel had plans including targeted killings of leaders of the Palestinian resistance group that controls Gaza, he said.
Those Israeli provocations never happened.
Yet by mid-October, an all-out war was under way.
Hamas led a surprise attack on Oct. 7, killing more than 1,300 people including more than 30 Americans and taking at least 200 hostages, and a mounting response from Israel now brings more bloodshed.
Already, Israel has struck a range of targets, and by mid-week announced at least six key Hamas operatives had been “eliminated.”
They’re pursuing him not just for his insider knowledge of the attack, but for his ties to others – possibly those “relevant parties” he cited in August.
The attack went far beyond what was expected from Hamas alone: A mass border invasion.
Withering rocket fire.
Precise raids on military surveillance, communications and intelligence hubs.
Those plans bear the hallmarks of sophisticated backers from the outside.
If Iran and Hezbollah were involved in the Oct. 7 attack – as security authorities now suspect – someone from Hamas coordinated their assistance.
More:Is Iran behind Hamas terrorist attacks?
What it would mean for US and Middle East security
“But I can tell you that Iran is heavily involved with everything that's happening in Gaza – the training, equipment, funding and method of fighting,”
“We are worried that the technology came from Tehran to Beirut and to Gaza.”
Now, he’s a prime target as Israel seeks out the strategists behind Oct. 7.
He is under the radar.
“We will attack them, we will dismantle them, dismantle their system.”
Officially, Iran has denied playing a role in the attack even as it congratulates Hamas.
President Joe Biden told 60 Minutes on Oct. 15 that there’s no evidence “at this point” that Iran was behind the attack.
Israeli officials have made similar comments, stressing that the investigation is in its early stages.
But U.S. and Israeli intelligence analysts say that if anyone could give the group the ability to launch such stunning land, air and sea attacks against the Israeli military, it would be Iran and its Revolutionary Guard.
And his role in raising money and plotting terrorist attacks for Hamas has been known to both governments for a generation.
Yet he has evaded authorities for years.
“He knows that if he steps anywhere close, we will kill him,” a former top Israeli intelligence official until earlier this year told USA TODAY.
Those included large-scale bombings and rocket attacks, according to the U.S.
Directorate of National Intelligence and the National Counterterrorism Center, which it oversees.
Upon his final release, he was forced out of Gaza for being a continuing threat to Israel and moved to the Syrian capital of Damascus to join Hamas leadership in exile there.
He spent time in Turkey, where he began building an operational Hamas presence, in Qatar, where Hamas’ political leadership resided, and Lebanon.
He publicly praised the murders, which sparked Hamas’ month-long war with Israel that year, as a “heroic operation,” State Department documents show.
In September 2015, the U.S. Treasury Department sanctioned him as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist, saying he served as “a key financier and financial facilitator for Hamas military cells.”
The move came amid intense pressure on Qatar by Washington to crack down on its longstanding role in providing safe haven for terrorists.
In the aftermath of the Oct. 7 attack, the FBI and other U.S. agencies have joined Israel in its response – and its investigation, according to Attorney General Merrick Garland and other Biden administration officials.
That includes the hunt for at least 13 Americans who may be still held hostage by Hamas, the dragnet for Hamas foot soldiers believed to be hiding inside Israel and the broader investigation into who orchestrated and led the sophisticated invasion, two U.S. intelligence officials told USA TODAY on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss ongoing investigations.
If the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks in the U.S. are any guide, it could be months or even years before authorities answer those questions in detail.
Iran has signaled a more aggressive approach to Israel, including a warning this week about potential Iranian action against Israel for its response in Gaza.
Hezbollah has issued similar warnings.
Iran’s suspected involvement in the planning of the Gaza raid has been widely reported.
Iran also has supported Hamas militarily, it said, “and has helped it design and produce a domestic missile and rocket system to match the capabilities and material available in Gaza.”
Neither did senior Trump administration Iran official Richard Goldberg when he mentioned the existence of a Lebanon-based intelligence center for the three groups during a public event Monday.
Hamas, Iran and Hezbollah, Goldberg said, “have coordinated a fusion cell in Beirut since 2021 where they put everybody together in a war room, an intel room operations room, they go in and out of Lebanon… and they coordinated it all.”
The former top Israeli security official confirmed to USA TODAY the existence of the joint Iran-Hezbollah-Hamas intelligence center in Beirut.
Goldberg, the Director for Countering Iranian Weapons of Mass Destruction for the White House National Security Council from 2019 to 2020, said he believed the strong cooperation between Hamas, Iran and Hezbollah helped them keep the plot away from Israeli intelligence, just like al-Qaeda kept the 9/11 plot away from the U.S.
“And so if you don't have any intel on the planning of the attack, it stands to reason you have no intel on Iran's involvement in said attack plans,” Goldberg said.
You’re not going to find the intel.
Rep. Brad Schneider (D-IL), a member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, also said all signs point to Iran, given its role in funding, training and equipping Hamas fighters.
“If you breed an attack dog, you train an attack dog, you equip an attack dog, maybe you're surprised that the dog breaks through the fence and attacks, but you're still responsible for that attack,” Schneider said.
“And Iran has been training Hamas, has been equipping Hamas, funding Hamas, and this has the fingerprints of (Iran) training and planning all the way through.”
Speaking to Al Jazeera, just after the attack, he described his view of the Israeli response to come.
Former Vice President Mike Pence isn’t one of them.
“It’s not a time for on-the-job training,” he told a crowd of New Hampshire voters at a town hall sponsored by the USA TODAY Network last week, repeating an argument he’s made time and again on the 2024 campaign trail.
“I’m running for president because, and I do say this with all humility, I’m the most qualified, tested and ready conservative seeking the Republican nomination”
Pence has pitched a more traditional brand of conservatism than other candidates in the race that's focused on Republican values, fiscal responsibility and a strong U.S. military presence.
But that argument doesn’t appear to be resonating with voters in the Granite State, or across the country.
A recent Suffolk University survey, conducted in partnership with The Boston Globe and USA TODAY, showed Pence at just 1% in New Hampshire.
At the national level, Pence is doing slightly better.
A Morning Consult survey on the race, fielded between Oct. 13 and 15, showed Pence at 6% – over 40 points behind Trump.
He's also trailing GOP contenders like former United Nations Ambassador Nikki Haley, Florida Gov.
So, how is Pence attempting to win over voters?
Here’s a look at the priorities he outlined in New Hampshire that would impact Americans coast to coast if the former vice president is elected to the White House.
When it comes to balancing the federal budget and reducing the national debt, Pence has called for reforming mandatory spending programs like Social Security and Medicare – at least for some Americans.
“I’d say to everybody that’s got hair the same color as me, this doesn’t affect you ... we’re not going to make changes to the deal,” the one-time talk radio host told voters in New Hampshire.
For Americans under age 40, however, Pence said he would opt to privatize Social Security by allowing young workers to invest their payroll taxes into savings accounts.
He insisted that the plan would give American workers twice what they earn from Social Security.
The idea has been floated before by members of the Republican Party, most prominently during former President George W. Bush's administration.
But it has never garnered enough support in Congress to become a reality for Americans.
As the war between Israel and Hamas rages on, Pence in New Hampshire pledged to unequivocally support Israel, calling the country “our most cherished ally.”
“We’ll make it clear to Hezbollah and Lebanon, to Iran and any other powers in the region, that everybody needs to stand down,” Pence said.
“We’re going to defend Israel.”
During the Trump administration, Pence helped negotiate the Abraham Accords, a bilateral agreement signed by Israel, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain in 2020 to normalize relations.
However, at the town hall, Pence noted that facilitating further peace talks likely wouldn’t be a priority under his administration, given the ongoing war.
“It feels to me like real progress is going to have to take a second chair to Israel doing what it needs to do,” he said.
Pence offered similarly strong words on other issues of U.S. national security, including ongoing efforts to bolster Ukraine in its war against Russia.
When asked about his views on allocating U.S. taxpayer dollars to aid foreign conflicts, he argued that it’s among the most powerful ways America can stave off future aggression by countries like China.
“China has made no secret of the fact that they would like to grab Taiwan,” Pence said.
The Chinese government views the East Asian island as an extension of its territory and in recent years has ramped up military activity around its shores.
Describing the growing superpower as “the greatest economic and strategic threat facing the U.S.,” Pence told New Hampshire voters that, as president, he would push to implement tariffs on Chinese goods and expand U.S. military presence in the South China Sea to defend American interests in the region.
A strong defense strategy would pave the way toward “a peaceful future with China and progress for the Chinese people,” he said.
EL PASO, Texas — Democrats in Texas and New Mexico joined forces this week to denounce the concertina wire installed along the Texas-New Mexico border as part of Gov.
Greg Abbott's ongoing Operation Lone Star to limit crossings.
Abbott said migrants were bypassing miles of wire and fencing along the Texas side of the Rio Grande by moving west.
"Migrants are entering New Mexico illegally then crossing into Texas," he said earlier this month on X, formerly known as Twitter.
"We are stopping it."
"We are now fortifying the border between Texas and New Mexico to block migrants," the Texas Military Department said in an unsigned statement.
'Recipe for death:'Migrant deaths more than doubled in El Paso Sector after scorching heat
The concertina wire strung along the Texas-New Mexico border is the latest in a string of efforts made by Abbott to stem border crossings by record numbers of asylum-seekers entering the U.S.
Since August, authorities have encountered more than 2.2 million migrants along the U.S.-Mexico border, according to the latest Customs and Border Protection (CBP) statistics.
What began as razor-wire along the Rio Grande and morphed into a floating barricade in the middle of the river has now transformed into an interstate conflict.
New Mexico Gov.
Michelle Lujan Grisham, a Democrat, did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
In their statement, the state party chairs praised New Mexico as having "some of the most humane, people-oriented immigration laws in the country."
"New Mexico Democratic leaders believe that everyone who comes to our country in pursuit of a better life, as an asylum-seeker or otherwise, deserves just and humane treatment, and the laws of New Mexico reflect those values," the statement read.
"Greg Abbott knows that our neighbors in New Mexico are not the enemy but is working overtime to gain Fox News airtime to cover up his proposed legislation to implement unpopular school voucher scams, imprison vulnerable migrants and their families, and his own party's public infighting."
Abbott told a conservative audience during a trip to New York City late last month that migrants were bypassing the miles of razor wire along the Texas side of the Rio Grande near El Paso.
'New normal':High number of migrants crossing border not likely to slow
"Not only are we building a border of barriers between the border of Texas and Mexico," Abbott said during a Sept. 27 appearance sponsored by the Manhattan Institute.
"We're also having now to build border barriers between Texas and New Mexico."
"Shame on Greg Abbott for using public tax dollars to uplift his dangerous approach to border security and infringing upon Texans' and New Mexicans' right to move freely across state lines," the statement read.
"Texas and New Mexico Democrats condemn Abbott's razor wire fencing along our state borders and call for its removal effective immediately."
Customs and Border Protection officials said migrants without any legal basis to stay will be processed for removal and face consequences that include a minimum five-year bar on re-entry, loss of eligibility to access lawful pathways, and prosecution for repeat offenders.
"Compared to that kind of life, they probably think there's no level of misery that these policies can impose that is worse than what they are fleeing from."
Adam Powell covers government and politics for the El Paso Times.
He may be reached via email at apowell@elpasotimes.com.
The pups, born on July 11, 2023, include two females and one male, SeaWorld Orlando said in a press release.
The marine animals that look like little sharks with their saw-shaped rostrums measured approximately two feet in length.
SeaWorld said that the pups underwent a comprehensive examination after their birth and continue to receive regular check-ups to "ensure their sustained health and expected developmental progress".
The check-ups are essential for saving these critically endangered species from extinction.
The marine creatures get their name from their distinct rostrum - a long, flat snout edged with teeth - that looks like a saw.
They are usually olive gray to brown on top and have a white underside.
Their skeletons are instead made of cartilage.
In the U.S., they can be found in Florida’s coastal waters.
Watch:Giraffe stumbles, crashes onto car windshield at Texas wildlife center
The duo currently resides in the 700,000-gallon Shark Encounter main habitat and have the title of the largest fish in the park.
The aquarium does not intend to put them the pups on display just yet.
They will remain behind the scenes as they grow and develop under supervision.
Is the ivory-billed woodpecker officially extinct?
Not yet, but these 21 animals are
'Climate captives':Frogs, salamanders and toads dying rapidly as Earth warms, study says
Reach her at sshafiq@gannett.com and follow her on X, formerly Twitter, @saman_shafiq7.
An avid distance runner in Raleigh, North Carolina, diagnosed with a terminal neurodegenerative disease, decided to enter what she thought would be her last race.
Instead, she ended up doing 50 more.
But in 2014, after noticing her times were slowing and her muscles weren't as strong as they used to be, she discovered she had ALS, commonly known as Lou Gehrig's disease.
Doctors told her the typical life expectancy for someone with ALS is two to five years.
She decided she wanted to use her time and her body in a way that she loves.
She bought a recumbent trike, sometimes used in races as an accessibility alternative, and competed in what she believed would be her last triathlon.
"I came in last by almost an hour, but people stayed to watch," she said.
"This was really a profoundly moving experience."
It encouraged her to keep going.
While her muscle movement was declining, she appeared to be defying the grim prognosis she'd been given.
Before she knew it, Andrea had completed marathons in every state — the first person with ALS to do so.
Her 50th one was in Alaska.
Watch the moment Andrea crosses the finish line in the video below after competing in 50 races.
"I hope that it can be used to show people how to take on whatever marathon is in their lives, whether it's ALS, whether it's anything," said David.
"If you just put one foot in front of the other, there's really no telling where you can end up."
Humankind is your go-to spot for good news!
Click here to submit your uplifting, cute, or inspiring video moments for us to feature.
Also, click here to subscribe to our newsletter, bringing our top stories of the week straight to your inbox.
USA TODAY will be providing live coverage of Biden's address, which begins at 8 p.m.
You can watch at the video at the top of this page or on USA TODAY's YouTube channel.
Biden's remarks follow his trip to Israel this week, where he met with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, pledged support in the Jewish state's war against Hamas and sought to prevent the war from expanding into a larger conflict.
Biden arrived as tensions were mounting after an explosion Tuesday at a Gaza City hospital that had been treating wounded Palestinians and sheltering many more who were seeking a refuge from the fighting.
The Hamas-run Health Ministry in Gaza blamed an Israeli airstrike.
The Israeli military said the destruction was caused by a misfired Palestinian rocket.
The blast prompted worldwide outrage and protests.
At the start of a meeting with Netanyahu, Biden said it did not appear that Israel was to blame.
Updates:Gaza 'safe zones' bombed; US armored vehicles delivered to Israel; Hamas on aid
Biden's Thursday address will also cover the ongoing war in Ukraine.
This weapons shipment is the latest since Russia invaded in February 2022, bringing total American military support to more than $40 billion.
U.S. Capitol Police said Thursday that they arrested more than 300 protesters who held a demonstration inside a U.S. House office building in Washington D.C., over the Israel-Hamas war.
Police reported that the protest broke out at the Cannon House Office Building just before 1:40 p.m. Wednesday and shut down roads outside the building due to the demonstration.
Video shows demonstrators wearing black T-shirts reading "Jews Say Ceasefire Now" in white lettering shouting "Ceasefire now!"
Other footage shows the group sitting on the Cannon Rotunda floor clapping in unison.
Arrests took place in the Cannon Rotunda, police reported.
They were ticketed and released.
The rotunda was cleared by 5 p.m., police said.
The war:As war in Israel, Gaza rages on, President Biden is having a moment
On Oct. 7, a major Jewish holiday, Hamas militants stormed from the blockaded Gaza Strip into nearby Israeli towns.
The attack, which killed hundreds of civilians, stunned Israel and caught its military and intelligence apparatus completely off guard.
Israel immediately launched airstrikes on Gaza, destroying entire neighborhoods and killing hundreds of Palestinian civilians in the days that have followed.
As of Thursday, the war's death toll surpassed 5,000, making the conflict the deadliest of five Gaza wars for both sides.
At least 199 people, including children, were captured by Hamas and taken into Gaza, according to Israel.
The Hamas incursion came on Simchat Torah, a normally joyous day when Jews complete the annual cycle of reading the Torah scroll.
Israel declared war the next day.
Previous Israel-Hamas wars were in 2008, 2012, 2014 and 2021.
Israel-Hamas war updates:Biden says Gaza to get aid by Friday; US says Israel not to blame for hospital blast.
Reach her at nalund@usatoday.com and follow her on X @nataliealund.
An explosion at a Greek Orthodox church in Gaza City late Thursday resulted in casualties and injuries along with displacing Palestinians who were taking refuge there.
The Holy Orthodox Order of the Holy Great Martyr George confirmed the bombing, adding that more than 500 people were being housed at the church and monastery.
According to a preliminary U.S. intelligence analysis, the death toll was on the "low end" of 100 to 300.
The incident triggered outrage across the Middle East, as Hamas and Israel blamed each other for the attack.
Since the war began on Oct. 7, the Hamas-run Gaza Health Ministry said 3,785 Palestinians have been killed and more than 12,500 others have been wounded.
And in Israel, more than 1,400 people have been killed.
In a televised address on Thursday, President Joe Biden urged people to support Ukraine and Israel, saying "American leadership is what holds the world together."
Israel-Hamas War newsletter:Sign up to get the latest news and analysis from USA TODAY into your inbox.
The aid deal struck Wednesday had included a stipulation that roads essential to the flow of aid would first be fixed.
∎ More than 100 retired U.S. generals have signed an open letter from the Washington-based Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs calling on President Joe Biden and Congress to give Israel all the support it needs militarily, diplomatically and logistically against the "Iran-backed terrorist threats that surround it on all sides."
∎ The U.S. is waiving travel visa requirements for Israelis earlier than expected.
∎ Hamas fighters likely fired North Korean weapons during their Oct. 7 assault on Israel, a video and weapons seized by Israel show, despite Pyongyang’s denials that it arms the militant group.
South Korean officials, two experts on North Korean arms and an Associated Press analysis of weapons captured on the battlefield by Israel point toward Hamas using Pyongyang’s F-7 rocket-propelled grenade, a shoulder-fired weapon that fighters typically use against armored vehicles.
Gaza's dwindling water, electricity supply could turn hospitals into 'morgues'
No place was safe for more than 2 million Palestinians as Israeli bombs slammed the Gaza Strip, including parts of the Palestinian territory that Israel had declared “safe zones.”
The intensified shelling came one day after Israel agreed to allow limited shipments of humanitarian aid into southern Gaza from Egypt.
“Israeli Air Forces continued to strike southern areas despite the directive for people in #Gaza to move south,” the UN Relief and Works Agency said.
The agency said at least 14 of its own staff had been killed and nine more wounded − adding that the “actual number is likely to be much higher” − in less than two weeks since a stunning, bloody incursion of Hamas militants killed more than 1,000 Israeli citizens and fueled military reprisals from Israel.
Israel Defense Forces says it is attacking Hamas militants wherever they hide in Gaza and has accused the militants of taking shelter among the civilian population.
The death toll of Israelis and Palestinians surpassed 5,000, making the conflict the deadliest of five wars involving the narrow, densely populated strip of land bordering Israel, Egypt and the Mediterranean Sea.
The U.S. State Department on Thursday issued a "worldwide caution" for U.S. travelers.
The travel advisory cites "increased tensions in various locations around the world, the potential for terrorist attacks, demonstrations or violent actions against U.S. citizens and interests."
The agency urges Americans overseas to exercise increased caution and stay alert in known tourist spots that might be attractive targets.
It also suggests travelers sign up for the Smart Traveler Enrollment Program (STEP) to receive information and alerts − and to make it easier to locate someone in an emergency overseas.
A U.S. warship in the northern Red Sea shot down three missiles and several drones fired from Yemen, the Pentagon said Thursday, in the latest danger sign of how the Israel-Hamas war could expand into a regional conflict.
Last week, their leader cautioned that they may fire missiles and drones if the U.S. intervened in the war.
A U.S. official told The Associated Press the missiles were likely not aimed at the USS Carney, the Navy destroyer that intercepted them over the water.
The official spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss military operations that have not been made public.
“We cannot say for certain what these missiles and drones were targeting, but they were launched from Yemen heading north along the Red Sea, potentially towards targets in Israel,” Brig.
Gen. Pat Ryder, the Pentagon press secretary, told reporters.
Ryder said the Defense Department is still trying to ascertain the missiles' target, adding they were destroyed because their flight pattern indicated a possible threat.
He said the U.S. is prepared to do whatever is required “to protect our partners and our interests in this important region.”
The United Nations will inspect the trucks bringing in humanitarian aid from Egypt into Gaza and will help oversee the process, but the organization's head would prefer the desperately needed supplies could be carried in under a cease-fire.
The crossing has been expected to open Friday, but CNN reported that road repairs and other concerns will likely delay that till later in the weekend.
Israel agreed Wednesday to allow aid into Gaza after a request from Biden, but demanded the assistance not go through its territory, only via Egypt, and that it be kept away from Hamas.
Israeli officials have said their siege of the Palestinian territory won't be lifted until Hamas releases the approximately 200 hostages it captured during its Oct. 7 rampage.
One unresolved issue is whether Israeli will allow fuel into Gaza, a particularly important matter at a time when several hospitals in the territory have closed for lack of diesel.
Negotiations are ongoing.
A U.S. cargo plane arrived in Israel carrying the initial shipment of armored vehicles designated to replace vehicles damaged during the war, the Israel Ministry of Defense said Thursday.
Armored ambulances, trucks and mechanical engineering equipment are expected to arrive in coming days, the ministry said.
The first delivery came the day after Biden's trip to Tel Aviv, where he pledged the U.S. would stand by Israel and provide whatever is needed to defend itself in its war with Hamas.
Biden said he would seek congressional approval of an "unprecedented support package" to bolster Israel's defense.
He also pledged $100 million in U.S. funding for humanitarian assistance for Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank.
More than a million people have fled their homes in the Gaza Strip ahead of an expected Israel invasion that seeks to eliminate Hamas’ leadership after its deadly assault.
Aid groups warn an Israeli ground offensive could hasten a humanitarian crisis.
About 300,000 Israelis have been internally displaced since the start of the war, the Times of Israel reports, citing Israel Democracy Institute research.
Most are from southern Israel in the Gaza border towns where Hamas carried out its murderous rampage.
The president has made a sudden transformation from a political figure whose commitment to Israel was often questioned by conservative critics inside and outside the Jewish state to arguably the world's leading champion of Israel outside the Middle East.
Biden's actions and words since the Oct. 7 Hamas attack, capped by a dramatic visit to Israel on Wednesday, have been lauded even by many of Biden's biggest skeptics in Israel as he stands in solidarity with the country and pledges "unprecedented" military assistance.
Read more here.
− Joey Garrison
Palestinian Americans are seeing two fronts in the Israel-Hamas war: One is the bloodshed in the Middle East, the other is emotional backlash from bigotry and hate in the U.S.
A U.S. Department of Justice hate crime investigation into the fatal stabbing of a 6-year-old Palestinian American Muslim boy in Illinois is one of several incidents of alleged hate being directed at Palestinian Americans, allies and people who look like them since the war began.
Read more here.
Battle against hate:Violence, bigotry toward Palestinian Americans spiking across U.S.
The Israel Defense Forces, also known as the IDF, is the national military of Israel.
It has three branches: the army, navy and air force.
It was established in 1948, two weeks after Israel became an independent country.
Before the war began, the IDF had 169,500 active troops and was the 28th largest military in the world by active personnel, according to the International Institute for Strategic Studies' Military Balance 2023.
There were also 465,000 reserve personnel to supplement active military forces if deemed necessary.
Read more here.
More:Biden: Gaza to get aid by Friday; US says Israel not to blame for hospital blast.
The State Department designated Hamas a terrorist group in 1997, and several other nations also consider Hamas a terrorist organization.
In 2006, Hamas won parliamentary elections, and in 2007 the group violently seized control of Gaza from the Palestinian Authority, which was controlled by the rival Fatah movement that still governs the West Bank.
There have been no elections since.
The group calls for the establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel and believes in the use of violence to carry out the destruction of Israel.
Hamas receives financial, material, and logistical support from Iran.
So far, however, the U.S. and other nations have said there is no evidence that Iran was directly involved in Hamas’ attack.
Contributing: The Associated Press
As usual, it’s a great day to not be former president and current criminal defendant Donald J. Trump.
Sidney Powell – his former legal adviser, fellow champion of the gargantuan and ongoing “rigged election” lie and co-defendant in the sweeping Georgia election interference case – pleaded guilty Thursday and agreed to testify against others involved in the alleged conspiracy.
The word “others” is important, as it may well include Trump, the far-and-away leading GOP presidential primary candidate who, one imagines, is presently hurling all available ketchup at the walls of his Mar-a-Lago pout room.
Powell was known among Trump fanatics and election conspiracy theorists as the person who would “release the Kraken” and unleash unassailable evidence the election was rigged, righteously returning Trump to the White House.
In a Nov. 24, 2020, Fox Business interview with Lou Dobbs, Powell said of the election, "There's no way there was anything but widespread election fraud here."
She has now pleaded guilty to six misdemeanor counts of conspiracy to commit intentional interference of election duties and been sentenced to six years of probation.
She also has to pay some fines and write an apology letter to the people of Georgia, which is quite the thing when you consider the unbridled conviction with which she lied to the American public, often via Fox News appearances, about the 2020 presidential election being “stolen” from Trump.
Trump's Georgia arrest isn't an anomaly:Take a good look at Trump's booking photo, Republicans.
That's your GOP.
Powell's unhinged conspiracies were featured prominently in Dominion Voting Systems successful lawsuit against Fox News, and she's facing her own $1.3 billion defamation lawsuit from the company as well.
It appears the Kraken may not be all she was cracked up to be.
Worse yet for the MAGA crowd, said Kraken will now be released in Trump’s direction.
In a Nov. 14, 2020, tweet, Trump hailed Powell as part of his “truly great team” of lawyers.
Powell was part of an election conspiracy news conference held at the Republican National Committee headquarters on Nov. 19, 2020, an event made famous largely because Giuliani was sweating so profusely that hair dye ran down the side of his face.
At the news conference, Powell said: “What we are really dealing with here and uncovering more by the day is the massive influence of communist money through Venezuela, Cuba and likely China and the interference with our elections here in the United States.”
People with even a pinky toe still dipped in the pool of reality knew at the time that was nonsense, but it's clear from her guilty plea that Powell knew it was nonsense as well.
She went to meet with Trump at the White House on Dec. 18, 2020, and talked about declaring a national emergency and having the president order the military to seize certain voting machines.
And you know he will.
It’s easy to write Powell off as a conspiratorial crackpot, but they were all conspiratorial crackpots, and she marched side by side with Giuliani and Trump.
So the Kraken pleading guilty does three significant things:
For all her zany nonsense – which was featured over and over on Fox News in the wake of the 2020 election, helping brainwash a sizable swath of the populace – Powell was sane enough to know when to save her own hide.
Asked by the judge Thursday whether she believes “there are enough facts that support this plea of guilty,” Powell responded: “I do.”
That’s one of the first honest things she has said in a long time.
And it pulls the curtain all the way back on the scam Trump and his cronies have been running since the day he lost the 2020 election.
Ready or not, winter is coming − but how bad is it going to be?
Federal forecasters from NOAA's Climate Prediction Center gave us their answer Thursday in an annual winter outlook.
NOAA said the U.S. winter of 2023-24 will probably be dominated by the effects of what could be a powerful El Niño.
That means a mild, dry winter is likely on tap for much of the northern tier of the U.S., while the southeastern U.S. should see a wetter-than-average winter.
The center's forecast covers December, January and February, which is known as meteorological winter.
Warmer-than-average temperatures are favored across the northern tier of the U.S. and much of the far West, NOAA said.
The greatest odds for warmer-than-average conditions are in Alaska, the Pacific Northwest and northern New England.
As for precipitation, wetter-than-average conditions are most likely in northern Alaska, portions of the West from California to the south-central Rockies, the southern Plains, the Gulf Coast, the Southeast and the lower mid-Atlantic, NOAA predicts.
As for where a dry winter is likely, the greatest odds for drier-than-average conditions are forecast in portions of the northern Rockies and central Great Lakes region, especially for Michigan and northern Ohio and Indiana.
The main factor federal climate scientists use to forecast winter weather is the strength of El Niño or La Niña, climate patterns that affect weather in the U.S. and around the world.
The entire natural climate cycle is officially known as the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), which swings between warmer and cooler seawater in the tropical Pacific Ocean.
(El Niño is unusually warm water in the tropical Pacific Ocean; La Niña means cooler-than-average water in the Pacific.)
This El Niño, which began in June, is predicted to last through the winter.
It could be a "historically strong" one, the Climate Prediction Center said, potentially rivaling those in 2015-16 and 1997-98.
Let it snow?
Here's what forecasters say.
The forecast released Thursday predicts only where above- or below-normal temperatures – and above- or below-normal precipitation – are most likely.
This winter forecast does not specify how much precipitation will fall as rain, snow or ice, only that more or less is likely overall.
Snow forecasts depend upon the strength and track of winter storms, which generally cannot be predicted more than a week in advance, the center has said in the past.
As for the 50 million Americans who live in the Northeast and mid-Atlantic, where big snowstorms typically bring the most angst, the climate center does not give a specific forecast for how much snow will fall.
How cold and snowy will US winter be?
Other large-scale climate patterns in the atmosphere that can influence winter weather include the Madden-Julian Oscillation, which can affect the number of heavy-rain events along the West Coast.
It also can contribute to other extreme events in the U.S., including Arctic air outbreaks during the winter months across the central and eastern portions of the nation, the Climate Prediction Center says.
The forecast does also not factor in Siberian snow cover, which other forecasters use as the basis for their winter weather forecasts.
Since the Israeli military ordered civilians to flee Gaza as it pursues Hamas militants, more than 1 million Palestinians have left their homes in the face of mounting airstrikes.
Vehicles carrying relief supplies stood motionless at Egypt's border with the Gaza Strip this week while locals and aid organizations begged for food, water and fuel for generators.
They said the tiny territory sealed off by Israel after last week’s rampage by Hamas was near total collapse.
Hundreds of thousands of Palestinians who had been forced from their homes were searching for bread.
Hospitals in Gaza were on the brink of power outages, endangering the lives of thousands of patients.
As an Israeli ground invasion seemed a certainty, Hamas militants continued their relentless rocket fire, and tensions grew along the Israel-Lebanon border to the north.
The Gaza power plant and power cables from Israel, which were Gaza's two primary suppliers of electricity, are no longer operational.
At the beginning of the siege, Israel cut off its supply of electricity to the city, and the power plant ceased operations almost a week ago because of a shortage of fuel.
Unable to view our graphics?
Click here to see them.
On Oct. 11, the Gaza Power Plant in Deir al-Balah, immediately south of the evacuation area, closed for lack of fuel.
And with the suspension of Israeli supplies, Gaza is now without energy.
Hospitals and other large facilities have backup generators, but when the fuel runs out, Israel's blockade will prevent new supplies from coming in.
Hospitals in Gaza "risk turning into morgues" without electricity, according to the International Committee of the Red Cross.
The death toll on both sides has surpassed 5,000, making the conflict the deadliest of five wars involving the narrow, densely populated strip of land bordering Israel, Egypt and the Mediterranean Sea.
SOURCE AP, UN Office of Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, USA TODAY research
WASHINGTON — In the nation's 16th day without a speaker of the House, Republican lawmakers made seemingly no progress towards electing a new, permanent leader.
Lawmakers looked like they were coming close to a deal after Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, backed a plan empowering Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-N.C., as speaker until January to get the House moving again.
McHenry has already been serving as an interim speaker with limited powers, and Jordan has lost two speaker elections on the House floor.
But after an hours-long, closed-door meeting, House Republicans appeared to reject the plan, putting the lower chamber − and the nation − back at square one.
As long as the House doesn't have a speaker, lawmakers can't approve crucial legislation, such as funding to avoid a government shutdown or aid to Israel as the country's war rages on with Hamas.
Catch up with USA TODAY's updates on the speaker fight.
The House will convene for a third speaker election at 10:00 a.m. Friday morning, Jim Jordan's office confirmed Thursday evening.
– Ken Tran
Rep. John Rutherford, R-Fla., told reporters that he and the other Republican holdouts who have refused to support Jim Jordan told the Ohio lawmaker on Thursday to withdraw his candidacy.
– Ken Tran
Jordan left a meeting with a handful of the GOP holdouts against him and said they had a "good discussion."
– Ken Tran
Leaving the speaker's office, Rep. Kevin McCarthy, the former speaker of the House, told reporters Jim Jordan should stay in the race and "fight through it."
"Don't give up right away," McCarthy said.
– Ken Tran
The major problem facing Jordan is that his opponents come from various corners of the House Republican conference, each with their own grievances against the Ohio Republican.
A portion of the New York GOP delegation for instance, are pressing Jordan for commitments to increase what's known as the SALT tax cap, a state and local tax deduction popular with their constituents back home.
Bacon has argued voting for Jordan would effectively be rewarding “bad behavior” from conservative hardliners, the people who fueled the ouster of former Speaker Kevin McCarthy.
Jordan is also facing opposition over his proposed government funding plan that could include a 1% cut across the board to government spending, which would include defense spending.
Among those lawmakers is Rep. Kay Granger, R-Fla., chair of the House Appropriations Committee.
A large portion of the GOP holdouts against Jordan are currently meeting with the Ohio Republican, McCarthy and McHenry.
– Ken Tran
“I’m still running for speaker and I plan to go to the floor and get the votes and win this race.”
Before heading to a possible third speaker election however, Jordan said he will consult his allies and meet with the holdouts and attempt to assuage their concerns “so that we can move forward and begin to work for the American people.”
– Ken Tran
A group of Republicans on Thursday afternoon appeared to balk at the idea of granting McHenry additional powers.
Empowering McHenry almost certainly would have required Democratic support.
Rep. Andy Barr, R-Ky., told reporters Jim Jordan will consult his family and ousted former House Speaker Kevin McCarthy before a possible third speaker election Thursday.
-- Ken Tran
Exiting a closed-door meeting, Republican lawmakers said the resolution to empower McHenry will not go to the floor.
Rep. Matt Gaetz, R-Fla., told reporters he expects there to be a third speaker election Thursday, with Jordan as the GOP nominee again.
– Ken Tran
Speaking to reporters outside the closed-door meeting, McCarthy noted how following his ouster, there is no clear GOP leadership to handle key legislative issues, such as funding the government or passing a foreign aid package for Israel.
"I don't quite understand what that helps America for, what that helps the conservative cause because it's actually the reverse," he added.
– Ken Tran
Among one of the points of debate in the closed-door conference meeting is whether there is even need for a resolution to empower McHenry.
McHenry already has powers to oversee legislation on the House floor, some House Republicans have argued.
GOP lawmakers have been huddling for two and a half hours now and there is still no clear timeline for when the measure to empower McHenry would be considered
– Ken Tran
The efforts to empower McHenry have bitterly divided the House Republican conference to the point members might hold an internal vote to determine support.
Rep. Dan Crenshaw, R-Texas, said members are questioning whether the measure is constitutional.
An internal vote would effectively be a test to see where the conference stands on granting McHenry temporary powers.
– Ken Tran
The Maryland Democrat deferred to House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries on what those concessions might look like.
– Ken Tran
– Ken Tran
– Ken Tran
Rep. Jim McGovern, D-Mass., said House Democrats were keeping their powder dry on supporting a resolution to empower McHenry.
The resolution has sparked fury from a sizable portion of the House Republican conference, meaning Democrats will have to pitch in and support the measure.
McGovern, reacting to the infighting the resolution has caused, suggested for House Republicans to stop holding conference meetings and instead opt for "intense therapy."
– Ken Tran
Meanwhile, just a one-minute walk away from a closed-door meeting where House Republicans are debating a resolution to empower McHenry, House Democrats are huddling to discuss next steps.
The move to empower McHenry as a temporary speaker will almost certainly require a heavy lift from Democrats.
Hard-right lawmakers have been leaving the GOP meeting furious and lambasting the resolution.– Ken Tran
A roll call vote to determine attendance in the House, scheduled for noon, has been postponed as lawmakers continue to debate a resolution that would empower McHenry as an interim speaker.
– Ken Tran
Jordan will back empowering McHenry as temporary speaker up until January, according to a source familiar.
In the meantime, Jordan will continue to run for speaker and work to shore up support over the next few months.
– Ken Tran
Rep. Scott Perry, R-Pa., chair of the House Freedom Caucus, a loose coalition of hard-right lawmakers, told reporters he would oppose empowering McHenry with temporary powers.
The resolution to make McHenry effectively an interim speaker "sets a bad precedent," Perry said.
– Ken Tran
House Republicans are currently meeting behind closed doors to discuss a resolution from Rep. Dave Joyce, R-Ohio, to temporarily empower McHenry as acting speaker.− Ken Tran
The vote drew some applause from House Democrats.
– Ken Tran
Sen. Patty Murray, a Democrat representing Washington state, currently serves as president pro tempore of the Senate.
Without an official speaker of the House, Murray was next in line for the presidency after Vice President Kamala Harris in the case of an emergency.
House Republicans will huddle in a closed-door conference meeting at 11 a.m. Thursday to discuss next steps.
The meeting comes as Jordan faces growing opposition to his bid for speaker and talks increase about giving temporary speaker Patrick McHenry more power.
− Ken Tran
Jordan, R-Ohio, told reporters Wednesday he intends to stay in the race and expected a vote at noon Thursday.
But as it remains clear Jordan has no path towards the 217 votes he needs to become speaker, the timing of the third speaker election is up in the air.
− Ken Tran
Lawmakers were originally expected to begin proceedings at noon Thursday in Washington, but timing could change if Republicans meet in conference first.
When the House reconvenes, you can follow along here.
Rep. Mike Lawler, R-N.Y., one of the moderate GOP lawmakers opposing Jordan, told USA TODAY the House is in its state of paralysis by the fault of the conservative hardliners who have overturned "precedent."
Hard-right lawmakers, Lawler told USA TODAY, "set a new precedent within this congress."
The New York Republican referenced multiple times ultraconservatives tanked rule votes, traditionally procedural votes that until this year, never failed.
− Ken Tran
Rep. Patrick McHenry, R-N.C., was chosen to be acting House speaker from a succession list that McCarthy provided to a House clerk in January in case his seat became vacant.
McHenry is serving his 10th term in Congress and represents the 10th congressional district in North Carolina.
He is a McCarthy ally and chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, a role that helped him negotiate the debt limit deal earlier this year.
Technically, Rep. Hakeem Jeffries could be elected, as there are no requirements for the speaker to be from the majority party (or even a member of Congress).
In both rounds of voting this week, Jeffries has received 212 votes, the full backing of House Democrats and more than Rep. Jim Jordan both times.
However, the New York Democrat would still need five more votes to hit the necessary 217.
Despite infighting among Republicans, it's very doubtful any lawmaker on the right, let alone five, will cast a vote across the aisle.
The number of votes needed is determined by a majority of House lawmakers present and voting.
On Tuesday, that number was 217.
Because no lawmaker received 217 votes in the first election, the speaker race continues today.
When the vote for speaker begins Wednesday, members will have a roll call vote to determine how many are present and voting − and how many votes are needed to win.
Then they will be called on individually to cast their vote for a speaker.
Voting could last several rounds Wednesday or be postponed until another day if a speaker isn't elected during the second try.
– Candy Woodall
Former House Speaker Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., had a rocky start to his reign as speaker.
He went through 15 rounds of voting to get elected and had to make concessions with hard-line conservatives who opposed him.
But once elected, his detractors' frustrations only grew, particularly during debt ceiling negotiations between McCarthy and President Joe Biden
Rep. Matt Gaetz, R-Fla., who criticized McCarthy for the measure, introduced a motion to vacate and remove McCarthy as speaker.
Eight Republicans and 208 Democrats voted to oust him.
He simply doesn’t have the votes — we need to have a frank discussion as a conference about a path forward.
20 House Republicans voted against Jordan in the first House speaker election while 22 Republicans voted against him in the second election.
Bergman supported Jordan in both rounds.
Bergman said on X, formerly known as Twitter, on Monday that “We need a leader to step up to unite the Republican conference, actually pass critical legislation, and move our Nation forward.”
The second ballot was another setback for Jordan’s bid for speaker.
Twenty-two GOP lawmakers voted against Jordan, an increase from the 20 that opposed him on Tuesday.
– Ken Tran
After 75-year-old Bay View, Wisconsin, resident Paul Bailey won a gun auction through GunBroker.com in August, he received a UPS tracking number for the package and awaited his new gun's arrival.
Trevor Lawrence has earned a rest.
Playing through a left knee injury suffered four days earlier, the Jacksonville Jaguars quarterback was efficient – if not effervescent – but made his biggest play when his team needed it most.
Jacksonville (5-2) extended its AFC South lead while joining the Kansas City Chiefs and Miami Dolphins as the conference’s only five-win clubs.
Lawrence completed 20 off 29 passes for 204 yards and, despite the bum knee, ran for a team-high 59 yards on eight carries.
But Moreau couldn’t hang on, and Carr couldn’t convert on his final chance on fourth down as New Orleans dropped to 3-4.
― Nate Davis
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
NFL NEWSLETTER: Sign up now to get football news delivered to your inbox
Jaguars: The Jaguars gave up a 24-9 lead in the fourth quarter, but were able to survive the Saints’ late rally.
The Jaguars broke a four-game losing streak against New Orleans.
Prior to Thursday night, Jacksonville’s last victory versus the Saints was on Dec. 21, 2003.
The Jaguars are currently in first place in the AFC South.
Jacksonville is 5-2 for the first time since 2007.
His play diagnosis and nose for the football was on display Thursday night.
The Jaguars running back tallied 77 yards from scrimmage (53 rushing yards and 24 receiving yards) and two touchdowns in the win.
He led the Saints in carries, catches, rushing yards and receiving yards in the loss.
Derek Carr, Saints offense: The Carr-led Saints offense was booed multiple times Thursday night.
Carr and his wide receivers weren’t on the same page for much of the contest.
Credit to Carr and the Saints offense, they did rally back in the fourth quarter with two touchdowns to tie the game at 24 apiece.
But three field goals through the first three quarters wasn’t good enough.
Carr finished 33-of-55 passing for 301 yards.
He had one touchdown and one interception.
The Saints quarterback also appeared to injure his groin area late in the game.
Saints' third-down efficiency: The Saints were 3-18 on third downs.
The team’s third-down inefficiency probably cost them the game.
Saints' poor red zone offense: The Saints went 2-5 in the red zone.
New Orleans’ red zone struggles played a big role why they lost at home.
The most critical red zone mishap came on third down with 30 seconds in remaining in the fourth quarter when tight end Foster Moreau dropped a wide open game-tying touchdown.
Moreau’s drop was a microcosm of the Saints' red zone struggles on Thursday night.
― Tyler Dragon
Saints tight end Foster Moreau dropped a would-be game-tying touchdown in the back on the end zone with 30 seconds remaining in the fourth quarter.
The back-breaking drop proved to be costly for the Saints.
The Jaguars were able to get in victory formation after the Saints turned the ball over on downs.
New Orleans finished the game 2-5 in the red zone.
― Tyler Dragon
Christian Kirk caught a short pass over the middle from Trevor Lawrence and took it 44 yards to the house.
Kirk made the entire Saints defense look slow after he caught the football and ran up field for the score.
The Jaguars reclaimed the lead, 31-24, after the score.
Kirk has six catches, 90 yards and a touchdown in the game.
― Tyler Dragon
The Saints scored on just three plays after Jacksonville turned the ball over on downs.
Two of New Orleans’ three plays went to wide receiver Michael Thomas, including a great diving catch for a 17-yard touchdown.
It was Thomas’ first touchdown of the season.
The Saints scored a two-point conversion after the touchdown to tie the contest 24 apiece.
New Orleans has scored touchdowns on two of its last three possessions after being held out of the end zone for three quarters.
― Tyler Dragon
A little more than two years ago, Jaguars QB Trevor Lawrence fronted the first round of a 2021 NFL draft that included four other passers: Zach Wilson, Trey Lance, Justin Fields and Mac Jones.
There was little debate at the time that Lawrence, the No.
1 overall pick, was a generational prospect and the best of this bunch, but few could have envisioned he could well be the only one of those quarterbacks to reach a second contract with the team that drafted him.
A win tonight would be Lawrence's 18th in the NFL; the other four 2021 first-round QBs have a combined 35 victories.
Lawrence's one Pro Bowl nod so far (2022) also matches the rest of the class, Jones earning one as a rookie but nowhere close since.
― Nate Davis
New Orleans was finally able to reach pay dirt.
The Saints are 4-5 on fourth downs in the game.
― Tyler Dragon
Derek Carr’s forced pass turned disastrous.
― Tyler Dragon
The Saints home fans have seen enough field goals.
― Tyler Dragon
Hill has two carries for 12 yards so far tonight.
― Nate Davis
The Saints entered tonight's game with the NFL's sixth-ranked scoring defense.
The Raiders never ranked better than 20th in that category during QB Derek Carr's nine seasons with the franchise.
― Nate Davis
The Saints were booed multiple times in the first half after their offense failed to score a touchdown.
New Orleans only scored three points off two Jacksonville turnovers.
― Tyler Dragon
Tonight is the first time the Saints' new-look backfield has been completely available.
But not a banner night thus far offensively.
In fact, the Saints have only scored 19 points in the six quarters since they demolished the Patriots 34-0 in Week 5.
Carr has completed 11 of 21 passes for 100 yards.
― Nate Davis
The Jaguars called a fake punt on fourth-and-2.
Jacksonville’s special teams unit snapped the football and the punter Logan Cooke threw a perfect pass to Tim Jones for a 13-yard gain.
The fake punt set up a successful 43-yard field goal by Brandon McManus.
Jacksonville has a 17-6 lead.
― Tyler Dragon
The Saints are 0-2 in the red zone in the first half.
Derek Carr and the Saints converted a fourth-and-3 to keep their possession going, but their drive stalled again in the red zone.
The Saints again had to settle for a field goal.
― Tyler Dragon
So is Ridley Batman or Robin?
Ridley has yet to be targeted in this game.
― Nate Davis
Two first quarter fumbles haven’t slowed down the Jags.
After holding New Orleans to a field goal after a muffed punt, the Jaguars went 75 yards down the field in seven plays to reach the end zone for the second time.
Jacksonville’s touchdown came on a nifty misdirection jet sweep.
The Saints are down 14-3.
― Tyler Dragon
But Jacksonville’s defense was able to keep New Orleans out of the end zone.
The Saints converted one first down and had first and goal from the 6-yard line, but their touchdown efforts failed on three attempts inside the 10-yard line.
― Tyler Dragon
The Saints got quick reprieves from their missed field goal.
New Orleans took over at its own 41 ... but didn't need long to go three-and-out.
New Orleans recovered and is back in business.
― Nate Davis
The Saints rookie kicker missed two field goals last week, and he missed his first field goal attempt in Week 7.
― Tyler Dragon
The only other rushing touchdown surrendered by New Orleans this season was a 1-yard run by Packers QB Jordan Love.
― Nate Davis
The Saints defense hadn’t allowed an opening drive touchdown all season, until Week 7.
Trevor Lawrence and the Jaguars marched down the field on a 10-play, 75-yard touchdown drive in just over five minutes.
Jacksonville converted six first downs on its opening drive.
Lawrence completed five of six passes for 60 yards.
― Tyler Dragon
Jaguars vs. Saints begins at 8:15 p.m.
ET on Oct. 19.
Jaguars at Saints will be streaming exclusively on Amazon Prime Video and will be broadcast in local markets only.
The Jaguars announced that Trevor Lawrence was active for Thursday night's matchup with the Saints.
Jaguars' inactive players:
Saints' inactive players:
Lorenzo Reyes: Saints 21, Jaguars 17
This is a tricky one, with the status of Jaguars quarterback Trevor Lawrence up in the air.
But with the quick turnaround with the Thursday game, I would expect Lawrence to be hindered — if he can go at all.
If you’re leaning Saints, it might not be bad to jump on this sooner rather than later, assuming the line moves if Lawrence is ruled out.
Tyler Dragon: Jaguars 24, Saints 20
Jacksonville’s won three straight games.
New Orleans has dropped three of its last four.
Trevor Lawrence’s knee injury is a concern, but the team expects him to play.
The quick turnaround favors New Orleans.
However, Derek Carr and the Saints are still trying to figure themselves out offensively.
Victoria Hernandez: Jaguars 23, Saints 21
The Jaguars are tried and true on the road and showed last week that their success in London wasn’t a fluke.
Jordan Mendoza: Saints 16, Jaguars 14
Trevor Lawrence’s health is a big concern, and the Saints defense has only given up more than 20 points once this season.
The New Orleans offense isn’t great, but they hold down Jacksonville enough for a close win.
... it's been a minute.
In fact, nearly two decades since it happened and is famous for one of the wildest finishes in league history.
That game occurred Dec. 21, 2003, in a game that became known as the "River City Relay."
It occurred in Duval County in Week 16 and was a must-win affair for New Orleans' playoff hopes.
Then ... New Orleans kicker John Carney sailed the extra-point attempt wide ride.
Jags 20, Saints 19 ... no playoffs in The Big Easy.
― Nate Davis
... was also in New Orleans — and in prime time.
It was Aug. 23, 2021 — preseason — a game the Saints won 23-21 on a Monday night.
On that evening, then-rookie QB Trevor Lawrence showed his inexperience, taking a huge hit on a third-down run but surviving it.
And then-coach Urban Meyer was clearly agitated throughout the night, managed the game like it counted in the standings and seemed crushed by the loss — among the attributes that would scuttle his only season as an NFL head coach before he could reach the end of it.
― Nate Davis
... and the game actually counted?
It was his final game at Clemson, the Sugar Bowl on New Year's Day 2021.
― Nate Davis
Looking to wager?
Check out the best mobile sports betting apps offering NFL betting promos in 2023.
According to the top NFL betting apps, Jaguars quarterback Trevor Lawrence (+1800) boasts some of the best NFL MVP betting odds in 2023.
The Jaguars (+2200) also have some of the best early Super Bowl betting odds.
Not interested in this game?
Our guide to NFL betting odds, picks and spreads has you covered with "Sunday Night Football" odds, "Monday Night Football" odds and more.
If you’re new to sports betting, don’t worry.
We have tips for beginners on how to place a bet online.
Saints vs. Jaguars | Ravens vs. Lions | Bears vs.
Raiders | Colts vs. Browns | Patriots vs. Bills | Giants vs.
Falcons | Rams vs. Steelers | Seahawks vs. Cardinals | Broncos vs. Packers | Chiefs vs. Chargers | Eagles vs. Dolphins | Vikings vs. 49ers
Take a look at how all 32 teams stack up heading into Week 7.
How do Week 6 losses by the previously undefeated 49ers and Eagles shake things up?
But that throwback comeback will hardly be the last, plus some fresh fashion-forward alternates are also coming down the pike.
Nate Davis does important work by ranking the NFL's alternate uniforms.
We have a complete list at every position:
Do you like football?
Then you'll enjoy getting our NFL newsletter delivered to your inbox
Get the latest news, expert analysis, game insights and the must-see moments from the NFL conveniently delivered to your email inbox.
Sign up now!
We occasionally recommend interesting products and services.
If you make a purchase by clicking one of the links, we may earn an affiliate fee.
USA TODAY operates independently, and this doesn’t influence our coverage.
Gannett may earn revenue from sports betting operators for audience referrals to betting services.
Sports betting operators have no influence over nor are any such revenues in any way dependent on or linked to the newsrooms or news coverage.
Terms apply, see operator site for Terms and Conditions.
If you or someone you know has a gambling problem, help is available.
Call the National Council on Problem Gambling 24/7 at 1-800-GAMBLER (NJ, OH), 1-800-522-4700 (CO), 1-800-BETS-OFF (IA), 1-800-9-WITH-IT (IN).
Must be 21 or older to gamble.
Sports betting and gambling are not legal in all locations.
Be sure to comply with laws applicable where you reside.
BALTIMORE — Will Smith joined Jada Pinkett Smith on stage as she promoted her new memoir in her Baltimore hometown Wednesday night, pledging lifelong support for her just a week after she revealed that the couple had been separated since 2016.
It came at the end of a talk about her book, "Worthy."
'Hell of a rugged journey':Jada Pinkett Smith bares all about marriage in interview, book
More:Jada Pinkett Smith says she and Will Smith haven't been together since 2016, 'live separately'
We've been on a powerful quest.
"Ever since the Oscars, it's so interesting how such an intense event can bring you closer together, and I would say that after that, we really dove in and dug in and got to this beautiful place we are now."
More:Will Smith slapped Chris Rock at the 2022 Oscars.
Here's what has happened since.
We recognize that mistakes may happen – or that new information can emerge after a story is published – and we pledge to address all concerns quickly, fairly and transparently.
If a correction or clarification is warranted, we will highlight that in the original file and explain to readers why the change was made.
Any correction or clarification would also be published on our corrections log.
To report corrections & clarifications, contact:
Please indicate whether you're responding to content online or in the newspaper.
The following corrections & clarifications have been published on stories produced by USA TODAY's newsroom:
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated who is affected by this rule.
The story has been updated to reflect the proposed rule affects satellite and cable providers.
Money: A previous version of this story misstated the number of people 62 and older who have student debt loans.
Sports: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed the locations for Big Ten games.
"5 Things" podcast: On the Oct. 5 show in our segment about school psychologists, we misstated the ratio of counselors to students at a school in Hershey, Pennsylvania.
At 1 to 1000, it is half of the recommended ratio.
Money: An earlier version of this story mischaracterized the competitiveness of Capital One's savings-account interest rates.
The reference has been removed.
Jarrett Payton covers the Chicago Bears.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the amount of Fox Corp.'s settlement with Dominion Voting Systems in a defamation lawsuit.
Money: The UAW strike affects 38 locations across 20 states.
An earlier alert undercounted the number of states affected.
See the list.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly identified an organization.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified the Higher Education Advisory Group.
Sports: A headline on the story incorrectly described Christian Coleman's winning time in the men's 100 meters.
He won with a time of 9.83 seconds, tied for the world's fastest time this season.
News: This article was updated to remove incorrect details about math courses and departments at the University of California, Santa Cruz.
News: A previous version of this video misstated the Longwood Garden's distance from the prison.
His personal security guard ran onto the field to restrain the person.
A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the name of the home team.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified Chester County Prison.
It's the University of Pennsylvania.
News: A previous version of this video misstated how many co-defendants had been booked.
Money: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed among states with no Social Security tax Minnesota, which expanded in May 2023 a state tax exemption for benefits without eliminating the tax.
News: An earlier version of this story contained inaccurate or incomplete facts about the history of language.
Social media: A previous version of this post graphic contained a name misspelling of Scooter Braun.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the extent of the standing water around Dodger Stadium.
Sports: The USA TODAY Sports’ MLB power rankings in the Aug. 15 edition misstated the leader of the American League Central Division.
The Minnesota Twins lead the division.
News: A previous version of this video misidentified USA TODAY’s National Political correspondent, David Jackson.
Entertainment: The location of the bookstore in an earlier version of this story was incorrect.
Wild Geese Bookshop is located in Franklin, Indiana.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the next opponent for the U.S. women should they advance from their Round of 16 game vs. Sweden.
The Americans would then play the winner of Japan vs. Norway in the quarterfinals.
Money: Due to a typo, an earlier version of this story misstated total U.S. sales of the Kia Stinger.
The automaker has sold more than 65,000 Stinger sedans in the U.S. since the model's launch.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees between Madrid, Spain, and a mountainous area in Spain.
It also misstated a temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees in reference to average temperatures in Tunisia.
News: An earlier version incorrectly identified Victoria McQueen's title at her high school.
She is student body president.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified the Norwegian Gem.
It is a Jewel-class cruise ship.
News: A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the origins of Blue Moon.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the Iowa State teams being investigated by the Iowa Racing and Gaming Commission.
The school does not have a baseball program.
News: This article has been updated to include additional nonpartisan sources of data and research.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated 10-year-old J'Adore's diagnosis date.
News: In a 1A story on July 5 about primary care doctors, the relationship between physicians and health professionals such as nurse practitioners and physician assistants was unclear.
Paraprofessionals generally work under the supervision of a licensed physician.
Entertainment: A photo included in an earlier version of this report was misidentified as The Beatles.
The new record featuring John Lennon’s vocals will be a song.
Graphics: A previous version of this story misstated the number of competing teams in the Tour de France.
News: This story has been updated to clarify how many people died on the Titanic.
Money: This story has been updated to clarify details about local liquor laws.
News: A June 19 article on Page 2A misstated the year the 13th Amendment was passed.
Life: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated when the rescue was made.
Travel: A previous version of this story incorrectly described the Airbus A321 with new livery.
The aircraft is part of JetBlue’s existing fleet.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the number of states under red flag warnings.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly named ISR courses.
The courses are called Infant Swimming Resource courses.
News: This story has been updated to correct how far away the body was found from where the missing doctor was last seen.
News: An earlier version of this story did not make clear which versions of the AP African American Studies course framework excluded the word "queer."
It has been updated to clarify that versions in May 2022 and February 2023 did not include the word.
Travel: An earlier version of the story incorrectly listed how police resolved the case.
News: A previous version of this article incorrectly referred to the tornado data provided by the Storm Prediction Center of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Sports: A story on the documentary movie “It Ain’t Over” in the May 12 edition misstated the number of league MVP titles won by Yogi Berra.
The Yankees legend won three.
The information has been updated.
Those portions have been removed.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the Australian Open women's singles champion.
News: In some editions, the March 30 1A story about attackers targeting schools misstated the partners in the mass killing database.
They are USA TODAY, The Associated Press and Northeastern University.
News: This story originally included an inaccurate detail related to one woman's application for a domestic violence restraining order.
The information on Alison Kessler has been updated.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the comparative price between electric vehicles and gas-powered vehicles.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the year of Paul Walker's death.
News: A previous version of this article misstated Terry Wilson's employment status.
He remains a Fresno State employee but was granted leave from the position to serve as a staff-wide union representative.
News: An earlier version of this podcast incorrectly stated that USA TODAY ran the Dilbert comic strip.
It was the USA TODAY Network, not USA TODAY.
News: USA TODAY did not publish the Dilbert comic strip.
A previous version of this article was incorrect.
Facebook: A previous version of this post contained photos from other events earlier this month in Florida.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated salary figures of bartenders and pharmacists.
News: A story on Page 1A Feb. 16 about corporate diversity gave the incorrect date of Southern Co.’s annual meeting.
It takes place later this year.
News: A previous version of this graphic misstated the title of a movie.
News: A previous version of this article misstated the number of Maryland’s Eastern Shore counties.
Social media: An earlier version of this video had an incorrect description.
News: An earlier version misstated the requirements in the Biden administration’s proposed Title IX rule for determining the outcome of sexual assault cases.
The proposed regulation would require schools to use the “preponderance of evidence” standard most of the time.
News: An earlier version of this video misstated the status of a House Ethics Committee investigation.
Social media: A previous post misidentified the award Beyoncé won.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the home state of Sen. Chris Coons.
He is from Delaware.
Social media: A previous version of this post included an incorrect year of death.
News: An earlier version misstated the name of Hillsdale College's spokesperson, Emily Stack Davis.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated the new price of the Tesla Model Y.
It is $52,990.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this gallery included a photo incorrectly identifying Paige Butcher.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified who created Seven Principles of Leave No Trace.
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2016
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2017
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2018
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2019
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2020
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2021
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2022
The USA TODAY Opinion section publishes analysis, argument and essays on a wide variety of subjects.
We're looking for timeliness (pegged to news), persuasion pitched to the other side, new information, novel arguments, revelatory insights, passion without partisanship, first-person experience, original reporting that reveals fresh angles and makes news, expert knowledge, and/or a topic that will drive conversation on social media and in the real world.
We accept only pieces that are submitted exclusively to USA TODAY.
We do not accept material that has been published on blogs, social media or anywhere else.
Columns typically run 550 to 750 words.
They should be pasted directly into an email and sent to theforum@usatoday.com.
Pieces should include links (URLs, not headlines or footnotes) to back up quotes and factual material.
People featured in columns must be identified by their real, full names.
We do not publish open letters, class projects or material that has been submitted to multiple outlets.
Rebuttals to editorials and columns published in USA TODAY should be submitted as letters to the editor, not as full-length op-eds.
Due to the volume of submissions, we can’t respond to all columns sent to us.
If our Opinion team is interested in yours, you will hear from us within three business days.
Submissions may be edited for accuracy, clarity, style, standards and length.
Please include with your submission a short biography, two sentences at most, to run at the end of your column, as well as a current photograph, to which you own publishing rights.
If you or a business, trade group or other institution with which you are associated stands to gain financially or in any other way from your column, you should disclose that information in detail.
In most cases, it should also be included in the body of the piece or in the author's biographical information.
Columns are accepted for online publication; print publication is not guaranteed.
All columns published by USA TODAY are available for use online and in print by the more than 250 properties in the USA TODAY Network.
They include Austin; Bergen County, New Jersey; Burlington, Vermont; Cincinnati; Columbus, Ohio; Des Moines; Detroit; El Paso, Texas; Indianapolis; Louisville, Kentucky; Memphis, Tennessee; Milwaukee; Nashville, Tennessee; Phoenix, Reno, Nevada; Palm Beach, Florida; and Wilmington, Delaware.
Authors may post their columns elsewhere 48 hours after they are published at USA TODAY.
By submitting a column to USA TODAY and agreeing to its publication, authors are granting exclusive rights to the piece to the USA TODAY Network for 48 hours and non-exclusive rights thereafter.
To get a sense of our range, preferences and requirements, check out our op-ed section, follow us on Twitter and Facebook, or sign up for our daily Opinion newsletter.
If you're interested in joining conversations about topics in USA TODAY, email letters@usatoday.com, comment on Facebook or use #tellusatoday on Twitter.
Letters are edited for accuracy, clarity and length and to conform to our editorial style and standards.
Submissions of 200 words or fewer have the best chance of being published.
Letters must include a name, address and phone number.
Corrections to published letters or columns follow USA TODAY guidelines.
She had fun learning the chants that fans perform at football games.
“I knew that I was in a safe space.”
This has in the past two years become an important consideration for college-bound students from all backgrounds and beliefs.
The digital tables also list, for every four-year institution in the country, such things as racial and gender diversity among students and faculty, the number of student veterans enrolled, the incidence of on-campus race-motivated hate crimes, free-speech rankings and if the university or college serves many students from rural places.
Test our new College Welcome Guide:These tools offer a new lens on campus life.
Students have long picked schools based on their academic reputations and social life.
But with campuses in the crosshairs of the culture wars, many students are now also taking stock of attacks on diversity, course content and speech and speakers from both ends of the political spectrum.
They’re monitoring hate crimes, anti-LGBTQ+ legislation, state abortion laws and whether students like them ‒ Black, rural, military veterans, LGBTQ+ or from other backgrounds ‒ are represented and supported on campus.
When they look at colleges in various states now, she said, “There are students who are asking, ‘Am I really wanted here?’”
For some students on both sides of the political divide, the answer is no.
In the chaotic new world of American colleges and universities, many say they feel unwelcome at certain schools, while others are prepared to shut down speakers and report faculty with whose opinions they disagree.
It’s too early to know how much this trend will affect where and whether prospective students end up going to college since publicly available enrollment data lags real time.
But there are early clues that it’s having a significant impact.
One in 4 prospective students has already ruled out a college or university for consideration because of the political climate in its state, according to a survey by the higher education consulting firm Art & Science Group.
Among students who describe themselves as liberal, the most common reason to rule out colleges and universities in a particular state, that survey found, is because it’s “too Republican” or has what they consider lax gun regulations, anti-LGBTQ+ legislation, restrictive abortion laws and a lack of concern about racism.
Students who describe themselves as conservative are rejecting states they believe to be “too Democrat” and that have liberal abortion and gay rights laws.
Of these, 8 in 10 say they would prefer to go to a state with greater access to reproductive health services.
“We have many young women who will not look at certain states,” said Levine.
One of her own clients backed out of going to a university in St. Louis after Missouri banned almost all abortions following the Supreme Court’s Dobbs decision, she said.
Institutions in Alabama, Florida, Louisiana and Texas are the most likely to be knocked off the lists of liberal students, according to the Art & Science Group survey.
They’re generally most likely to steer clear of the South and Midwest, while conservative students avoid California and New York.
One in 8 high school students in Florida say they won’t go to a public university in their own state because of its education policies, a separate poll, by the college ranking and information website Intelligent.com, found.
“You are attacking kids who are already vulnerable,” said Javier Gomez, an LGBTQ+ student in his first year at Miami Dade College.
It’s not yet evident whether the new laws are affecting where LGBTQ+ young people are choosing to go to college, said Casey Pick, director of law and policy at The Trevor Project, which supports LGBTQ+ young people in crisis.
But LGBTQ+ adults are moving away from states passing anti-LGBTQ+ laws, she said.
And “if adult employees are taking this into account when they decide where they want to live, you can bet that college students are making the same decisions.”
“The real attack here is on the feeling of belonging,” said Jeremy Young, who directs the Freedom to Learn program at PEN America, which tracks laws that restrict college and university diversity efforts and teaching about race.
“What it really does is hoist a flag to say to the most marginalized students, ‘We don’t want you here.’”
More than 40% of university and college administrators say the Supreme Court ruling curbing the use of affirmative action in admissions will affect diversity on their campuses, a Princeton Review poll found as the school year was beginning.
College students of all races and political persuasions report feeling uncomfortable on campuses that have become political battlegrounds.
It found that those who answer in these ways are more likely to frequently experience stress and more likely to drop out.
Nearly two-thirds say that faculty and administrators don’t understand the challenges they face, and 70% say the same thing about their non-veteran classmates.
Colleges should be “safe and affirming spaces,” said Pick, of the Trevor Project ‒ not places of isolation and alienation.
Of those, 72% say they worry their opinions would be considered unacceptable by classmates and 45%, by their professors.
Conservative students are less likely than their liberal classmates to believe that all points of view are welcome and less willing to share theirs.
“Is that really an intellectually diverse environment?” asked Sean Stevens, director of polling and analytics at the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression, or FIRE, which has launched a campus free-speech ranking based on students’ perceptions of comfort expressing ideas, tolerance for speakers and other measures.
“Anecdotally and from personal experience, there’s certainly a pocket of students who are weighing these factors in terms of where to go to college,” Stevens said.
Eighty-one percent of liberal students and 53% of conservative ones say they support reporting faculty who make comments that they find offensive, the same survey found.
It used sample comments such as, “There is no evidence of anti-Black bias in police shootings,” “Requiring vaccination for COVID is an assault on individual freedom” and “Biological sex is a scientific fact.”
A professor at Texas A&M University became the subject of an investigation when a student accused her of criticizing the state’s lieutenant governor during a lecture, though she was ultimately exonerated.
An anthropology lecturer at the University of Chicago who taught an undergraduate course called “The Problem of Whiteness” said she was deluged with hateful messages when a conservative student posted her photo and email address on social media.
More than half of all freshmen say that colleges have the right to ban extreme speakers, according to an annual survey by an institute at the University of California, Los Angeles; the College Pulse poll says that sentiment is held by twice the proportion of liberal students as conservative ones.
A group of Stanford students in March disrupted an on-campus speech by a federal judge whose judicial record they said was anti-LGBTQ+.
When he asked for an administrator to intervene, an associate dean for diversity, equity and inclusion confronted him and asked: “Is it worth the pain that this causes and the division that this causes?” The associate dean was put on leave and later resigned.
“Today it is a sad fact that the greatest threat to free speech comes from within the academy,” pronounced the right-leaning American Council of Trustees and Alumni, which is pushing colleges to sign on to its Campus Freedom Initiative that encourages teaching students about free expression during freshman orientation and disciplining people who disrupt speakers or events, among other measures.
“I have to imagine that universities that have a bad track record on freedom of expression or academic freedom, that it will affect their reputations,” said Steven Maguire, the organization’s campus freedom fellow.
Some colleges are now actively recruiting students on the basis of these kinds of concerns.
Colorado College in September created a program to ease the process for students who want to transfer away from institutions in states that have banned diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives; Hampshire College in Massachusetts has offered admission to any student from New College in Florida, subject of what critics have described as a conservative takeover.
Thirty-five have so far accepted the invitation.
Though many conservative critics of colleges and universities say faculty are indoctrinating students with liberal opinions, incoming freshmen tend to hold left-leaning views before they ever set foot in a classroom, according to that UCLA survey.
Fewer than 1 in 5 consider themselves conservative.
Three-quarters say abortion should be legal and favor stricter gun control laws, 68% say wealthy people should pay more taxes than they do now and 86% that climate change should be a federal priority and that there should be a clear path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants.
Prospective students say they are watching as new laws are passed and controversies erupt on campuses and actively looking into not just the quality of food and available majors at the colleges they might attend, but state politics.
Florida’s anti-LGBTQ+ laws prompted Javier Gomez to leave his native state and move to New York to go to fashion school.
“People ask me, ‘Why the hell are you back in Florida?’” said Gomez.
It’s overwhelming at times.
It can be very mentally depleting.
Sign up for our higher education newsletter.
Thousands of Israelis and Palestinians have been killed and Palestinians have been ordered to evacuate from the northern Gaza Strip ahead of Israel's impending ground invasion, leading to a humanitarian crisis that has brought protests from the United Nations and around the world.
The U.N. said about 1 million Gaza residents have been displaced in just a week, about half of them finding refuge in U.N. schools and other facilities where water supplies are diminishing.
The war has claimed more than 4,000 lives since Hamas launched an unprecedented surprise attack Oct. 7.
Meanwhile, the World Health Organization pleaded with Israel on Sunday to immediately reverse evacuation orders for hospitals in northern Gaza, saying the deadlines are impossible to meet and risk additional loss of life.
"Evacuation orders by Israel to hospitals are practically impossible to implement and are a death sentence for the sick and injured."
Here are several organizations that are providing aid to people caught in the conflict.
How to cope:The videos out of Israel, Gaza are graphic, but some can't look away
"Our members are speaking loudly and clearly about the values that unite our community: Opposition to this horrific violence, and a commitment to Israeli/Palestinian partnership on the path to ending it, and achieving peace and equality," the agency said in a statement.
The organization is asking for donations to improve access to essential services like water and to support livelihood projects.
Doctors Without Borders is a nongovernmental organization that describes itself as an "independent, impartial and neutral" charity that provides humanitarian aid to people affected by conflict, disease outbreaks and natural and human-made disasters.
The agency is seeking donations to continue to provide medical care in the area.
The agency has reported overcrowding in hospitals, a lack of medical supplies, and dangerous working conditions as it tries to support the thousands injured by the fighting.
UNRWA has designated shelters to host the estimated 127,000 people displaced in Gaza.
The agency is seeking donations to support its work.
The Jewish Agency for Israel North American Council, an American charity organization, is accepting donations to help victims of terrorism.
Save the Children issued an emergency alert in response to the conflict, noting that escalating violence has left 1.2 million children in need of humanitarian aid.
The agency is accepting donations.
National and international organizations that aid victims in the conflict include the Palestine Children's Relief Fund (PCRF), which works to provide lifesaving medical relief and humanitarian aid.
Founded by former President Jimmy Carter and his wife, Rosalynn Carter, in partnership with Emory University, The Carter Center is a humanitarian aid organization that has been promoting peace and a viable two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict for decades.
After Israel declared war, The Carter Center released a statement condemning the targeting of Israeli and Palestinian civilians and called for international action to end the violence.
Warning: This article contains graphic descriptions of death.
JERUSALEM − They don't agree on a lot of things.
They agree on this: What they have seen and had to do, no one should have to see or do.
Two weeks into the conflict that began when Hamas massacred civilians in rural communities and at a music festival on Israel's border with the Gaza Strip, Israelis and Palestinians have been collecting, weeping over and burying their dead with as much dignity as they can in trying, unpredictable and dangerous circumstances.
In Israel, where more than 1,400 civilians and soldiers have died and where all Jews are by religious tenet supposed to be buried immediately after death − a few days at most − this has involved emergency responders going to great lengths to recover bodies they have discovered in scenes of unspeakable horror, sometimes in places where fighting is still taking place.
In Gaza, where at least 3,500 Palestinians have been killed and large parts of the territory controlled by Hamas are in ruins as a result of Israel's bombing campaign, this has meant families resorting to makeshift graveyards dug in empty lots and authorities storing bodies in ice cream freezers as morgues fill up, doctors and witnesses say.
'I won't condemn Hamas':Some Palestinians find it hard to denounce attacks on Israel
On both sides of the Israel-Gaza border, faith traditions define the rules of burial.
For Jews, who believe the dead must be watched until they are buried and that every part of a body must be buried, the idea of unguarded remains is an almost unthinkable lapse.
Within the Muslim tradition, the body is wrapped in a shroud and the head is positioned to face Mecca with the eyes and mouth closed.
He filmed himself this week as he was driving in his car.
Across the back seat lay the body of his father, killed in one of those Israeli strikes.
Biden embraces Netanyahu:U.S. president says Israel must again be 'safe place' for Jewish people
"We have no funeral cars, no ambulances," he said.
I know people can't attend the funeral.
No one can.
But please pray for him.
Its mission is to collect the remains of the dead, including their blood if they can, so they can be buried in accordance with Jewish religious law.
He was in New York after the 9/11 attacks.
He has responded to natural disasters in India.
He has rushed many times to the scene of suicide bombings.
Israel-Hamas war:She spent her life advocating for Palestinian rights.
Then Hamas came
Yet Landau said that what he encountered in several of the kibbutzim that dot the front lines where Israeli civilians and soldiers were killed by Hamas on Oct. 7 was more than he could bear.
They were missing fingers and eyes.
In another home, he found a pregnant woman lying face down in a pool of blood.
Cellphone videos, security footage, photographs from residents and accounts of witnesses who survived the initial attacks have also helped establish with some specificity the brutality of the Hamas attacks on civilians on Israel's southern border.
But Israel's military has asked them to document it as part of the process of collecting evidence and in case it is helpful in identifying remains.
Hamas attacks:How Israeli police are trying to find the gunmen
On the grounds of the base were a series of refrigerated trucks and shipping containers.
Inside were dozens of filled body bags of various sizes − some of them very small.
Palestinian Muslims and Christians, like Jews, believe that the dead should be buried as quickly as possible, ideally within 24 hours.
The bereaved family typically hosts a meal and opens their home for three days for guests to visit and share their condolences.
Unsweetened bitter coffee is served.
Friends and family recount the life and qualities of the loved one.
In Gaza, there is now little capacity to observe these rituals.
One of the first photos he took was of a paramedic performing CPR on a wounded man.
At least 16 Palestinian journalists have been killed since Oct. 7, according to the Palestinian Journalists Syndicate, a nongovernmental professional organization.
"Who kills babies, who kills babies − free world, where are you?"
He stood in front of a stretcher on which lay six precious bundles.
Bloodied, bandaged and lifeless, their tiny bodies were covered in a fine gray dust from the exploded concrete and brick that killed them.
She said she wasn't able to join in a brief ceremony at the site because she was worried about the safety of her family and had decided to flee south, close to Gaza's border with Egypt.
Communication into and out of Gaza is exceptionally difficult because of diminishing electricity and virtually no internet access.
Thirty people, he said, were operated on without any anesthetic.
"For those that were killed we had to make a quick decision," he said.
The latest guilty pleas from two key allies in Donald Trump's high-profile Georgia election interference case put new pressure on the former president and raise questions about whether his once-loyal associates may one day flip on him.
Coming after a third defendant, Scott Hall, pleaded guilty in September, their deals bolster the weapons in prosecutors' toolbox, and may pressure other defendants to flip -- a move that would raise the legal stakes for Trump.
"It is ominous for the other defendants in the state or federal cases, above all Donald Trump."
"The defendant provided detailed instructions to co-conspirators in Georgia and other states for creating and distributing these false documents," she said.
Sixteen co-defendants in the Georgia case, including Trump, Eastman and Giuliani, have pleaded not guilty.
Powell, an election lawyer who spread baseless claims of voter fraud, pleaded guilty Thursday to a half-dozen misdemeanors associated with tampering with election equipment in Coffee County, Georgia.
Legal experts said Powell's agreement to provide testimony could have a weighty impact on the wider case because she had significant dealings with Trump, Giuliani, and others.
Powell can also describe how co-defendants tried to overturn the 2020 election.
She and Giuliani attended a raucous meeting at the White House with Trump, where they discussed having the military seize voting machines.
Trump never acted on the proposal.
Hall, a bail bondsman who served as a go-between for several of the co-defendants, pleaded guilty in September to five misdemeanors dealing with interfering with election duties.
Hall also made multiple calls to co-defendants in the case.
For example, Hall spoke with Jeffrey Clark, a former assistant attorney general, for more than an hour Jan. 2, 2021, according to the indictment.
Clark, who pleaded not guilty, is charged with drafting a letter of false statements about Justice Department concerns with the 2020 election, to be sent to Georgia officials.
Hall also spoke repeatedly with co-defendants accused of trying to intimidate election workers to change their stories about what happened with ballot counting at State Farm Arena on election night 2020.
Summer said McAfee would have to take the schedules for Trump's other criminal trials into account, as well as his attorneys' scheduling conflicts.
"Assuming he's acquitted in the DC case, I think then they'll probably specially set a trial for sometime after that, maybe the fall of 2024," she said.
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
But I was in here, for no reason.
“That really pissed me off.”
The Rangers absorbed the ultimate gut punch, from which almost every postseason club fails to recover.
USA TODAY Sports breaks down the most compelling figures from nine innings of drama:
The arc of the elite athlete can be fascinating: From fresh new thing, to consistent All-Star, to yesterday’s news.
Only when the athlete continues achieving the absurd, commanding the spotlight, bending the game to their will, do they appear intriguing again.
His home run Friday was the 26th playoff bomb of his career, second in major league history.
Yet with playoffs ever expanding and the postseason stretching five weeks when one once sufficed, these high-water marks can seem like statistical debris
That likely stood as his most significant of his 112 playoff hits.
Instead, they can spend the off day pondering how much better life is up 3-2 rather than down the same in a best-of-seven series.
No, perhaps the magnitude only grows the more times a legend does it.
“It’s literally an honor to take the field with him every single day,” says Bregman.
“I hope my 14-month-old son grows up to be the man he is.”
Yet it’s been six years since that scandal and four years since its revelation.
Friday’s moment came with a stunning sense of inevitability.
And Leclerc became the latest to get posterized in October.
“Otherwise, he’s going to rock your world.”
But Singleton’s stint has not been consecutive, his path diverted multiple times.
It’d be five more years before he got another one, catching on with the Milwaukee Brewers.
But he made the playoff roster and, despite having just seven at-bats since Sept. 13, had a feeling his number would be called as Game 5 unfolded.
Singleton would have his first.
Singleton was summoned to bat for the light-hitting Martin Maldonado.
Singleton didn’t swing the bat, even as Leclerc battled back from a three-ball count to run it full.
He got on base.
OK, it was just a walk.
But stars need table-setters and sometimes a championship team needs every man on its roster.
“Talk about two guys who hadn’t had many postseason at-bats really come through for us there
“It speaks to their character and their preparation they put in on a daily basis even if they’re not in the lineup every day.”
It would be far more impressive than that.
Then, he punched out Josh Jung and Nathaniel Lowe – who homered earlier – to end the threat.
The score would stay 4-2.
And Carter, the celebrated rookie, struck out swinging.
“But in situations like this, no, heck no, I don’t want that job.”
This game wouldn’t be complete without an ignominious figure or two.
Leclerc, sure, but he was taken far out of his comfort zone.
Garcia’s role in all this is minimal: He was simply hit by a pitch.
Yet for fans of a redemptive narrative, he certainly played the heel.
Garcia immediately got in catcher Maldonado’s face, assuming the pitch was retaliation – perhaps for Garcia’s emphatic home-run celebration, or extending from a beef between the two teams in July.
The benches cleared.
Players streamed from the dugout and clubhouse.
Nobody was pleased with that.
They considered Garcia “the aggressor there,” in his shouting match with Maldonado.
It was hard to find anyone agreeing with that last sentiment.
“You hit a ball like that, you're going to celebrate,” says Garcia through a club translator.
He got the chance to celebrate, do whatever he wants.
“Yes, of course it did,” says Maldonado.
They’ll have two shots to return to the World Series for a third consecutive year, all thanks to perhaps their most remarkable triumph in seven dominant years.
“It’s just a different animal in this clubhouse.”
A key border crossing between Gaza and Egypt opened Saturday to allow the first humanitarian aid to reach the besieged territory since the latest war between Israel and Hamas began.
Two weeks after the militant group Hamas launched a surprise attack in southern Israel and the country responded by sealing off and shelling the Gaza Strip where Hamas rules, a 20-truck convoy entered Gaza carrying desperately needed supplies.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza is catastrophic, international groups have warned, as Palestinians are rationing food, drinking dirty water and hospitals are overwhelmed with injured and running low on supplies.
Two trucks that entered Gaza from Egypt are carrying over 44,000 bottles of drinking water from the U.N. children's agency – a day's supply for 22,000 people, according to UNICEF.
Israel continues to launch strikes into Gaza that have leveled neighborhoods, and has warned of a coming ground invasion.
About half of the territory's 2.3 million Palestinians have fled their homes.
In Israel, more than 1,400 people have died — mostly civilians who died during the Hamas incursion.
U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken welcomed the first aid delivery but said more is needed, and said Hamas must not steal the aid or prevent it from getting to civilians who need it.
The amount of supplies entering Gaza Saturday pales in comparison to what was routinely sent into the occupied territory on a daily basis before the war started, Cindy McCain, executive director of the World Food Program, told The Associated Press.
Israel had previously said nothing would enter Gaza until Hamas released the over 200 hostages taken during its rampage two weeks ago.
The opening of the border came hours after officials announced Hamas had released an American woman and her teenage daughter, who were taken captive while visiting Israel.
It wasn't clear if the release of the hostages and the delivery of aid to Gaza were related.
∎ Fighting has intensified along Israel's border with Lebanon, with Israeli forces and Hezbollah fighters exchanging fire Saturday in several areas along the border.
Israel acknowledged the blast and said the church wasn't its intended target.
They were the first hostages released by the militant group, which took some 200 people captive in its rampage in southern Israel on Oct. 7.
They were in the hands of the Israeli military after being released, and Hamas said it released them for humanitarian reasons in an agreement with the Qatari government.
Their family hadn't heard from them since the attack.
President Joe Biden spoke with the mother and daughter Friday.
Her teen daughter recently graduated from Deerfield High School and loved art and animals, he said.
The State Department designated Hamas a terrorist group in 1997, and several other nations also consider Hamas a terrorist organization.
In 2006, Hamas won parliamentary elections, and in 2007 the group violently seized control of Gaza from the Palestinian Authority, which was controlled by the rival Fatah movement that still governs the West Bank.
There have been no elections since.
The group calls for the establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel and believes in the use of violence to carry out the destruction of Israel.
Hamas receives financial, material, and logistical support from Iran.
So far, however, the U.S. and other nations have said there is no evidence that Iran was directly involved in Hamas’ attack.
Contributing: The Associated Press
WASHINGTON – The Supreme Court on Friday tentatively sided with the Biden administration and agreed to decide a dispute about whether officials in the White House and federal agencies violated the First Amendment when they leaned on social media companies to suppress content about the election and COVID-19.
Amid a war between Israel and Hamas and a presidential election, the Supreme Court's move Friday allows the Biden administration to continue to interact with social media platforms such as Facebook and X to request that they remove disinformation.
By also agreeing to decide the underlying issues in coming months, the high court is once against thrusting itself into a divisive fight at the intersection of social media and the government.
"These are momentous, thorny issues, and how the court resolves them will have broad implications for the digital public sphere."
Without comment, a majority of the justices halted a lower court's order that blocked federal agencies from "coercing" social media companies like Facebook and X to take down or curtail the spread of social media posts.
Three members of the court's conservative wing − Justices Samuel Alito, Clarence Thomas and Neil Gorsuch − said they would have sided with the states and social media users who filed the lawsuit.
"Government censorship of private speech is antithetical to our democratic form of government, and therefore today’s decision is highly disturbing," Alito wrote in a dissent.
"At this time in the history of our country, what the court has done, I fear, will be seen by some as giving the government a green light to use heavy-handed tactics to skew the presentation of views on the medium that increasingly dominates the dissemination of news."
Second Amendment:Supreme Court blocks parts of Missouri law that declared federal gun prohibitions 'invalid'
The Republican state attorneys general who filed the lawsuit said they were pleased the litigation would be fully aired at the Supreme Court.
The court is expected to decide the case by the end of this term, which runs through June.
"We look forward to dismantling Joe Biden’s vast censorship enterprise at the nation’s highest court."
The Justice Department declined to comment on Friday.
But the administration has countered in its briefs that officials merely asked those platforms to remove harmful disinformation.
The decision to remove that content was ultimately made by the companies themselves, not the government.
Barring the government from flagging disinformation, the administration argued, could have enormous consequences for how Americans interact online.
“It is undisputed that the content-moderation decisions at issue in this case were made by private social-media companies, such as Facebook and YouTube,” the administration told the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court's action on Friday holds in place the status quo before the courts got involved, allowing the administration to proceed − for now − as it had been doing before.
By agreeing to hear arguments over and decide the underlying First Amendment questions in the case, the Supreme Court is once again thrusting itself into the messy and heated political debate over online content in the middle of a presidential election.
Born of conservative frustration with social media moderation practices, the lawsuit by the Republican attorneys general from Missouri and Louisiana and several individual users accused the administration of coercing the platforms to remove content that was unfavorable to Democrats.
That included posts about the 2020 election, the origins of COVID-19 and the Hunter Biden laptop story.
“When...federal agencies ‘flag’ Americans’ speech to social-media platforms to urge them to take it down, they induce platforms to take action against private speech that the platforms otherwise would not take,” the plaintiffs told the Supreme Court in a brief this month.
The intersection of social media and politics has emerged as significant theme for the Supreme Court this year.
Justices will hear arguments Oct. 31 in a pair of challenges dealing with whether public officials may block constituents on social media.
Separately, the high court will decide two suits challenging laws in Texas and Florida that would limit the ability of platforms like Facebook, YouTube and X to moderate content.
The state laws at issue in the cases, both of which have been temporarily blocked by federal courts, severely limit the ability of social media companies to kick users off their platforms or remove individual posts.
WASHINGTON – After House Republicans voted to drop Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, as their speaker nominee, a mad dash for the top job has started within the deeply divided House Republican conference.
After voting to abandon Jordan as their nominee by a vote of 112-86, GOP lawmakers are headed home for the weekend to recuperate after a chaotic series of events on Capitol Hill.
In the meantime, some Republicans have immediately declared their candidacy with others still considering a run.
House Republicans will hear from prospective speakers when they return to Washington for a candidate forum at 6:30 p.m. Monday.
The earliest the House could elect a new speaker is Tuesday.
Here's who is running for speaker or seriously considering a run.
3 ranking House Republican.
McCarthy still commands the respect of the vast majority of the House Republican conference.
He can unite the conference.
He understands the dynamics of the conference.
The Oklahoma Republican is chair of the Republican Study Committee, a caucus of around 170 GOP lawmakers making it the largest group of House Republicans.
Scott ran against Jordan in an internal vote within the House Republican conference to select a nominee.
Scott lost the nomination by a vote of 124-81.
"There's a lot of people that appreciated what we did," Scott told USA TODAY about his first speaker campaign.
With Jordan out however, Bergman immediately jumped in the race announcing his candidacy.
Rep. Mike Johnson, R-La., vice chair of the House Republican conference, is currently making calls considering a run for speaker.
Rep. Pete Sessions, R-Texas, also launched a bid for speaker immediately following Jordan's exit.
"Congressman Sessions believes he can forge a positive path as a conservative leader who can unite the Conference," Sessions' office said in a statement.
For the last four decades, invasive Burmese python snakes have terrorized mammals and the greater ecosystem of the Everglades National Park and throughout South Florida.
Now, a recent study shows what is biting back.
The Southeast Asian apex predator can grow up to 19 feet long, weigh more than 150 pounds and eat everything from rabbits to deer.
The pythons and their appetites are also blamed for the disappearance of almost all the fur-bearing mammals in the Everglades and surrounding areas.
A new study by the U.S. Geological Survey and partner organizations in Florida studied the deaths of 19 baby Burmese pythons from May 2021 to February 2022 to see how this part of the python population might meet its fate.
But studies like this provide data points to fill in the gaps of their life cycle.
"We need more information and are continuing to track juvenile pythons in Southern Florida to understand their ecology, particularly movement, habitat use, and survival."
Burmese pythons:Latest hunt netted over 200 of the invasive species in the Everglades
Burmese pythons are native to Southeast Asia.
They were imported to Florida to be sold to pet owners, and were likely released or escaped.
Since then, they have wreaked havoc on the natural environment, eating everything from rabbits to deer with few species being able to check the population.
The USGS estimates there are tens of thousands living in the Everglades.
A 2012 study showed that pythons' diets have drastically cut the populations of Everglades-area mammals.
Raccoon, opossum and bobcat populations had dropped 85%-99%, and rabbits and foxes had "effectively disappeared."
Humans may be one known predator of the python, but the recent USGS study shows there are more, at least for the babies.
More:Florida will teach you how to hunt, kill Burmese pythons.
Practice and you could get paid
Juvenile Burmese pythons were opportunistically collected throughout more than a year.
They were implanted with high-frequency radio transmitters equipped with mortality sensors that notified researches when the snake stopped moving for 24 hours.
During the length of the study, 19 baby snakes died.
At that point, scientists would go to the scene of the crime and conduct some detective work to discover the cause of death.
Here is what they found:
Among the deceased juveniles recorded as part of the study, one ambitious snake set a new record for pythons that size.
The study says this is notable in more ways than one.
While maladaptive behaviors are naturally selected out of the population overtime, the native species can also adapt to the invasive species in that time.
He said that the range of predators they found in the study was a pleasant surprise.
A cottonmouth snake, for example, would never be able to eat an adult python, but did consume one of the juveniles in the study.
"Our role as scientists is to try to tip the scales in the direction of the native species and identify the weaknesses of the invasive species that we can exploit for management purposes," he said.
Lauro didn’t provide the correct answer, which is this: all of them.
Criminal defendants have just as much disdain for prosecutors as the prosecutors have for them.
Their displeasure is expressed outside of court.
The only difference with Trump’s calling special counsel Jack Smith a thug is that no one was listening when these other defendants insulted their prosecutors.
Talking smack is part of the game.
It’s almost like the former public defender doesn’t understand defense.
A defendant’s rights may be in tension with the First Amendment rights of the news media, but that’s not what’s happening with the former president.
This isn’t even a situation where a lawyer’s speech is restrained.
That has happened in the past on occasion, such as the gag order in the trial of the Los Angeles police officers accused of beating Rodney King.
Those are the two situations that courts have reviewed in the past, but telling a defendant he can’t speak is unprecedented.
Judge issues partial gag order:Trump, who never shuts up, now has a gag order to whine about.
And you know he will.
While for some it might be wise not to testify in one’s own defense, some studies suggest an acquittal is more likely when a defendant tells their story.
Even if taking the witness stand in one’s own criminal case is ill-advised, defendants can't legally be stopped from speaking to protect themselves.
The Supreme Court has held that preventing someone from testifying in court in a case against themselves violates the due process clause of the 14th Amendment and the compulsory process clause of the Sixth Amendment.
There have been very few studies of the First Amendment’s role in criminal courtrooms.
It’s practically unthinkable.
Because criminal cases threaten an individual’s freedom and possibly life, courts have to give a defendant more leeway in speech.
That’s why in People v. O.J.
Simpson, there were no gag orders in the criminal case under former Superior Court Judge Lance Ito – Ito floated the idea but never followed through on it.
However, the judge assigned to the subsequent civil case filed by Ron Goldman’s family restricted speech of the parties in what has been called a “sweeping” order.
All that was at stake in those civil proceedings was civil liability – i.e., money.
If there’s a defense to be made, there’s no reason why the defendant shouldn’t be able to speak it.
In fact, for people whose freedom is jeopardized, the right to speak becomes even more important.
Don't obstruct sentencing reform:First Step Act advanced prison reform, but hundreds are still serving unjust sentences
The judge was correct when she said that the former president “does not have the right to say and do exactly what he pleases.” He doesn’t.
He can’t threaten people.
And laws exist to cover that.
They’re in the criminal code of every state and the federal government, and if law enforcement thinks Trump violated those statutes then he should be charged as anyone else would be.
Stopping him from speaking is stopping him from defending himself, and that’s something no judge presiding over a criminal case should ever be allowed to do.
Located approximately 70 miles from Charleston, the Moselle Estate House is private and secluded, surrounded by upland open fields and a mature old growth hardwood forest, the home's listing notes.
Crosby describes the listing as a "unique property" that could serve as a "a family residence or compound" or allow new buyers to engage in "equestrian pursuits, [a] hobby farm, or just a weekend retreat destination."
"The 4 bedroom / 4.5 bathroom residence is a sprawling 5,275 square foot home that exudes character, charm, and high-end finishes," says Crosby in a property listing.
The Moselle house, which stands out in its surrounding with a white outlook, is characterized by front and back porches.
Given its history, the property is bound to attract a lot of curiosity, but the Crosby Land Company explicitly states that all potential buyers must be pre-approved for purchase before visiting the home for a showing.
Broker Todd Crosby told The Daily Beast that though the house's notoriety may complicate the sale, his office is ensuring that all potential buyers are vetted “pretty hard” to make sure they are serious buyers and not just “being nosy.”
“I don’t care what the buyer’s deal is with the house,” Crosby told the media outlet.
The trial concluded on March 3, 2023, with Judge Clifton Newman sentencing him to two life sentences.
The petition was approved on Tuesday.
Reach her at sshafiq@gannett.com and follow her on X, formerly Twitter, @saman_shafiq7.
A fun outing at a pecan festival in Texas took a scary turn when a gust of wind launched a carnival ride car into the air and left its operator dangling 30 feet above the ground.
A strong gust of wind suddenly propelled the car into the air with Juliana inside as the ride operator held onto the door to keep it shut and protect her, the station reported.
He managed to do that all while the compartment turned 180 degrees and stalled 30 feet from the ground.
Now he's being hailed as a hero.
Video:Day of adventure turns into nightmare for Canadian amusement park riders
As he went to close the door he just kind of flew up with it.
It "felt like the longest time of my life," before employees were able to get the ride's motor going and lower the ride, bringing both the operator and Juliana to safety.
Just before that the employees quickly removed a handful of children who were in a ground-level compartment of the ride.
The Bullet was shut down for the rest of the event.
A spokesperson for the festival organizer, the Groves Chamber of Commerce, told USA TODAY on Wednesday that the ride operator was fine and that they are not aware of any injuries.
Organized by the Groves Chamber of Commerce since 1969, the Groves Pecan Festival is a community-wide celebration that coincides with the yearly pecan harvest.
Pecans are an integral part of the Groves landscape and have been a focal point for community growth, the chamber of commerce says.
A spate of recent incidents related to amusement rides and attraction has left riders stuck or injured.
On Sept. 29, an 8-year-old boy sustained significant injuries when he was "sucked out" of his seat on a ride called The Storm at the State Fair of Virginia.
In August, guests were forced to walk down a 200-plus-foot roller coaster at Cedar Point in Sandusky, Ohio after the ride known as the Magnum XL experienced a mechanical issue.
Just two days before that, a North Carolina amusement park closed one of its rollercoasters after guests noticed a crack in a support pillars and video showed pieces moving out of place as cars moved along the tracks.
Reach her at sshafiq@gannett.com and follow her on X, formerly Twitter, @saman_shafiq7.
PHOENIX — The Philadelphia Phillies spent the whole winter thinking about just how close they were to a World Series title last October before falling just short.
They spent the entire summer knowing there’s only one destination that would ever be acceptable in October.
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
Four batters later, Gabriel Moreno lined a single into center field, providing the D-backs with a dramatic comeback victory.
He was instantly removed with Ryan Thompson becoming their sixth pitcher of the game, leaving the D-backs without a lefty for the rest of the game.
The Phillies wasted no time capitalizing.
He threw off-balance home, but the ball got away from catcher Gabriel Moreno, and by the time he retrieved it, two runs scored for a 4-2 lead.
Oh, has it ever.
Here's how Game 4 unfolded (by USA TODAY Sports staff):
Alvarado fell behind 3-0 on Gabriel Moreno and on the fifth pitch, Arizona's young catcher lined an RBI single to give the D-backs the lead.
Rivera was charged with a throwing error on the play in the top of the sixth.
With runners on second and third and one out, Ryan Thompson struck out J.T.
It was catcher J.T.
The Diamondbacks left field robbed Phillies catcher J.T.
Game 4 of the NLCS on Friday is scheduled to begin at 8:07 p.m.
ET, airing on TBS.
The LHP started 18 games for Philadelphia this season, going 3-5 with a 3.44 ERA and 96 strikeouts.
Sánchez last started Sept. 24 against the New York Mets, earning the win after allowing three hits and two runs, while striking out 10 in seven innings.
The LHP gave up three runs in less than an inning of relief in Philadelphia’s Game 2 win, but he was spotless in the NLDS and NL wild card series, allowing no hits in 2 ⅔ innings.
For the second consecutive game, the roof at Chase Field in Phoenix will be closed.
With temperatures around 102 degrees for the first pitch, scheduled for shortly after 5 p.m. local time, Game 4 of the NLCS will once again take place in an enclosed environment.
And only T-Mobile Park was less homer-friendly with a closed roof, with the Mariners' stadium yielding 68 home runs to the Chase Field's 78.
The D-backs’ 25-year-old rookie was pitching the greatest game of his career Thursday and had given up just two hits, striking out nine, while throwing just 70 pitches in 5⅔ shutout innings.
I have a strategy for everything that's done.
Everything that's done has been well talked about.
It's not just analytics.
I know how quickly playoff baseball can change.
I am prepared to get second-guessed.
“That’s crazy, it’s like, are you kidding me?”
In May, the chair’s armrests were damaged after a flight on Southwest Airlines, but the device was still usable.
“I just started crying, I was so upset, I said, ‘how could you do this?’ ” she said.
“I was numb, I was just in shock.”
United Airlines acknowledged the incident in a statement to USA TODAY.
I can’t go to the grocery.
“I asked them how am I going to get to work, how am I going to continue to be able to put food on the table for my family if I can’t get around?” she said.
She said the whole situation makes her feel unwanted by the travel industry.
“I just feel even more angry that we are isolating this whole section of society who otherwise would be productive and moving around and working … It’s almost like a fear mechanism you’ve created that prevents people from doing what they need to do,” she said.
According to the Department of Transportation, airlines "mishandle" on average about 1.5% of the mobility equipment they transport.
In 2022, that translated to 11,389 incidents reported by U.S. airlines, up from 7,239 in 2021.
This year, USA TODAY wants to highlight what those figures mean for travelers with disabilities.
We're looking to track these incidents throughout 2023 with the goal of bringing light to an all-too-common problem.
If your own mobility equipment was damaged or lost by an airline this year, please share your story with us using the form below:
You can reach him at zwichter@usatoday.com
While much of the world races to put keyboards on as many instruments as possible, one state has just made a law to ensure that students are taught how to put pen to paper.
Gavin Newsom signed into law a bill that requires the teaching of cursive writing across the state.
California Assembly Bill 446 amends the state's education code to include, "instruction in cursive or joined italics in the appropriate grade levels," for grades one through six.
“A lot of the historical documents going back two or three decades are actually in cursive,” Quirk-Silva, a former elementary school teacher, said.
While the teaching of cursive may feel anachronistic, the skill may help expand the ability of students to learn.
A 2020 study from the Norwegian University of Science and Technology found that students writing in cursive activated different electrical activity in the brain as compared to typing and argued that "young children should learn to write by hand successfully, and, at the same time learn to manage to write on a keyboard."
Open polluting:New California law will require large corporations to reveal carbon emissions by 2026
While California is the latest to add cursive back into its educational standards, it is not alone.
17 states have laws on the books requiring cursive to be taught.
Here they are:
The crowd at the historically Black Catholic university's Convocation Center rose to its feet for the 22-year-old graduating with a biology degree and a Spanish minor.
A man fatally shot by Georgia police during a traffic stop had previously served 16 years in prison after a wrongful conviction.
A Camden County deputy pulled 53-year-old Leonard Allan Cure over at about 7:30 a.m. Monday on Interstate 95, according to a statement issued by the Georgia Bureau of Investigation.
The bureau says that Cure got out of his car upon the deputy's request and otherwise complied until he learned he would be arrested.
"After not complying with the deputy's requests," the deputy stunned him with a Taser.
After that, "Cure assaulted the deputy," who used a baton and again a Taser on Cure, the bureau said.
The deputy was not injured.
'A nightmare':Man who nearly got death penalty for murder he didn't commit is declared innocent
The Georgia Bureau of Investigation told USA TODAY on Tuesday that the deputy pulled Cure over for reckless driving and speeding.
The Camden County Sheriff's Office told USA TODAY that Cure was speeding at 90-plus mph.
On Wednesday, the sheriff's office released patrol car and body camera videos of the fatal incident
The officer who the Los Angeles Times confirmed to be Staff Sgt.
Buck Aldridge, can be seen pulling Cure over.
Aldridge asks Cure to get out of the car, which he does, but he then refuses to put his hands on the truck.
“I ain’t doing s---,” Cure can be heard telling the deputy.
The exchanged gets tense quickly as Aldridge tells Cure that he'll use a stun gun if he doesn't comply.
Cure complies and asks why he's being pulled over.
The speed limit was 70 mph.
Cure ignores the Aldridge command and the officer tases him.
The shock from the taser causes Cure to flail before turning around and grabbing the officer.
The two get into a physical fight on the side of the highway.
Both had their hands around the others neck.
Aldridge hits Cure with baton, but he doesn't let go.
Then a shot can be heard, and Cure falls to the ground.
The deputy, yells at him to stay down, before getting on the radio and calling for help.
“Shots fired, suspect down!” Aldridge says.
Emergency personnel show up and try to revive Cure, but he's pronounced dead at the scene.
Cure was arrested on Nov. 20, 2003 in Florida on charges of robbery with a firearm and assault with a firearm, according to the Florida Innocence Project.
His arrest stemmed from the robbery of Walgreen's in Dania Beach after one of the victims picked him out of a line-up.
The jury in his first trial was deadlocked, but a second jury found Cure guilty.
He was sentenced to life in prison in 2004.
In 2020, the Broward State Attorney’s Office's Conviction Review Unit asked a judge for his release, the Sun Sentinel reported.
A judge vacated Cure's convictions in 2020, exonerating him and ordering his release from prison after 16 years.
Ron DeSantis signed a claims bill in June that awarded Cure $817,000 in compensation for the wrongful imprisonment.
Here's what they do.
More:A real life Training Day: A corrupt cop lead to nearly 200 wrongful convictions
The Florida Innocence Project did not respond to USA TODAY's request for comment but in a statement to the Associated Press, executive director Seth Miller said he was devastated by the news of Cure's death.
“I can only imagine what it’s like to know your son is innocent and watch him be sentenced to life in prison, to be exonerated and ... then be told that once he’s been freed, he’s been shot dead,” Miller said.
Cure's mother said she was heartbroken by the loss of her son who said he lived in constant fear of being arrested and imprisoned again.
The family said shooting Cure was unnecessary.
“I don’t feel, no matter what happened, that he should have been killed,” Mary Cure said.
Cure's family acknowledged that he did become a "bit physical" but for the most part was compliant.
“The officer just triggered him,” Cure's brother Michael said.
“It was excitement met with excitement.”
USA TODAY was not able to independently verify the claims.
“He really should be alive,” Cure's brother Michael said.
In a statement posted to Facebook, Broward State Attorney Harold F. Pryor said that Cure was the first person exonerated by his office's Conviction Review Unit.
"The Leonard we knew was a smart, funny and kind person," Pryor said.
"After he was freed and exonerated by our office, he visited prosecutors at our office and participated in training to help our staff do their jobs in the fairest and most thorough way possible."
Pryor said that Cure would frequently check in on the head of the review unit "and offer our team encouragement to continue to do the important work of justice."
"He had been working a job in security, he was hoping to go to college and wanted to work in broadcast radio production, he was buying his first home," he said.
"We send our sincerest condolences to his family and all who knew him."
The sheriff's office said Aldridge has been placed on administrative leave.
The Georgia Bureau of Investigations is still investigating the fatal shooting.
The bureau will send it's finding to Brunswick Judicial Circuit District Attorney Keith Higgins.
Higgins who met with Cure's family on Wednesday, will ultimately decide whether to pursue charges against Aldridge.
After 75-year-old Bay View, Wisconsin, resident Paul Bailey won a gun auction through GunBroker.com in August, he received a UPS tracking number for the package and awaited his new gun's arrival.
Although last week’s confrontation between Kathy and Theresa spilled over into Thursday’s Episode 4, it was Theresa who got the final rose as Kathy said her goodbyes and left the mansion.
For Kathy, she has no regrets about her “Golden Bachelor” experience.
She added, “At the end of the day, I only wish Theresa well.”
While Kathy was only one of three women who didn’t make the cut Thursday night, she said she wasn’t surprised by Gerry’s decisions.
Kathy also emphasized that she came to the show with the intention of falling in love.
There's no doubt about it.
Look, I was married.
Happily married, almost 46 years.
A few years ago, she committed to saying “yes” to adventures and new opportunities.
I believe that you can find love on this show.
We only get one go-round here.
So I think that hopefully that America will see that life isn’t over at 60.
For many of us, it’s a second chance at love.
And if the opportunity came knocking to perhaps be a “Golden Bachelorette”?
“Of course I would do it,” Kathy said.
“But you know, I question whether they could find 22 guys who could keep up with me!”
More:'The Golden Bachelor' contestants: Meet the six women still vying for Gerry Turner's roses
She likes food, cuddles and television.
If you participate all three laid-back activities with the lazy lady, you'll need to turn the TV volume up.
Per Guinness, that's the equivalent sound to a kettle boiling.
Dog ingests meth on walk:Woman’s dog accidentally eats meth while on walk, she issues warning to other pet owners
She and her daughter (Bella's human sister) downloaded an app on their phone which recorded Bella’s purr.
Guinness measured the purr, and Bella's vocals claimed the win.
"She's a stubborn little old lady, and she does how she pleases," human mom told Guinness.
"It is very much Queen Bella's world."
But it didn't take much to get her unique vocals rumbling with content.
Just a bowl of her favorite Whiskas cat food.
Reach her at nalund@usatoday.com and follow her on X @nataliealund.
Editor's note: Part one of a five-part USA TODAY series revealing why America hasn't solved its long struggle with Type 2 diabetes.
For chef Robin Ray, newly married with young stepchildren, the turning point came when a stabbing chest pain sent her rushing to the emergency room.
“I didn’t think you’d make it,” the doctor said.
The moments were turning points for all three to get serious about addressing their diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes, in which the body can’t properly regulate blood sugar, has become so common it’s almost considered inconsequential.
More than 1 in 10 Americans have the disease (though many don't know) and another nearly 4 in 10 are at risk for it.
In total, half of all adults and a quarter of teenagers have diabetes or pre-diabetes.
Its financial costs are astronomical.
The country spends more than $300 billion a year to address diabetes, accounting for $1 out of every $4 spent on health care.
And its personal tolls are even worse: heart attacks, amputations, blindness, kidney disease, double the risk of premature death.
It also causes what’s known as “diabetes distress,” the daily burdens and emotional toll of living with and managing a chronic ailment that can lead to regular dips in energy, foggy thinking and depression, and a sense of isolation.
The most frustrating aspect of Type 2 diabetes, experts say, is that it has long been largely preventable and controllable.
“We have made tremendous gains in understanding diabetes,” said Dr. Donald Berwick, a pediatrician and former administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Roughly 40% of people who died early in the coronavirus pandemic had Type 2 diabetes, a rate four times higher than people without the disease.
Even when elevated blood sugar levels are below the threshold for type 2 diabetes, the risk for heart disease jumps 30% to 50% compared with people with normal blood sugar levels.
(Type 1 diabetes, which accounts for 5% to 10% of diabetes, is caused by the immune system and is unrelated to diet or lifestyle.)
America’s failure to address Type 2 diabetes highlights larger problems with our food and medical systems, Berwick and other experts said.
A soda costs less than a bottle of water, a double cheeseburger and fries less than a carton of blueberries.
Patients wait months for medical appointments only to see the back of a white coat for the short time they’re allotted.
Treating disease costs society far more than preventing it but typically provides more profit for insurance companies, hospitals and the pharmaceutical industry.
The USA TODAY Health team spoke with scores of health care providers, researchers, community leaders and patients for this five-part series to understand why Type 2 diabetes continues to worsen in America despite known solutions.
The answer isn't simple.
It involves systemic problems facing everyone in society, not just those with diabetes: a food system designed to sell products; a medical system in which cutting off a leg is less expensive than saving it; the high cost of healthy living and the fact that breaking habits takes a lot more than just personal willpower.
This first story looks at what it takes for people to cope with or overcome the disease.
Then, we explore one community in a David vs. Goliath battle against a food system that fails to prioritize people's health.
More in series:Diabetes runs deep in rural Mississippi.
Locals have taken to growing their own solutions.
We next travel to Colorado, which has the lowest level of diabetes in the nation.
Yet even in this state, where hiking trails and gorgeous views abound, economic and other disparities make it easier for some people to avoid diabetes than others.
More in series:A diabetes disparity: Why Colorado's healthy lifestyle brand isn't shared by all
It's tough to manage a chronic illness in the face of high medical costs, scattered care and caregiver frustration and burnout, so we highlight that next.
More in series:The steep cost of Type 2: When diabetes dragged her down, she chose to fight
Finally, we explore solutions, addressing why it will take a combination of education, medication, medical devices and improved food access to solve this national problem.
More in series:Solutions exist to end the Type 2 diabetes dilemma but too few get the help they need
But it will take "sensible action" from across many sectors, including health care, science, nutrition, business, public health and politics to change the financial and other incentives that drive so many Americans toward sickness instead of health.
"If we do it incrementally or don't do it at all, we're all going to be toast in 50 years from diet-related illnesses and a depleted environment."
There’s no question personal responsibility plays a role in fighting diabetes.
They’ve reduced their dependence on daily medication and hope to have saved themselves the horrors of more amputations, blindness and dialysis.
They’ve extended their lives and improved the quality of that time.
But like many medical problems, the challenges of diabetes go well beyond individual responsibility and blame.
Agarwal recently led a series of studies in the journal The Lancet that looked at diabetes rates around the world.
Poverty, the studies showed, was a major driver of diabetes, along with racism and unequal access to healthy food and high-quality medical care.
Personal stories illustrate how these structural issues play out in the lives of so many Americans.
 “I’m healthy because of privilege – not diet, not exercise, not determination,” he said.
“It’s going to be all right after a while, as long as I keep this spirit,” he said.
Ray’s love for food began when she was 8 years old, watching Julia Child on TV.
During family gatherings, she would run around taking everyone’s dinner order.
Then she’d scurry back to the kitchen with a notepad full of scribbles.
Throughout her life, she made fried chicken, pork chops, baked mac and cheese, collard greens, and even a whole roasted chicken filled with wild rice and two sticks of butter – everything that made her soul sing.
In her world, food was home.
Food was family.
Food was love.
But that was some pretty tough love.
In 2002, Ray was diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes.
Her father, grandmother, aunts and uncles all had diabetes.
She knew what it meant.
“For you to tell me I can’t have ice blue raspberry Kool-Aid was like you shut down my world,” Ray said.
She didn't dwell on the diagnosis and continued with life.
Her culinary career took her to Italy, where she learned and fell even more in love with food.
She returned to St. Louis, got married and became a mom to her husband’s two children ‒ “beautiful bonus babies,” as she described them.
Through the years, she continued to express love through cooking and eating.
In 2015, a stabbing chest pain sent her to the emergency room.
Doctors assured Ray she hadn’t had a heart attack, but they warned that her life was on the line.
At 5-foot-2, she weighed 334 pounds and had an A1C, a measure of average blood sugar of 11%, well above the 6.5% cutoff to be considered diabetic.
Her diabetes – and her diet – were out of control.
She and her primary care doctor decided she would pursue weight loss surgery.
But she also decided to use her culinary prowess to transform her diet.
She reconfigured favorite foods, substituting healthier ingredients: Collard greens cooked in smoked fats or ham hocks turned into a kale, turnip and rutabaga recipe flavored with natural chicken broth fat, oils and seasonings.
She fostered her feelings into new recipes and brought them to North Sarah Food Hub, which partnered with Barnes-Jewish Hospital to make packaged, pre-made meals for St. Louis residents with diabetes and limited access to fresh food.
“I became excited about food again, and food became a joy.”
It isn’t always easy, of course.
Ray admits to an occasional cookie craving.
But now she takes the time to think about how her body processes that cookie and whether it’s worthwhile.
She hopes her cooking can help other people make the same transformation she did.
Her staff at North Sarah helps her create new recipes for others.
She wants to provide nourishment that allows people to avoid illness and medicine.
The lifetime risk of developing Type 2 diabetes if a parent has it is 40%.
If both parents have it, the risk jumps to 70%.
He knew he was at risk, but he pushed his luck, he said, by eating poorly during the pandemic and falling out of his exercise routine.
With the luxury of working from home, walking to the kitchen and bathroom was often the extent of his daily activity.
On Feb. 14, 2022 – Valentine’s Day – he went to an urgent care clinic, concerned his breathing trouble meant he had bronchitis.
His blood pressure measured 210 over 110, well above normal levels that top out at 120 over 80.
A chest X-ray showed fluid filling his lungs, leading to congestive heart failure.
The clinic sent him straight to a local emergency room, where he was diagnosed with a blockage of the left descending artery – a clogged artery made worse by diabetes.
If he had waited any longer, he would have had a massive heart attack, his doctor later told him.
After his release from the hospital, he went to the drugstore to fill his new prescriptions.
The pharmacist told him she couldn’t fill one because it would cost $1,000.
He’d have to wait until his insurance approved it.
“Please fill it,” he said.
She stressed the cost.
“Fill it,” he pleaded, putting the charge on his credit card.
Medication helped him lose 70 pounds in three months.
When his local drugstore ran out of the weight-loss drug, he easily drove to another pharmacy and then another to find what he needed.
His 100 hours of high-quality cardiac rehabilitation were fully covered by insurance.
He could devote all his energy to getting well because he didn’t have to focus on how to afford his care.
When they finally show up in the emergency room, “because they will,” they will cost the system far more, he said.
On the day Haynes stepped on a rusty nail in 2019, he walked all day as the nail pierced the sole of his sneaker and then his foot.
By the time he took off his shoe that night, his foot was infected.
He landed in the hospital for two months as doctors and nurses tried, mostly unsuccessfully, to get the infection and Haynes’ blood sugar under control.
By the time he was released, he knew enough about Type 2 diabetes to realize his daily blood sugar levels – typically in the mid-400s – were four times above what he had been told to shoot for.
But nothing he did or ate seemed to make a difference.
He had long since traded ribs for salads, beer for water.
His wife, Angela, barely noticed when James started wearing multiple pairs of socks, pouring powder on his feet and buying bigger shoes.
His feet tingled a lot, he said, but he was coping with it.
James ended up in the emergency room again, dehydrated and in need of antibiotics.
The doctor amputated the baby toe on his right foot, leaving a large open wound.
“I didn't like that we're not going to try to save anything, we're just going to start cutting.”
James was fading.
Antibiotics left him looking sickly, his voice so weak Angela could barely hear him.
“I felt like I was watching my husband slowly dying,” she said.
She thought it would take months to get James in to see the heart disease specialist, but the office called and asked if they could come the next day.
“We started looking forward to these visits because there was always hope,” Angela Haynes said, though she felt guilty they were taking up so much of the important doctor’s time.
Haynes had blockages in blood vessels on both legs.
Once he got the blood flowing again, Haynes began to feel better.
His flesh returned to its normal color.
The wound started healing at last.
Walking became easier.
Then disaster struck again.
On July 2, 2022, Haynes caught COVID-19.
"Everything went downhill after that," he said.
During his 13-day illness, the bacteria in his foot raged out of control.
Every week, a surgeon would come to the door of his hospital room and before even stepping all the way in ask Haynes whether he had decided to get his leg amputated.
I was born with this.
He was worried about how he’d get around, how he’d be able to work to support his family if he had only one leg.
No one took the time to explain why they thought the leg needed to come off or how he’d cope without it, Haynes said.
In late November, he was finally sent home in a wheelchair.
Back at the hospital, Haynes was told his foot was broken, essentially beyond repair.
He agreed to a below-the-knee amputation.
Released right before Christmas, he spent the next three weeks in bed wondering how he’d manage the rest of his life.
Finally, it looked as if his luck might be turning around.
With the leg gone, his diabetes improved.
His blood sugar dropped into the 120s or one-teens.
His blurry vision cleared up.
During his long hospital stay, he befriended nurses and learned about a program for people who needed prostheses.
The man who ran it called early in the year and said he had received a donated leg.
If it fit Haynes, he could have it while waiting for insurance to pay for a personalized one.
Miraculously, it did.
Haynes spent the next six months teaching himself to walk again.
The donor leg was heavy and uncomfortable.
He wasn't mobile enough to hold down a job.
One late spring night, picking up dinner at a nearby restaurant, he headed to the bathroom for a pit stop.
A sink had been leaking all day and Haynes slipped in the puddle, falling backward.
He's still recovering from the resulting wrist surgery.
He and Angela are living – barely – off her part-time salary as a secretary and a church organist.
Haynes has tried "at least three or four times" to receive government assistance, but they keep losing his paperwork, or not believing he's disabled, though he once checked himself out of the hospital and arrived at an appointment in his wheelchair to prove he didn't have a leg.
Still, he clings to his faith and the positive attitude he has long used to cheer up himself and others.
These are his secret weapons against diabetes and everything else life throws his way.
"I try to put a smile on other people's faces," he said.
"It keeps my day going."
This story is part of a reporting fellowship sponsored by the Association of Health Care Journalists and supported by the Commonwealth Fund.
Our goal remains the same: Provide book lovers with the best, most accurate snapshot of what people are reading by showing which titles are selling.
It is a master list, unbound by genre and format, of what’s selling broadly across the U.S.
Her novel "It Starts With Us" claimed the No.
1 spot in its first week, her highest debut ever, selling more than 800,000 copies on its first day of sales.
It was her fourth book to hit No.
1 in 2022.
The USA TODAY list is a ranking of the top-selling titles each week from a broad range of businesses including major chains, independent bookstores and online retailers.
It reflects combined sales of titles in print and electronic format, if available.
Our data team weighs and compiles those numbers to generate the week's 150 top-selling titles.
The rankings reflect sales from the previous Monday through Sunday.
The full list will publish online at 6 a.m. Wednesdays, with the top 50 titles publishing in print Thursdays.
The list, which began in 1993, went on hiatus in December.
It is the longest-running USA TODAY data journalism project.
In our continued commitment to bring readers more books coverage, USA TODAY is also excited to announce a new content partnership with The Novel Neighbor, an independently owned and operated bookstore in St. Louis.
They are expert booksellers and passionate readers who are deeply connected to what their community is reading.
With the partnership will come regular profiles of independent bookstores across the country, highlighting the important role of these businesses in their local communities.
Novel Neighbor will also be sharing expert book recommendations and fun takes on book trends.
We can't wait to see what you've been reading!
Since the Israeli military ordered civilians to flee Gaza as it pursues Hamas militants, more than 1 million Palestinians have left their homes in the face of mounting airstrikes.
Vehicles carrying relief supplies stood motionless at Egypt's border with the Gaza Strip this week while locals and aid organizations begged for food, water and fuel for generators.
They said the tiny territory sealed off by Israel after last week’s rampage by Hamas was near total collapse.
Hundreds of thousands of Palestinians who had been forced from their homes were searching for bread.
Hospitals in Gaza were on the brink of power outages, endangering the lives of thousands of patients.
As an Israeli ground invasion seemed a certainty, Hamas militants continued their relentless rocket fire, and tensions grew along the Israel-Lebanon border to the north.
The Gaza power plant and power cables from Israel, which were Gaza's two primary suppliers of electricity, are no longer operational.
At the beginning of the siege, Israel cut off its supply of electricity to the city, and the power plant ceased operations almost a week ago because of a shortage of fuel.
Unable to view our graphics?
Click here to see them.
On Oct. 11, the Gaza Power Plant in Deir al-Balah, immediately south of the evacuation area, closed for lack of fuel.
And with the suspension of Israeli supplies, Gaza is now without energy.
Hospitals and other large facilities have backup generators, but when the fuel runs out, Israel's blockade will prevent new supplies from coming in.
Hospitals in Gaza "risk turning into morgues" without electricity, according to the International Committee of the Red Cross.
The death toll on both sides has surpassed 5,000, making the conflict the deadliest of five wars involving the narrow, densely populated strip of land bordering Israel, Egypt and the Mediterranean Sea.
SOURCE AP, UN Office of Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, USA TODAY research
A key border crossing between Gaza and Egypt opened Saturday to allow the first humanitarian aid to reach the besieged territory since the latest war between Israel and Hamas began.
Two weeks after the militant group Hamas launched a surprise attack in southern Israel and the country responded by sealing off and shelling the Gaza Strip where Hamas rules, a 20-truck convoy entered Gaza carrying desperately needed supplies.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza is catastrophic, international groups have warned, as Palestinians are rationing food, drinking dirty water and hospitals are overwhelmed with injured and running low on supplies.
Two trucks that entered Gaza from Egypt are carrying over 44,000 bottles of drinking water from the U.N. children's agency – a day's supply for 22,000 people, according to UNICEF.
Israel continues to launch strikes into Gaza that have leveled neighborhoods, and has warned of a coming ground invasion.
About half of the territory's 2.3 million Palestinians have fled their homes.
In Israel, more than 1,400 people have died — mostly civilians who died during the Hamas incursion.
U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken welcomed the first aid delivery but said more is needed, and said Hamas must not steal the aid or prevent it from getting to civilians who need it.
The amount of supplies entering Gaza Saturday pales in comparison to what was routinely sent into the occupied territory on a daily basis before the war started, Cindy McCain, executive director of the World Food Program, told The Associated Press.
Israel had previously said nothing would enter Gaza until Hamas released the over 200 hostages taken during its rampage two weeks ago.
The opening of the border came hours after officials announced Hamas had released an American woman and her teenage daughter, who were taken captive while visiting Israel.
It wasn't clear if the release of the hostages and the delivery of aid to Gaza were related.
∎ Fighting has intensified along Israel's border with Lebanon, with Israeli forces and Hezbollah fighters exchanging fire Saturday in several areas along the border.
Israel acknowledged the blast and said the church wasn't its intended target.
They were the first hostages released by the militant group, which took some 200 people captive in its rampage in southern Israel on Oct. 7.
They were in the hands of the Israeli military after being released, and Hamas said it released them for humanitarian reasons in an agreement with the Qatari government.
Their family hadn't heard from them since the attack.
President Joe Biden spoke with the mother and daughter Friday.
Her teen daughter recently graduated from Deerfield High School and loved art and animals, he said.
The State Department designated Hamas a terrorist group in 1997, and several other nations also consider Hamas a terrorist organization.
In 2006, Hamas won parliamentary elections, and in 2007 the group violently seized control of Gaza from the Palestinian Authority, which was controlled by the rival Fatah movement that still governs the West Bank.
There have been no elections since.
The group calls for the establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel and believes in the use of violence to carry out the destruction of Israel.
Hamas receives financial, material, and logistical support from Iran.
So far, however, the U.S. and other nations have said there is no evidence that Iran was directly involved in Hamas’ attack.
Contributing: The Associated Press
An Oct. 18 Facebook post (direct link, archive link) claims a major news outlet reported an American weapon was used in a fatal blast at a Gaza hospital on Oct. 17.
“The Wall Street Journal: The bomb dropped on the hospital was an American MK-84 bomb,” reads part of the post.
It was shared more than 800 times in two days.
Other versions of the claim were shared widely on Instagram and X, formerly known as Twitter.
Fact check roundup: Israel-Hamas war sparks many misleading claims online.
Here's what's true and false.
There is no reference to an MK-84 bomb in the Wall Street Journal’s reporting on the hospital blast.
A company spokesperson said the claim is false.
The outlet told USA TODAY the claim is false.
“The Wall Street Journal has not reported that an American MK-84 was deployed in the Gaza hospital blast Tuesday,” a company spokesperson said.
The outlet’s various stories on the incident make no mention of an American MK-84 bomb being used.
Rather, they highlight the dueling narratives from Israel and Hamas, each assigning blame to the other party.
Fact check: Photo of deceased children is from Syria in 2013, not Israel-Hamas war
Palestinian and Arab officials claimed an Israeli airstrike caused the fatal explosion, while Israel blamed it on a misfired rocket launched by the Palestinian militant group Islamic Jihad, according to the outlet.
The U.S. government has also said preliminary evidence suggests Israel was not behind the explosion.
The U.S. has sent munitions to Israel since Hamas' surprise attack on Oct. 7.
They include small-diameter bombs, interceptor missiles for Israel's Iron Dome defense system and artillery shells, according to the Department of Defense and the Associated Press.
USA TODAY has debunked an array of false claims surrounding the Israel-Hamas war, including that Hamas surrendered and Gaza now belongs to Israel, that video shows President Joe Biden announcing the reinstatement of the draft, and that University of Pennsylvania students chanted “We want Jewish genocide” at a pro-Palestinian protest.
USA TODAY reached out to users who shared the post for comment but did not immediately receive a response.
Thank you for supporting our journalism.
You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or e-newspaper here.
Our fact-check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook.
FORT DODGE, Iowa — Allison Roderick has a warning and a pledge for rural residents of her county: The water from their wells could be contaminated, but the government can help make it safe.
Roderick is the environmental health officer for Webster County in north-central Iowa, where a few thousand rural residents live among sprawling corn and soybean fields.
Many draw their water from private wells, which are exempt from most federal testing and purity regulations.
Roderick spreads the word that they aren’t exempt from danger.
The crowd at the historically Black Catholic university's Convocation Center rose to its feet for the 22-year-old graduating with a biology degree and a Spanish minor.
After 75-year-old Bay View, Wisconsin, resident Paul Bailey won a gun auction through GunBroker.com in August, he received a UPS tracking number for the package and awaited his new gun's arrival.
Week 7 of the 2023 NFL schedule comes in light, six teams (Bengals, Cowboys, Jets, Panthers, Texans and Titans) breaking for byes.
But a decent slate of games kicks off Thursday with the New Orleans Saints hosting the AFC South-leading Jacksonville Jaguars.
No international games this week, so Sunday starts at 1 p.m.
ET with a juicy matchup in Baltimore, the Ravens facing the Detroit Lions in a battle of first-place squads.
The "Sunday Night Football" nightcap is the biggie, the Miami Dolphins (5-1) visiting the Philadelphia Eagles (5-1) – decked out anew in Kelly Green – in the latest candidate for game of the year.
Who's 6-1 on Monday?
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Gannett may earn revenue from sports betting operators for audience referrals to betting services.
Sports betting operators have no influence over nor are any such revenues in any way dependent on or linked to the newsrooms or news coverage.
Terms apply, see operator site for Terms and Conditions.
If you or someone you know has a gambling problem, help is available.
Call the National Council on Problem Gambling 24/7 at 1-800-GAMBLER (NJ, OH), 1-800-522-4700 (CO), 1-800-BETS-OFF (IA), 1-800-9-WITH-IT (IN).
Must be 21 or older to gamble.
Sports betting and gambling are not legal in all locations.
Be sure to comply with laws applicable where you reside.
That left a lot of explaining for his media session before Wednesday’s practice.
Survive long enough as an NFL quarterback and there will be weeks like this.
Heat like this, with hot-take analysts suggesting the quarterback take a seat on the bench.
The Falcons (3-3) lost an eight-point game against Washington after two of their final three drives ended with picks by the second-year quarterback.
The other possession was rather ugly, too; the ball was turned over on downs that included a sack and two incompletions.
Was it accuracy or the play design?
Bad decisions or bad routes?
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
So, there’s little parts in that entire game – not only with myself but with the whole offense.
In rolling with a young quarterback, the Falcons knew there would be some turbulence along the way with this learning curve.
And the defense has improved, allowing them to stay in games.
Arthur Smith, the Falcons coach and play-caller, has fingerprints on this, too.
The Falcons’ operational process during the final minutes was a mess.
Atlanta probably uses as many personnel packages as any team in the league, which can help create matchup advantages but also requires frequent substitutions.
In any event, this stuck out as the issues piled up on Sunday.
Asked about the operational issues, Smith fired back with arithmetic.
"Two-thousand plays the last two years," Smith said.
They are all different.
I wouldn’t call that some catastrophic trend.
Now they shouldn’t happen.
But they’re all different, why they happened.
You identify the problem.
It’s what happened lately.
The mishaps on Sunday came with the game on the line.
"We can play this game all day," defended Smith, in his third season at the helm.
What about New York?"
"We’ve won a lot of games handling those situations," Smith added.
We’ve got to get it fixed.
This isn’t a trend, a runaway story.
Acknowledge what happened.
Smith pointed to the turnovers, maintaining that NFL teams this season have won just 6% of the games when committing three turnovers.
"Go back to Houston, and those guys executed pretty damn good," Smith said.
He summed it up as a matter of paying better attention to detail, yet he also acknowledged the challenges with communication….especially as the play-clock winds down.
It goes back to communication.
"He’s even-keeled," Pitts said.
It's possible the NFL has never looked cooler.
That was perfectly evident Sunday, when the Tampa Bay Buccaneers became the most recent team to throw it back, breaking out their beloved – beloved?
But that throwback comeback will hardly be the last – and if you don’t already know what’s coming in Weeks 7 and 8, you’ll be thrilled to see other classic uniforms coming out of mothballs.
Even better, some fresh fashion-forward alternates are also coming down the pike.
Naturally, not every team is successfully leveraging the new opportunities the league has afforded with the use of secondary helmets and alternate and/or retro color schemes.
So let’s take this haberdashery interlude to do a deep dive on NFL couture and rank the alternate uniforms from best to worst:
But Kelly should always be an option in Philly’s palette, and its 13-year absence has been far too lengthy.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Of heroes come and gone.
On this bridge between eras, it’s up to all of us to pass the torch.
This is not a throwback.
It’s our heart and soul.
It’s a very nice offset to the attention-grabbing highlighter-green alternates.
“Old gold,” black and white looks good in virtually any combination – aside from those regrettable gold jerseys they tried in 2002 – whether in a callback to the team’s earliest looks from the 1960s or the monochrome white or black combos utilized in the current era.
They’re now 3-0 in the “White Bengal” presentation – which finally includes a white helmet – after it debuted last year and returned in Week 3 against the Rams.
But the Titans have finally gone back to their roots and will even be shoving it in the faces of their H-Town replacements, the Texans, in Week 15.
"It's been a long time coming," said Hall of Fame Oilers QB Warren Moon, who also hopes the Titans will get to wear the jerseys in Houston someday in appreciation of those fans.
They finally came to their senses and brought back their slick J-E-T-S logo from the 1980s in the “Legacy White” package they’ve already used to honor the “New York Sack Exchange” twice this season – including opening night.
After that, let’s maybe consider an entirely radical logo – which actually incorporates the silhouette of a jet fighter – and slap that on your crowns while scrapping the dopey Stealth Black helmet introduced in 2022.
When it comes to the extra uniform – forgettable throwbacks or gray Color Rush – they’ve done alternate in pretty much the most forgettable ways.
Very cool way to commemorate what’s already becoming a memorable season between the lines for the NFC North leaders, not to mention the franchise’s 90th year as the Lions.
You could argue – and I have – no club has better unis.
Not only that, since moving back to LA and updating their closets in 2020, they’ve given themselves so many mix-and-match scenarios, in addition to the royal blue and navy (with corresponding helmet lightning bolt) Color Rush options.
(For the record, love the navy and white.)
Let’s commend them for maximizing the use – three appearances this season – of the retro red helmets and original logo with the black, white and gold striping mix meant to honor both the University of Georgia and Georgia Tech.
At least we won’t be subject to those vile gradient alternate jerseys in 2023.
Little reason to mess with something that’s practically perfect, but their deviations work well.
The “Steel Curtain” era throwbacks won’t pop off the screen, but the 1970s number font style is the giveaway.
Pittsburgh’s all-black Dark Knight look is among the best alternates going – especially when you consider the mistake it would be to revive some of the club’s awful appearances from yesteryear, bumblebees, shoulder swatches and whatnot.
Sunday afternoon, they’re going to roll out their new “Indiana Nights” one-off for 2023.
Couple of thoughts here.
They’ve added black helmets because Indy fans allegedly demanded them, and they play into the nocturnal theme – fine … aside from the fact the Colts have zero prime-time games this year.
Otherwise, this is fairly boss.
The secondary logo – with the state of Indiana serving as the center of the “C” for Colts on the shoulder is a plus.
But the “heather pattern” used for the blue-on-blue uniform – golfers will recognize it immediately – really distinguishes this get-up.
Never too far afield, their alternates provide truly nice subtleties.
And keep your eyes peeled for the perfectly pleasing and pristine purple-and-gold alternates.
It’s not quite as slick as the retro Jets, but Sunday night marked this season’s first usage of the block GIANTS logo – with the white Color Rush road treatment – Big Blue used for the final quarter of the 20th century.
But the Fins will be kitted in their original unis in Week 8 and again in Week 16.
They’ll continue wearing the duds – with shaded jersey numbers – the 1994 Super Bowl champions made famous, sporting the red version twice this season and the white roadies once.
Their 2020 rebrand has aged fairly well so far – doesn’t hurt when you win the Super Bowl in your new threads.
Let’s issue belated credit for this season’s very clean uniform reboot, the whites (with a new dash of silver) especially evocative of their long-gone days in St. Louis.
The alternate all-blacks, plus helmet, that debuted in Week 5 still seem extraneous.
But, fine, whatever.
Cardinals can only be so badass.
Their latest rebrand has gone so well … that new ownership is already mulling yet another one.
But the alternate black uniforms topped with the black lids are the least-objectionable aspect – the usage of the D.C. flag on the right shoulder (in burgundy and gold) and back of the helmet the deftest touch.
They're one of several old-school organizations that’s never embraced hindsight or foresight flair especially well.
The green jerseys with gold numbers paired with green pants in recent years have been a marked step forward … but another could be taken with a fresh second helmet to top it off.
Never been a huge fan of their 1960s-era throwbacks, whether home or away – and they’ll sport both this season.
In Monday night’s win, they topped it with their alternate white-shelled helmet adorned with the current star insignia.
They added a black helmet to the wardrobe last year and have evidently decided it would look better atop their “Panther Blue” jerseys than as part of a monochrome blackout.
Low bar, but agreed … not that it’s likely to help them win a game.
What is it with 1995 feline expansion teams?
Thankfully, the Jags are finding their way back from the black-and-gold, two-toned wilderness.
But nothing inspiring, or especially objectionable, in their black and (mostly) teal look at present.
They’ve got multiple ways to mix and match their various (dark) colors, the best alternate the purple on purple with gold jersey numbers.
The original logo Baltimore used from 1996 to ’98 was one of the busier ones in NFL history … and might be fun to break out periodically for nostalgic purposes – especially if we could see those ugly black pants with the fat white stripe from the days of Ravens yore.
The NFL’s youngest franchise is also the only one to never change its crest.
Tradition – yay.
But last year, the Texans really stepped out by adding a metallic “Battle Red” helmet to go with the alternate jerseys branded the same way.
This ranking is more a penalty that they’re not doing more than interspersing the alternate red jersey and pants.
Let’s mix that grazing bison from the AFL days into heavier rotation and work up another lid – meaning something more imaginative than just taking the red shells from the 1990s Super Bowl teams out of mothballs.
For years, pretty much everything they’ve touched has turned to horse scat.
Extend that to their attempt at merging their history with an edgy look.
It returns in Week 16 if you were fortunate enough to miss it the first time.
Let’s acknowledge there isn't much to do historically for a franchise that opted for a hideous color scheme and no primary logo.
While on some level we appreciate the Browns’ decades-long holdout on helmet symbology, couldn’t we bend that rule in the alternate space?
Stick with the winged University of Michigan knockoffs – yes, the Bears briefly wore them first in the 1930s – and call it a day.
In my most recent overarching uniform power rankings, their iconic look ranked No.
And, as expressed elsewhere, it’s sometimes foolish to mess with magnificence.
But the Silver and Black are being ranked last here mostly to put them on notice while serving a complacency penalty.
The white Color Rush and white throwback jersey (with silver numbers) they’ve utilized in recent years are totally ... fine.
But there’s a real opportunity to take their sinister look to a new, Darth Vader-caliber level a few times a year.
Black helmets with a chrome Raiders shield?
Seriously, Mark Davis, what are we waiting for here?
Commit to uniform excellence!
Pulling on the red pants is as frisky as they get, so no alternates or throwbacks to assess.
And a team based in K.C.
As far as anything in the pipeline?
“I think we have a very distinct brand with the red and white, and I don’t anticipate steering away from that any time soon,” owner Clark Hunt revealed this year, saying he also wanted to honor the wishes of his later father – AFL and team founder Lamar Hunt – who wanted uniform continuity.
Follow USA TODAY Sports' Nate Davis on X, formerly Twitter @ByNateDavis.
Indianapolis Colts quarterback Anthony Richardson will indeed undergo shoulder surgery that will end his rookie season after just four games.
Richardson suffered a reported Grade 3 AC joint sprain in his shoulder during a Week 5 win over the Tennessee Titans and was placed on injured reserve last week.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
He threw for 329 yards on Sunday against Jacksonville, but committed four turnovers in a 37-20 loss.
Joel A. Erickson of the Indianapolis Star, part of the USA TODAY Network, contributed to this story.
"So if you think you can intimidate me, go … suck it up, buttercup!"
Washington, D.C., was gridlocked this week as House Republicans failed to elect a new speaker.
The caucus nominated Jordan, an ultraconservative representative from Ohio.
But, she told reporters, she had concerns about whether Jordan could unify the party, and she was worried about the looming threat of a government shutdown.
"As soon as the vote was had in conference, and then, not two hours later, we had that coming out."
She cast her vote Wednesday for U.S. Rep. Kay Granger of Texas, a Republican who chairs the Appropriations Committee.
Jordan then lost a secret ballot and withdrew his nomination.
She anticipates House Republicans will successfully choose a speaker "next week."
"I have told everybody I’m not doing anything until Sunday."
Katie Akin is a politics reporter for the Register.
Reach her atkakin@registermedia.com.
Follow her on Twitter at @katie_akin.
The latest guilty pleas from two key allies in Donald Trump's high-profile Georgia election interference case put new pressure on the former president and raise questions about whether his once-loyal associates may one day flip on him.
Coming after a third defendant, Scott Hall, pleaded guilty in September, their deals bolster the weapons in prosecutors' toolbox, and may pressure other defendants to flip -- a move that would raise the legal stakes for Trump.
"It is ominous for the other defendants in the state or federal cases, above all Donald Trump."
"The defendant provided detailed instructions to co-conspirators in Georgia and other states for creating and distributing these false documents," she said.
Sixteen co-defendants in the Georgia case, including Trump, Eastman and Giuliani, have pleaded not guilty.
Powell, an election lawyer who spread baseless claims of voter fraud, pleaded guilty Thursday to a half-dozen misdemeanors associated with tampering with election equipment in Coffee County, Georgia.
Legal experts said Powell's agreement to provide testimony could have a weighty impact on the wider case because she had significant dealings with Trump, Giuliani, and others.
Powell can also describe how co-defendants tried to overturn the 2020 election.
She and Giuliani attended a raucous meeting at the White House with Trump, where they discussed having the military seize voting machines.
Trump never acted on the proposal.
Hall, a bail bondsman who served as a go-between for several of the co-defendants, pleaded guilty in September to five misdemeanors dealing with interfering with election duties.
Hall also made multiple calls to co-defendants in the case.
For example, Hall spoke with Jeffrey Clark, a former assistant attorney general, for more than an hour Jan. 2, 2021, according to the indictment.
Clark, who pleaded not guilty, is charged with drafting a letter of false statements about Justice Department concerns with the 2020 election, to be sent to Georgia officials.
Hall also spoke repeatedly with co-defendants accused of trying to intimidate election workers to change their stories about what happened with ballot counting at State Farm Arena on election night 2020.
Summer said McAfee would have to take the schedules for Trump's other criminal trials into account, as well as his attorneys' scheduling conflicts.
"Assuming he's acquitted in the DC case, I think then they'll probably specially set a trial for sometime after that, maybe the fall of 2024," she said.
“We are just a little young, going through our own version of adolescence, figuring out who we’re really going to be when we grow up.”
The other half, he suggested, will be to steer the policy agenda in Washington.
So what is the 38-year-old political newcomers vision for America's future?
Here's how his pitch impacts Americans across the country.
"There are certain people, good people, in this race, that will favor incremental reform of the federal government and the bureaucracy," he said.
I favor quantum leap change.
He said he’d opt to send the department's $80 billion in funding back to taxpayers to “economically empower” them to choose a school for their children.
“The correct answer is shut it down and give the power and the money back to the people.”
The same tactic was adopted by former President Jimmy Carter in the late 1970s but was not found to reduce costs and was later abandoned by former President Ronald Reagan.
Previously, the biotech entrepreneur has proposed allowing Russia to keep the Donbas region and requiring Ukraine to concede its attempts to join NATO.
He called for reopening relations between the U.S. and Russia and said that such an alliance would help counter China.
During a confrontation at the first GOP debate, for instance, former South Carolina Gov.
“Under your watch, you will make America less safe.”
The House of Representatives heads into its third weekend without a Speaker as Ohio Republican Jim Jordan failed to win enough votes for the third time this week.
The third round of balloting for the Speaker's chair saw 25 Republicans vote against the party's Speaker Designate.
Following the floor vote, Jordan was defeated in an internal, secret ballot vote to decide if he would remain the nominee 112-86, as reported by USA Today's Ken Tran.
Multiple Republican Representatives have come forward to put their names into the race as Acting Speaker Patrick McHenry told reporters that the "goal" is to have the next Speaker election on the floor on Tuesday.
Tuesday's Speaker of the House vote:See how all the members of the House voted in Tuesday's election
Democrats remained united behind Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries, with all present members voting for the New York representative for the third consecutive ballot, since the ouster of Former Speaker Kevin McCarthy.
To see how your reps voted, click on the state name to go directly to the state or scroll through the list below
Alabama | Alaska | Arizona | Arkansas | California | Colorado | Connecticut | Delaware | Florida | Georgia | Hawaii | Idaho | Illinois | Indiana | Iowa | Kansas | Kentucky | Louisiana | Maine | Maryland | Massachusetts | Michigan | Minnesota | Mississippi | Missouri | Montana | Nebraska | Nevada | New Hampshire | New Jersey | New Mexico | New York | North Carolina | North Dakota | Ohio | Oklahoma | Oregon | Pennsylvania | Rhode Island | South Carolina | South Dakota | Tennessee | Texas | Utah | Vermont | Virginia | Washington | West Virginia | Wisconsin | Wyoming
The upcoming Mega Millions drawing, scheduled for Oct. 20th, is set to award an estimated jackpot of $91 million to one lucky winner.
Don't miss your chance to play!
The numbers were drawn just after 11 p.m.
ET and we have the results below.
Here's a look at the winning numbers for Friday, Oct. 20.
The winning numbers for Friday night's drawing were 07, 29, 36, 49, 61, and the Mega ball was 22.
To be determined.
The full list of Mega Millions winners can be found on the lottery's website.
When purchasing a Mega Millions ticket, you have the opportunity to select six numbers.
The first five will be chosen from a range of 1 to 70 for the white balls, and the last number will be chosen from 1 to 25 for the coveted golden Mega Ball.
For those who find it daunting to pick their own numbers, the option to select Easy Pick or Quick Pick is available, which will generate the numbers for your ticket at random.
This decision could potentially increase your non-jackpot winnings by a factor of 2, 3, 4, or even 5 times.
Here are the top five Mega Millions jackpots:
Tickets can be purchased in-person at gas stations, convenience stores and grocery stores.
Some airport terminals may also sell lottery tickets.
Must be 18+, 21+ in AZ and 19+ in NE.
Not affiliated with any State Lottery.
Visit jackpocket.com/tos for full terms and conditions.
Two men visited New York Lottery headquarters to claim million-dollar prizes.
He purchased his ticket at S Grocery in Jackson Heights.
The New York Lottery is the largest and most profitable in North America, according to Lottery officials.
It contributed $3.7 billion in fiscal year 2022-2023 to support public K-12 education in New York State.
Long waited claim:New York woman comes forward to claim $12 million prize from a 1991 jackpot, largest in state history
Alternatively, players can opt to receive random numbers.
The non-jackpot prizes offered range from $4 to $1 million.
Tickets can be purchased in-person at gas stations, convenience stores and grocery stores.
Some airport terminals may also sell lottery tickets.
Must be 18+, 21+ in AZ and 19+ in NE.
Not affiliated with any State Lottery.
Visit jackpocket.com/tos for full terms and conditions.
A California man walked out of a store holding a $10 million lottery ticket, thanks to a clerk's recommendation after he couldn't decide which scratch-off ticket to buy.
Brent Young won his $10 million from the California 200X $30 instant game.
He bought the winning ticket at Prince Food & Gas on West Walnut Avenue in Visalia.
Young had no idea which game would give him the best chance of winning.
Feeling indecisive, he asked the clerk for help in picking a ticket.
It can be challenging for players to choose from over two dozen scratch-off games the California Lottery offers.
The clerk picked out a ticket from the $30 instant game California 200X.
After paying for his gas and lottery ticket, Young got to work scratching.
As he was about halfway through, he noticed that one of his numbers matched the winning numbers printed on the side of the ticket.
There was no mistaking it - the prize amount of $10,000,000 was printed in bold font.
"When I saw all those zeros, I was like, 'No way, this doesn't happen to people like me,'" Young told the Lottery.
Out of all those options, the clerk could have picked a different game, but he didn't.
Young was surprised to find himself at this particular retailer.
He typically purchased fuel and lottery tickets at a different gas station.
However, on that day, the other gas station was closed, so he had to stop at Prince Food & Gas instead.
"It's almost like God's intervention," Young told the Lottery.
I had no choice but to go to Prince's.
My usual stop was closed.
After federal taxes, he chose to receive the $5.8 million lump sum prize, and the owner of Prince Food & Gas received a $50,000 bonus for selling the ticket.
California 200X is a California-exclusive instant game where players can win up to $10 million.
After Young won the top prize, four out of nine $10 million prizes remain in the $30 California 200X game.
Additionally, nine out of 18 $750,000 second-tier prizes and 40 out of 92 $50,000 third-tier prizes, remain.
More:New York woman comes forward to claim $12 million prize from a 1991 jackpot, largest in state history
The overall odds of winning any prize in the game are 1 in 2.71.
The odds of winning the top prize are 1 in 3,041,187.
Tickets can be purchased in-person at gas stations, convenience stores and grocery stores.
Some airport terminals may also sell lottery tickets.
Must be 18+, 21+ in AZ and 19+ in NE.
Not affiliated with any State Lottery.
Visit jackpocket.com/tos for full terms and conditions.
Chick-fil-A has reportedly agreed to pay customers $4.4 million in rebates or gift cards to settle a class action suit filed against the chain for misleading delivery fees.
The Atlanta-headquartered company faced a suit filed earlier this month in U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Georgia alleging the company had been "deceptive and untruthful" in promising free or low-priced deliveries of orders via the Chick-fil-A app and website.
The six plaintiffs in the suit, two from Virginia and one each from Arkansas, Maryland, South Carolina and Texas, said the food chain added a "secret menu upcharge" for menu items being delivered that made the company's "promise of free or low-cost delivery patently false," according to the complaint.
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the restaurant chain charged a $4.99 delivery fee, the suit alleges.
But as the lockdown measures were issued early in the COVID shutdown, Chick-fil-A "claimed to reduce its delivery fee to FREE, $2.99 or $3.99," to boost business, the suit charges.
At the same time, the company "secretly raised its menu prices on delivery orders only in order to cover the costs of delivery and profit – without once disclosing the manipulation to customers," according to the suit.
As a result, food prices on deliveries were 25% to 30% higher, the suit charges.
An example in the suit: a 30-piece order of chicken nuggets would cost $5 to $6 more when ordered for delivery than when picked up or ordered at a restaurant.
Thanksgiving dinner:Popeyes Cajun-style turkey available to preorder for holiday meals
Chick-fil-A did not admit guilt in the case but will create a $1.45 million cash fund and $2.95 million gift card fund for consumers, the website Top Class Actions reported.
Chick-fil-A and attorneys for the plaintiffs did not return USA TODAY's requests for comment.
An unspecified number of customers are expected to get either $29.25 in cash or a $29.25 gift card from Chick-fil-A as part of the settlement, the Top Class Actions site reported.
If the settlement fund is not large enough to fund all claims, proportionate payments will be made, the site states.
Keep an eye on your inbox because those eligible for a reward will be notified by email.
Chick-fil-A agreed to give the settlement administrator the email addresses needed to inform class members.
If you divide the total of $4.4 million by the proposed $29.25 settlement amount, there's a potential 150,427 affected customers.
As part of the settlement, Chick-fil-A will also put disclosures on its app and website stating that prices on menu items may be higher for delivery orders.
“Plaintiffs allege that by omitting, concealing, and misrepresenting material facts about (Chick-fil-A's) delivery service, (the company) deceives consumers into making online food purchases they otherwise would not make,” the Chick-fil-A settlement states.
Chick-fil-A Class Action Suit | PDF | Legal Remedy | Misrepresentation
What's everyone talking about?
Sign up for our trending newsletter to get the latest news of the day
Grains show up in many parts of our day – cereals and bagels in the morning, sandwiches at lunchtime, rice at dinner or popcorn while watching a movie.
But while the quantity may not be an issue, the quality is: the U.S. Department of Agriculture recommends more of your grain intake be from whole grains than refined.
Here are the healthiest options within that whole grain category.
Grains are an important source of fiber, B vitamins, complex carbohydrates and minerals like iron, magnesium and selenium.
While all whole grains will provide these nutrients, there are a few that stand out.
Dietary fiber helps you feel fuller, aids in digestion and helps prevent constipation.
Research presented at the 2021 American Society for Nutrition conference found fewer than 1 in 10 U.S. adults meet their daily fiber recommendations.
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommend eating 28 grams of fiber per day based on a 2,000-calorie diet.
You’re also getting protein with these three options.
A serving of oats (100 grams) contains nearly 17 grams of protein and 10.6 grams of fiber.
For cooked quinoa, it’s about 3 grams of fiber and 4.4 grams of protein.
For comparison’s sake, the same portion of white rice contains about 2.7 grams of protein and 0.4 grams of fiber.
The USDA recommends at least half your daily grain intake be whole grains, which contain more vitamins and nutrients than refined grains.
The refinement process gives grains a finer texture and longer shelf life – we see this in cereal, white flour, white bread and white rice, for example.
Today, many refined grains are enriched, which means they add back nutrients like B vitamins and iron but not fiber.
Folic acid is recommended during pregnancy because of its role in DNA and RNA formation, but it’s important for everyone.
The benefits of folate include improved digestive system functioning and preventing common cancers, cardiovascular disease, infertility, stroke, dementia and Alzheimer’s disease.
Check the packaging or nutrition labels to tell if a refined grain is enriched.
Organic products may not be fortified.
What is the healthiest bread?
To understand whole grains, you first have to understand grain kernel anatomy.
The kernel is made of three parts:
Whole grains are just as they sound – the entire grain kernel remains intact.
When you refine grains, it strips the grain of the bran and germ and uses just the inside endosperm.
This removes most of the grain's vitamins, minerals, fiber and protein.
You have to look at the ingredient list.
“You want the words ‘whole grain’ to be at the beginning of the ingredient list,” he says.
The easiest swap is to consciously add in more whole grain products to tip you over to that “more than half” whole grain recommendation.
Whole grain cereals can be another good addition to your mornings – routinely consuming ready-to-eat cereals, especially whole grain ones, is associated with significant increases in overall dietary fiber intake.
What foods are high in fiber?
USA TODAY is exploring the questions you and others ask every day.
From "How long to bake a potato?"
− we're striving to find answers to the most common questions you ask every day.
Head to our Just Curious section to see what else we can answer for you.
If you struggle with blemished or aging skin, or from a skin condition such as acne, chances are you've tried many natural remedies to help.
These may have included apple cider vinegar, vitamin supplements, essential oils or even a viral honey and cinnamon mask you may have seen trending on social media.
But chances are, you've also turned to prescription and over-the-counter medications or topical applications in an attempt to find a solution.
While there are many products offered by the $146-billion-dollar skin-care industry which include vitamin C serum and a host of lotions and creams, few such products or ingredients are more sought after than retinol.
It's a type of retinoid - chemical compounds derived from vitamin A or chemically related to it - but is unique in that most retinoids are considered powerful enough to require a prescription while the retinol formula is mild enough to be available in over-the-counter form.
"To my patients, I recommend using a pea-size amount of cream or gel, or about four drops of the serum, to cover the whole face."
Retinol is effective in a number of ways.
It can unclog pores (and thereby improve acne), neutralize free radicals and exfoliate one's skin.
In this way, he says it can help boost collagen production and also minimize wrinkles and fine lines.
Because of such varied functions, "it's used topically for acne, skin aging, discoloration and for certain skin diseases such as psoriasis," she says.
He says the most common one is irritation of the skin.
"It can disrupt the moisture barrier if you use too much or too strong of a retinol for your skin type," he cautions.
Another area of concern is that it's possible for retinol to increase one's sensitivity to the sun.
Retinol is also not generally recommended for use while pregnant.
As economic and environmental factors have contributed to rising stress levels, many Americans are turning to conventional therapies for help.
Common treatments for stress include getting better sleep, breathing exercises, rebalancing work and home life, and spending more time outdoors.
Others find that the food and nutrients they put into their bodies can be helpful.
Foods like fish, whole grains, fruits, vegetables and healthy fats, for example, have been known to reduce stress.
"It is not surprising that this botanical has health benefits," says Carol Johnston, PhD, RD, a professor of nutrition at Arizona State University.
"Plants produce highly sophisticated compounds to protect them from environmental insults and many of these protective properties extend to human tissues when ingested."
Understand it, first.
These include gastrointestinal distress such as nausea, diarrhea and vomiting.
Zinc is an important nutrient, but get it from food, not supplements, experts say
Should you be eating more grapes?
They have a whole host of health benefits.
Can apple cider vinegar help with weight loss?
The health benefits explained.
What is mindfulness meditation?
How to get started and the health benefits you should know
How to meditate and practice mindfulness better.
Jennifer Aniston, Duchess Meghan and more stars do Pilates.
Infertility or reduced fertility is a common problem in the United States.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, nearly 1 out of 5 women are unable to get pregnant after a year of trying − the standard definition for infertility.
When it comes to improving one's reproductive health, few things matter more than estrogen.
Along with progesterone, "estrogen is one of two hormones secreted by the ovaries," says Andrew Greenberg, MD, director of the obesity and metabolism lab at the Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University.
Hormones are chemical messengers that travel through the bloodstream to trigger specific functions or feelings throughout the body.
She explains that most women experience monthly cycling of estrogen and progesterone, "which matures the lining of the uterus in preparation for pregnancy should fertilization of the egg by a sperm occur."
This ebb and tide of hormonal secretion by the ovary and monthly bleeding "becomes a familiar rhythm to most women," she adds.
And though significantly higher amounts of estrogen are produced and present in women, men also have the hormone as well.
In males, estrogen is produced in the testes and, similar to women, in fat cells and adrenal glands.
In addition to its fundamental roles in reproductive health and menstrual cycle regulation, estrogen also affects the female urinary tract, reproductive tract, bones, breasts, skin, hair, mucous membranes, pelvic muscles and the brain, per Johns Hopkins Medicine.
In men, estrogen helps with sexual development, improved bone strength and muscle mass, and contributes to a healthy metabolism.
Because estrogen plays so many vital roles in the body, it's important to maintain healthy levels of the hormone.
More:Have we been thinking about 'sex drive' all wrong?
To prevent low levels of estrogen production, good eating habits are a wise place to start since dietary choices significantly affect hormone balance.
Reduced consumption of sugar-filled foods and getting plenty of foods high in fiber can help in this regard.
Reducing one's stress through practices like mindfulness meditation and exercise can also be beneficial since high-stress levels are associated with hormone imbalances.
Quality and quantity of sleep is also important.
If estrogen levels drop too low, a physician may recommend estrogen supplementation or a form of estrogen therapy.
This is not how the law of conservatorship works in Tennessee.
A court is required to find by clear and convincing evidence, based at least in part on the report of a physician, that the respondent is fully or partially disabled and that he or she is in need of assistance from the court.
Rights are then removed from the respondent and vested in the conservator.
Conservatorship system devours dignity:After Britney Spears' abusive conservatorship, don't reform the system – abolish it
There is no “custody” or adoption proceeding that goes along with a conservatorship.
Under Tennessee law, conservators are required to file an accounting and a status report once a year.
Prison reform gives second chance:First Step Act advanced prison reform, but hundreds are still serving unjust sentences
More will be revealed as this lawsuit progresses, but the case is disturbing.
An 18-year-old could be confused by the language of the original petition which refers to guardianship and custody along with conservatorship.
Barbara Moss is founder of Elder Law of Nashville PLC.
This column first published in The Commercial Appeal in Memphis, Tenn.
Lauro didn’t provide the correct answer, which is this: all of them.
Criminal defendants have just as much disdain for prosecutors as the prosecutors have for them.
Their displeasure is expressed outside of court.
The only difference with Trump’s calling special counsel Jack Smith a thug is that no one was listening when these other defendants insulted their prosecutors.
Talking smack is part of the game.
It’s almost like the former public defender doesn’t understand defense.
A defendant’s rights may be in tension with the First Amendment rights of the news media, but that’s not what’s happening with the former president.
This isn’t even a situation where a lawyer’s speech is restrained.
That has happened in the past on occasion, such as the gag order in the trial of the Los Angeles police officers accused of beating Rodney King.
Those are the two situations that courts have reviewed in the past, but telling a defendant he can’t speak is unprecedented.
Judge issues partial gag order:Trump, who never shuts up, now has a gag order to whine about.
And you know he will.
While for some it might be wise not to testify in one’s own defense, some studies suggest an acquittal is more likely when a defendant tells their story.
Even if taking the witness stand in one’s own criminal case is ill-advised, defendants can't legally be stopped from speaking to protect themselves.
The Supreme Court has held that preventing someone from testifying in court in a case against themselves violates the due process clause of the 14th Amendment and the compulsory process clause of the Sixth Amendment.
There have been very few studies of the First Amendment’s role in criminal courtrooms.
It’s practically unthinkable.
Because criminal cases threaten an individual’s freedom and possibly life, courts have to give a defendant more leeway in speech.
That’s why in People v. O.J.
Simpson, there were no gag orders in the criminal case under former Superior Court Judge Lance Ito – Ito floated the idea but never followed through on it.
However, the judge assigned to the subsequent civil case filed by Ron Goldman’s family restricted speech of the parties in what has been called a “sweeping” order.
All that was at stake in those civil proceedings was civil liability – i.e., money.
If there’s a defense to be made, there’s no reason why the defendant shouldn’t be able to speak it.
In fact, for people whose freedom is jeopardized, the right to speak becomes even more important.
Don't obstruct sentencing reform:First Step Act advanced prison reform, but hundreds are still serving unjust sentences
The judge was correct when she said that the former president “does not have the right to say and do exactly what he pleases.” He doesn’t.
He can’t threaten people.
And laws exist to cover that.
They’re in the criminal code of every state and the federal government, and if law enforcement thinks Trump violated those statutes then he should be charged as anyone else would be.
Stopping him from speaking is stopping him from defending himself, and that’s something no judge presiding over a criminal case should ever be allowed to do.
Family members called out by strangers.
A number of House Republicans who refuse to support right-wing Rep. Jim Jordan for House speaker are suddenly learning the true language of Donald Trump’s MAGA movement, a movement they have either tolerated or nurtured for years.
While MAGA fury is usually directed at liberals, this time it's hitting him like unfriendly fire.
I've been evicted from my office in Colorado … because the landlord is mad with my voting record on the speaker issue, and everybody in the conference is getting this.
This behavior is horrible and unacceptable.
It’s also entirely predictable to anyone who has paid attention to a political movement forged in violent rhetoric and seemingly driven by the destruction of social and political norms.
Just recently, Trump has suggested that a top U.S. general be executed, mocked the violent hammer attack on a Democratic lawmaker’s husband and talked about shooting shoplifters.
Election conspiracy theorist flips:Sidney Powell pleads guilty to election interference, releasing the Kraken on Donald Trump
In March, he railed against Manhattan District Attorney Alvin Bragg’s hush money investigation on Truth Social, warning of “potential death & destruction” if he is charged and calling Bragg “a degenerate psychopath.”
Like their avatar, Trump loyalists often lean into bullying and threats, enamored with flexing a faux toughness that comes easy when anonymous emails and social media accounts protect them from consequences.
When Jordan became a House speaker candidate, he quickly got Trump’s blessing and the extended MAGA universe rose up, excited to see one of their own get a shot at running the show.
Let them know what you think … Email, call their local office, all of it, burn it down.
And so they did.
That's to their credit.
Fear of the MAGA base is a big reason so many Republican lawmakers have remained loyal to Trump through an insurrection and a slew of indictments.
Bucking that trend, in today's chaotic and unraveling Republican Party, is downright courageous.
Jordan responded to the threats by putting out a statement on social media Wednesday saying, “We condemn all threats against our colleagues.”
But that has always been Trump and the broader MAGA movement’s game.
Say outrageous things and then, when those statements spark chaos or violent threats, pretend that was never the point.
It has always been the point, ever since Trump first bullied his way onto the political scene and cowed so-called normal Republicans with veiled threats and truckloads of red meat to throw at a base right-wing talk radio and television spent years priming for violence.
We saw it all culminate at the attack on the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021.
Plenty of folks critical of Trump have dealt with threats and bullying over the years, and I wouldn’t wish it on anyone, Republican, Democrat or otherwise.
This is your monster, Republicans.
You brought this beast to life by tolerating an unmoored narcissist.
You let it grow and gave it permission to lash out in all directions.
Some never learn.
If you put up with a dog that bites strangers, you can’t be surprised when it sinks its teeth into you.
“People throw rocks at things that shine.”
That lyric flashed through my head as I read a recent opinion column claiming that Taylor Swift “has yet to make a significant mark as a philanthropist,” and that her estimated $4 billion Eras Tour earnings are a chance for the singer to champion left-leaning causes in honor of her fans.
Swift has a mind of her own, and she’s not afraid to use it.
Her approach to philanthropy is no exception.
Map out Swift’s philanthropy and one finds the singer’s empathetic approach to giving is deeply personal and powerful, transcending political divides.
That includes her support of friends, cancer patients, sexual assault survivors, disaster relief organizations and food banks along her Eras Tour.
The list goes on.
'Eras' movie shows women have options:In 'Eras Tour' movie, Taylor Swift shows women how to reject the mandate of one identity
Take her steady support of friends who have fallen on hard times.
What’s more, after Swift won a countersuit against former country music DJ David Mueller, who groped her during a red-carpet event in 2013, “The Man” singer pledged money to the Joyful Heart Foundation, a nonprofit that helps counsel sexual assault survivors.
Perhaps the most personal of Swift’s charitable giving, however, is her ongoing support of those fighting cancer, just as both of Swift’s parents have battled cancer – an experience Swift writes about in “Soon You’ll Get Better,” a deep track on her "Lover" album.
Swift rose to fame as a country singer, securing the admiration of more moderate women who found escape in songs like “Love Story” and “Ours,” in which Swift sings about prioritizing love, marriage and the allusion of family life over a depressing 9-to-5 cubicle job.
Yet, since her transition to pop superstardom and amassing a global following, Swift has done a remarkable job of staying true to her progressive values without overly politicizing her brand.
Her focus, instead, is on connecting with her fans – whether from a stage or a hospital room.
What if nothing else matters?
What’s more, it’s reasonable to assume that a singer savvy enough to question the legitimacy of FTX, a now bankrupt cryptocurrency exchange, has already mapped out her philanthropic goals.
In fact, Swift could already be donating to the left-leaning groups that some people want her to give to, but – for a variety of reasons – does so privately, which is her prerogative and part of her constitutional right to free speech.
Whatever direction Swift decides to tack with her charitable giving – now or in the future – her decision likely will be personally driven, intentional and an extension of her already significant mark on the world of philanthropy.
And, most important, the decision will be entirely her own.
If you struggle with blemished or aging skin, or from a skin condition such as acne, chances are you've tried many natural remedies to help.
These may have included apple cider vinegar, vitamin supplements, essential oils or even a viral honey and cinnamon mask you may have seen trending on social media.
But chances are, you've also turned to prescription and over-the-counter medications or topical applications in an attempt to find a solution.
While there are many products offered by the $146-billion-dollar skin-care industry which include vitamin C serum and a host of lotions and creams, few such products or ingredients are more sought after than retinol.
It's a type of retinoid - chemical compounds derived from vitamin A or chemically related to it - but is unique in that most retinoids are considered powerful enough to require a prescription while the retinol formula is mild enough to be available in over-the-counter form.
"To my patients, I recommend using a pea-size amount of cream or gel, or about four drops of the serum, to cover the whole face."
Retinol is effective in a number of ways.
It can unclog pores (and thereby improve acne), neutralize free radicals and exfoliate one's skin.
In this way, he says it can help boost collagen production and also minimize wrinkles and fine lines.
Because of such varied functions, "it's used topically for acne, skin aging, discoloration and for certain skin diseases such as psoriasis," she says.
He says the most common one is irritation of the skin.
"It can disrupt the moisture barrier if you use too much or too strong of a retinol for your skin type," he cautions.
Another area of concern is that it's possible for retinol to increase one's sensitivity to the sun.
Retinol is also not generally recommended for use while pregnant.
Seven months ago, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill student Elizabeth Grace Burton died two days after overdosing on a blend of drugs and alcohol, according to the Assembly, which was the first to report her death this week.
(The state report detected fentanyl in Burton’s urine, but officials did not say it contributed to her death.)
The university would not confirm with USA TODAY if Burton was included in that tally.
Fentanyl is a synthetic opioid prescribed for severe pain management.
It’s up to 50 times stronger than heroin and 100 times stronger than morphine.
Just 2 milligrams — an amount small enough to fit on the tip of a pencil — can be lethal.
Because it’s so potent, fentanyl is often added to other drugs such as cocaine, methamphetamine and heroin, making them cheaper and more dangerous, particularly for teens, college students and other young adults.
“This scenario is sadly not uncommon, and it can happen to anyone,” said Dr. Ryan Marino, an emergency physician and addiction medicine specialist at University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center.
“This is a reminder of how an unregulated drug supply is always going to be unpredictable and unsafe.”
The best and only way to eliminate the risk of accidental fentanyl exposure is to avoid drugs all together.
But Marino says a more realistic piece of advice for those who plan on using them is to "never use alone."
Here are other important things to know.
You cannot see, taste or smell any amount of fentanyl in drugs, the CDC says.
Never assume drugs are safe because you know where or who they came from, experts say; your body could also react differently every time you use drugs.
People can use test strips that detect fentanyl in different drugs like cocaine, heroin and methamphetamine, and drug forms, such as pills, powder and injectables, in about five minutes.
It involves dissolving a small amount of a drug in water that you dip a piece of paper in.
If the test is positive, throw the drugs out.
Still, experts recommend testing drugs anyway.
“While they certainly aren’t foolproof, they’re an important tool we have that can reduce harms from an unsafe drug supply,” Marino said.
Fentanyl test strips are available at your local health department or community organization; they can also be purchased online.
Keep in mind, however, that some states consider these tests “criminal drug paraphernalia,” Marino said.
Symptoms of an opioid overdose include:
If you aren’t sure if a person is high or overdosing, the CDC suggests treating it like an overdose to be safe.
Here’s what you should do:
Avoid putting a person suspected of overdosing in a cold shower or bath; hitting them to wake them up; or trying to make them vomit, as that can increase their risk of choking.
And no, you can't overdose on fentanyl just by touching it.
In many cases — no.
Most states have Good Samaritan laws that protect the person who is overdosing or the person who called 911 from certain criminal penalties.
She discovered a woman wanting everyone to guess her age.
The 33-year-old had 30 followers at the time.
Now, she has 1.1 million, and regularly posts about "consensual doxxing."
The one-time Chicago restaurant server now makes enough money as a TikTok content creator to produce these videos full-time.
People have criticized her for the term she made up.
There's nothing "consensual" about doxxing, when you publicly expose someone's personal information (such as a home address or phone number) in order to cause harm.
But that's just it: she's facetious.
Think of her as TikTok's Nancy Drew.
"I look at it like a puzzle, and I've always loved puzzles," she says, and also wants to educate people about their online presence.
Experts say "consensual doxxing" can be a useful tool for learning about how much information you've put out online about yourself or can simply be a fun activity – but consider it a cautionary tale, too.
"Unfortunately, these videos highlight an uncomfortable truth: our lives are way more exposed online than we'd like to imagine."
After her second video: Hundreds of comments per day.
That number has held steady – she picks one or two out of these leads per day to pursue – partially because of the effort she puts into the task.
"It's evolved into people wanting to see the most creative way I found it," she says.
In her first viral video, for example, the subject in question had no videos, his profile picture had a cartoon filter over his face and the only remarkable attribute was that he was wearing glasses.
She dug deep through his followers to find a family member, scrolled through her likes on Facebook and found someone else's profile picture where a man was wearing glasses.
It correlated with a comment he made on TikTok about being an engineer, and that he lived in Florida, and so on.
Sometimes it's impossible to find people's birthdays when their profile is private, they have no followers, they follow no one and/or their username just has the word "user" and a bunch of numbers.
"Obviously, I cannot do anything with that," she says.
She estimates she finds 70% to 80% of the people whose birthdays she looks up.
A note about the method to her madness: She doesn't use public records, just social media.
"I want to try to show you that info that you have provided, is the reason that I found your birthday, even though you think you're locked down, your digital footprint is not as good as you think," she says.
Brad Fulton, associate professor of management and social policy at the Indiana University – Bloomington, adds: "It’s important for people to know how much of their personal information can be found online, and consensual doxxing can provide a relatively safe way for someone to discover the extent of their online exposure."
In case you missed:'Dimple maker' trend is taking over TikTok, but could it cause permanent damage?
Sometimes people reach out asking her for tasks beyond birthdays – like to help solve cases.
While flattering, she leaves that up to crime-fighting professionals.
"I'm hoping that it reaches people who are looking to be more private on the internet," she says.
Is it a real thing?
There’s no contest: people love condiments.
From ketchup, to mayo to mustard, condiments are a way to enhance flavors and textures that make an already great dish even better.
We love to spread our favorite condiments on sandwiches, hot dogs, burgers and even pizza.
(By now you’re either enraged or nodding along.)
Diets have often demonized condiments because they can add calories, sugar and fat to a dish.
But we want to hone in on one condiment in particular – mustard.
Should mustard be lumped in with all condiments or does mustard offer unique benefits?
They are low in calories, sugar and fat, which makes them an excellent addition to a dish, especially if the goal is weight management.
Ben-Asher explains, “Mustard can be utilized as a condiment which is low in calories and can help with weight management/control by enhancing flavor as an alternative to many high-calorie sauces, marinades and dressings.”
One serving (1 tbsp) of yellow mustard, for example, has 9.2 calories, and negligible fat and sugar.
One serving (1 tbsp) of honey mustard contains 69.5 calories, 6 grams of fat, and 2.4 grams of sugar.
These statistics do not make honey mustard off limits, it’s just something you need to be mindful of.
It turns out that mustard is packed with helpful nutrients.
Ben-Asher says, “Mustard provides nutritional value as well by its mineral composition of selenium and magnesium, which are important for many systemic functions.”
The powerful potential of mustard:How to use the condiment as an ingredient instead
According to the Harvard T.H.
Chan School of Public Health, selenium is a trace mineral that is vital for the creation of various enzymes and proteins that help make DNA and protect cells from damage.
Additionally, the NIH explains that magnesium is important for muscle and nerve function, regulation of blood sugar levels and blood pressure, and even the creation of DNA.
Like many nutritious foods, mustard contains antioxidants.
Turns out, this information is true.
It contains some compounds that have anti-inflammatory properties which can be beneficial for liver health.
The mustard seeds contain omega-3 fatty acids, which can reduce inflammation and support liver function.
We’ve learned that most types of mustard are low in calories, fat and sugar, so it seems to be like one of those foods we can enjoy.
It can be utilized as a low-calorie condiment to add flavor to foods without having a considerable impact on daily caloric intake.
However, it’s important to consider for some individuals that intake may need to be limited or avoided.
Although rare, mustard allergies can occur and if any adverse reactions are experienced – it should not be consumed.
Hot dogs:It's grilling, BBQ season.
But wait: Are hot dogs bad for you?
Toby Keith is back in the driver's seat amid his battle with stomach cancer, and he's ready to perform for fans again.
The 62-year-old country star announced Friday that he will be headlining two Las Vegas shows in December to "get the band back in sync (and) get me rolling again," Keith said in a video posted to Instagram.
The concerts will take place on Dec. 10 and 11 at Dolby Live Park MGM Las Vegas.
Tickets go on sale at 10 a.m. on Oct. 27 and will be available at ticketmaster.com.
These will be what he called "rehab" shows that allow Keith to get reacquainted with performing.
After being diagnosed with stomach cancer in fall 2021, the performer has taken a two-year break from music.
He's done several public appearances recently, including at two pop-up concerts in Oklahoma and the People’s Choice Country Awards in Nashville.
In his video announcing the upcoming shows, Keith hinted at how his cancer treatments are going.
Or (I can) get up, go outside.
Don't let the old man in, you know what I mean?"
I've never been off a year in my life.
"I've got him by the horns right now, so instead of just sitting around and waiting, we're going to get the band back together," he said.
Last month, Keith was honored with the 2023 Country Icon Award at the People’s Choice Country Awards.
During his first televised performance since sharing his cancer diagnosis in June 2022, he performed "Don't Let the Old Man," his song from Clint Eastwood's 2018 film, "The Mule."
"I feel pretty good," Keith told E!
News at the Nashville awards show.
He added, "It's always zero to 60 and 60 to zero, but I feel good today."
'I feel pretty good':Toby Keith shares update on cancer battle at People's Choice Country Awards
Local independent bookstores have never been more important.
With fair access to literature under political attack, bookstores are a bulwark against censorship and an asset to the communities they serve.
Each week we profile an independent bookstore, discovering what makes each one special and getting their expert book recommendations.
What’s your store’s story?
We are a creative, customer service and community focused team.
Our Hispanic American women-owned small business is located in the heart of Jacksonville, Florida's Historic Riverside neighborhood.
What makes your independent bookstore unique?
We are mothers, daughters, and advocates for unity and empowerment for all within our community.
What's your favorite section in your store?
Our store is sectioned in three.
My favorite section is the front of the house by our beautiful historic door and the main windows, where I enjoy seeing the beautiful afternoon sunset.
It is also the first space where we welcome our guests and get to know them.
What book do you love to recommend to customers and why?
My personal favorite is "East of Eden" by John Steinbeck.
Not only is he one of my favorite authors, but his works have warranted him coveted awards — the Nobel Prize for Literature and the Pulitzer Prize.
His stories continue to be relatable, and all of his works beautifully embrace life with compassion and humility, while embodying the human spirit.
What book do you think deserves more attention and why?
"Remarkably Bright Creatures" by Shelby Van Pelt, because in a way I feel that I am living this remarkable and unique book.
It teaches you to look into your past in a new light, and that nothing is impossible.
What upcoming books or series are you most excited about and why?
"Family Meal: A Novel" by Bryan Washington and "Wellness" by Nathan Hill.
I truly hope to find the time to read these beautiful works of fiction.
I am very drawn to stories and books that are relatable and humbling.
Why is shopping at independent bookstores important?
I think of the scene in "You've Got Mail" when the Fox family has no remorse whatsoever in shutting down the Shop Around the Corner.
Books should be a reminder to everyone, that not all that is big and fancy is meaningful and or has a wonderful story.
What are some of your store's events, programs, or partnerships you would like to share?
We are excited to announce our upcoming children's story hour, writer's workshops, Spanish book club, book and wine club, sidewalk free library, and so much more!
Gwen Stefani has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, and it's "Luxurious."
On Thursday, her three sons, husband Blake Shelton and her family celebrated the Grammy-winning No Doubt singer and "The Voice" coach during her Hollywood Walk of Fame ceremony, where her star was unveiled on the sidewalk outside the iconic Amoeba Music store.
Shelton himself received his star on Hollywood Boulevard in May.
"She has risen to the top over and over again with her unique style that has made the world fall in love with her − not as much as me, though," he said.
"It was clear to me that she was a mother, first and foremost, over anything else in the world," Shelton said of first meeting her in 2014.
"And now standing here, almost 10 years later after I first met her, I can say without question that being a mother is still the most important thing in her life."
Shelton joked that "it's nice to see her honored for her side project, which is being one of the biggest stars in the world."
Blake Shelton talks being a stepdad:He 'can't imagine' life without Gwen Stefani's kids
She married Shelton in 2021, and the country star has often enthused about being a stepfather.
"I can't imagine my life without these kids now," Shelton said in a 2021 radio interview.
It was a full house as her parents, Dennis and Patti, as well as sister Jill and brothers Todd and Eric all came out to see her star unveiled.
The Southern California-raised singer took some time after the star revel to pose with her family.
No Doubt fans will know Eric as a co-founder of the band; he was the keyboardist before he left to pursue a career in animation.
Reba McEntire, who's longtime friends with fellow Oklahoman Shelton, celebrated the occasion with her "The Voice" costar.
Catching up with Reba McEntire:On 'The Voice', she gives — and takes — advice
PHOENIX − It was completely dead silence inside the Philadelphia Phillies’ clubhouse late Friday evening.
Players stared vacantly into their lockers in utter disbelief.
The Phillies front office talked in hushed tones inside manager Rob Thomson’s office.
Owner John Middleton stood silently down the hallway.
When the Phillies spoke after their stunning 6-5 meltdown to the Arizona Diamondbacks, it was in short, subdued snippets for cameras and reporters, trying to convince everyone they’ll be fine.
The look on their faces, however, lacked all confidence.
This is a team that arrived into Phoenix three days ago, talking about jumping into the pool at Chase Field once they swept away the Diamondbacks, debating who they’d rather play in the World Series.
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
They instead spent the night watching a safe eighth-inning lead melt in the desert, and are now in a fight for their lives.
They have a chip on their shoulder.
He lost Game 3 in the ninth inning, and for an encore, blew a 5-3 lead in the eighth inning.
He faced six batters Friday.
Four batters reached base.
He dropped to his knees in agony as Thomas danced around the bases, basking in the deafening ovation.
I'm so grateful to have that moment.
It's just unreal.
Four batters later, it was all over.
This is a guy who just three days ago was discussing the Hall of Fame in an interview room.
This night, he was proving why he’ll fall short of a Cooperstown induction.
It’s one thing to have the seventh-most saves in baseball history, but when the Boston Red Sox snub you during their 2018 World Series run by using starter Chris Sale for their final outs, and the Los Angeles Dodgers leave you completely off the roster in last year’s postseason, and you melt down for the Phillies a year later, you have a tarnished Hall of Fame resume.
Who knows if the Phillies will now trust him again the rest of the postseason?
Certainly, not in a critical moment.
He responded quickly, succinctly, but had no real answers for the meltdown.
It was terrible.
Question: How’s your confidence?
I roll up in here and cost us two games.
… I can’t let that get in the way of what my job is and what I need to do.
Question: How do you keep your mind right?
I’ve lost a lot of ball games and I won a lot of ball games.
And the only way you come back to be successful is believing you can.
And I believe the next time I touch the ball it’s going to be great.
And, so it went for 1 minute, 42 seconds.
Really, the Phillies have no idea who’ll be available until they check in with their relievers before Saturday’s game, praying that Wheeler, can go at least six innings, preferably seven, if not longer.
Still, they know they are in trouble.
They have an exhausted bullpen, using 11 relievers in the last two games to combine for 26 outs.
So, while the Diamondbacks are winning a game using eight different relievers like Friday, the Phillies are using an 11-man staff instead of 13, and suddenly are without a reliable closer.
And twice has imploded.
He gave up three consecutive hits without retiring a batter in Game 3, and walked two batters and got one out in Game 4.
He suddenly has lost command, falling behind in counts, and the price.
The swagger is gone.
They may have games 6 and 7 scheduled in Philadelphia, but they can’t solely rely on their fans saving them from disaster.
It’s enough for the D-backs to believe they can not only play with the powerful Phillies, but slay the dragon, shocking the baseball world.
We’re not done yet.
On a cloudy fall day in Washington, D.C., Brandon Washington lit up the field with an electric 63-yard touchdown run.
On his third offensive play of the game, the quarterback took the snap, scampered through the line of scrimmage and sprinted his way straight down the middle of the field all the way to the end zone.
Not only was it the Gallaudet Bison’s first score of the day, but it was the first touchdown for the 5G-connected helmet, a technology the world’s only liberal arts university for deaf and hard-of-hearing students developed with AT&T.
Wearing the helmet, a player doesn’t have to hear a play call, but can see it.
After Washington and the Bison beat the Hilbert Hawks 34-20 in the Oct. 7 home game at Hotchkiss Field, the junior was named the Eastern Collegiate Football Conference co-offensive player of the week for putting up 124 rushing yards and three touchdowns.
"Brandon is one of the most electrifying players that we've had come through here," Coach Chuck Goldstein said.
"The stands were going crazy," Smith Kenny said of Washington's first score.
The 5G-connected helmet uses the same technology that powers cell phones across the United States.
It is connected to a lens mounted on the top of the helmet's facemask.
A coach can select a play on a tablet and then send it to the player, who can then see the play displayed on the lens.
Goldstein explained how Gallaudet, who invented the huddle in 1894 because the team needed to protect their communication using American Sign Language, embraced the helmet.
SEE MORE:How a high-tech football helmet could level the playing field for deaf athletes
We’re living with whatever play that’s called, that's it.
This gives us an opportunity for me to get his attention.
There’s a red exclamation point on the tablet, I hit it, it pops up.
Athletic director Warren Keller pondered how the helmet could have a positive impact for hearing players as well.
Carr explained to his teammate that they help block out crowd noise.
Smith Kenny said the possibilities for the helmet go beyond football.
"We've had people reach out to us saying, 'Hey, if you think about the capabilities of the helmet, could a 5G-connected helmet improve safety on construction sites or for first responders, or even potentially lead to more job opportunities for the deaf community?'"
"It's incredibly exciting and inspiring."
The helmet is giving them opportunities to shine on a national stage.
Washington was cheering next to Goldstein as Adams scored a touchdown using the helmet.
He offered feedback to the AT&T team as the helmet went through several iterations, including that an early version was too heavy due to a bulky battery pack.
This is his second year playing quarterback after Goldstein moved him from wide receiver because of depth needs.
I want the ball in my hands.
He had 1,363 yards of total offense on the season, including eight rushing touchdowns.
Last year, Adams captured the eight-man football championship with the California School for the Deaf-Riverside to cap off an undefeated season with an 80-26 victory.
He wanted to attend Gallaudet because both of his parents went there, and his father played football for the Bison.
The family attended a celebration for the school's 150th anniversary, which was observed through the 2013-14 school year, and Adams wanted to carry on the tradition.
The future is really looking good.
Gallaudet prides itself on being at the forefront of innovation to create equality for the deaf and hard-of-hearing community.
She was named one of USA TODAY's Women of the Year for her leadership.
That's my job.
While the 5G-connected helmet is a major breakthrough, there is still a ways to go in leveling the playing field for deaf and hard-of-hearing athletes.
"There is a communication barrier."
One of those barriers is with officials who don't sign.
"An official can tell a hearing player on the other team to scoot back or, 'Hey watch your hands on this' or 'Don’t do that,'" Goldstein said.
"If he does communicate that with our players, our player’s probably reading his lips, and that’s not fair."
Gallaudet's players also can't hear a whistle being blown, which can be a safety issue.
"If somebody, the whistle’s blown and somebody makes an athletic move on the other team, we’re going to tackle him, always," the coach continued.
And while the helmet helps with player-coach communication, it was only authorized by the NCAA for use in one game and was only worn by the quarterback.
Take it from Jim Schwartz.
It’s way too early to consider the Cleveland Browns' defense as one of the best in NFL history.
That’s no kind of knock on the amazing pace the NFL’s stingiest defense has established through five games this season.
The Browns – leading the league for fewest yards, passing yards, points, first downs and third-down conversions allowed – have some of the best numbers ever produced at this point in a campaign.
If this holds up, the comparisons to great defenses of yesteryear will be validated.
Yet it’s still early.
“Well, they don’t give out any trophies for five weeks,” Schwartz, Cleveland’s defensive coordinator, said during a news conference this week.
It’s a long season, and we’re going to have to survive a lot of highs and lows throughout the season.
We have some experienced coaches that have been there, that know that.
And I think that’s one of the things that keeps us grounded.
So let me know when the five-week stats are part of the tiebreaker.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Schwartz – whose perspective includes landing his only NFL head-coaching shot with the task of taking over a Detroit Lions squad that finished 0-16 the season before – has long been established as one of the league’s premier defensive strategists.
MORE:Five NFL players who need change of scenery as trade deadline approaches
That’s being proven again already during his first year with the Browns, as he has employed a wide-nine front and other wrinkles and surprises (see Myles Garrett’s feigned “crossover dribble” while lined up as a stand-up middle linebacker against the Bengals) to help a talented unit reach new heights.
Getting a glimpse of Schwartz fielding questions as he prepared for Sunday’s game at Indianapolis, though, showed that in addition to pushing the right buttons when it involves the X’s and O’s, he also set the proper tone against the landscape of the what-have-you-done-lately NFL.
“He’s playing 3-2, right?” Schwartz said.
Our defensive stats are 3-2, everything else, and he’s doing his job within – I don’t want to downplay it.
I just don’t want to get into the whole rate of everybody’s play.
It’s not about individuals.
We talked about that last week.
It’s about the group.
In any event, the “all 11” and additional role players on Schwartz’s unit can certainly take a bow for how they handled one of the hottest offenses in the league in the 19-17 upset of the previously unbeaten San Francisco 49ers last Sunday.
The 49ers, who scored at least 30 points in their first five games, were limited to 215 total yards.
For the season, Cleveland has allowed just 1,002 yards – third-fewest in the NFL through five games since 1970, after the 1971 Colts (836) and 1970 Vikings (945).
This is connected to the league’s best rate on third downs, with just 15 conversions on 65 attempts (23.1%).
So many of the numbers are staggering.
The Browns have allowed just 52 first downs, even more impressive when considering the team with the next-fewest, Tampa Bay, has allowed 94 first downs.
While the sack total (15) is average and the takeaways (four) way on the low end, that’s covered by the minimal yards (220.4 per game) and points allowed (77).
So maybe it’s a bit early to rank the Browns' defense among the best ever.
But even Schwartz doesn’t mind his talented unit rolling with a fair amount of swagger.
“That would look foolish if we’re out there giving up 42 points,” Schwartz said.
But I think a lot’s being said with if you’re going to have some personality and some swagger, then you better back it up on the field.
The scrutiny on new quarterback Derek Carr was intense enough when considering the disastrous results the New Orleans Saints have produced when getting near the goal line this season.
Now the heat has gone up a few notches – by Carr’s own actions during the 31-24 loss against the Jacksonville Jaguars on Thursday.
It was not a good look, and not the only example of questionable body language to express frustration.
Because that’s not going to help anything.
“I can do a better job as a leader to calm everybody down.”
He can also help the Saints reverse their red-zone patterns.
Carr, though, couldn’t be blamed for the result of a perfect pass that slipped through the fingers of tight end Foster Moreau in the end zone in the final seconds.
And what he said afterward, when it was mentioned that teammates rallied around a distraught Moreau, suggests that he gets it when considering how his response can make a difference.
In other words, pointing fingers is not the ticket.
Now he’s back, essentially for the price of a sixth-round pick.
“It’s not always just super simple,” Nagy said during a Thursday news conference, “but it is certainly easier for somebody like him that’s been here to come back in and go.”
His 2022 season, though, was cut short after eight games due to a pelvic/abdominal injury that had him hospitalized for 10 days.
That dubious distinction belongs to Washington, which heads into the matchup against the Giants on Sunday having allowed 34 sacks.
New York has yielded 33 sacks.
Pugh re-joined the team two weeks ago, while Myles and Phillips were signed this week off practice squads for Atlanta and Philadelphia, respectively, with New York losing seven of its original nine offensive linemen this season to injuries.
If one guy gets hurt, then here’s the next guy, they’re not playing that spot.
There’s been a lot of shuffling.
The Eagles signing of veteran wide receiver Julio Jones offers the promise of a playmaker with seven Pro Bowl selections on his resume … and caution.
Jones, 34, is with his fourth team in as many seasons, and has missed seven games in each of the past three seasons with Tampa Bay, Tennessee and Atlanta, due to assorted injuries.
But he must weigh that against the notion of expecting too much, too soon.
“We are going to have to make sure that we’re not putting him in danger.”
The college football season has reached the back nine with seven weeks down and seven more to go before the playoff pairings and bowl lineup is announced.
Between now and then, there's sure to be surprises along the way.
The hard part is sorting out when and where they're going to come from.
This Saturday, however, provides plenty of opportunity for upsets and unlikely results with a Big Ten showdown between Penn State and Ohio State leading the schedule and key conference matchups in the SEC, Pac-12 and ACC.
That's why we're here to make sense of things.
And if the Falcons keep winning, the College Football Playoff committee will be forced to pay attention, and with good reason.
The defense is also doing its part, ranking in the top 10 in rushing defense, passing defense, scoring defense, and total defense, with that unit being on the field for the fewest plays of any team in the nation.
MUST-WATCH: Big Ten clash leads six best games of college football's Week 8
WEEKEND FORECAST: Picks for Ohio State-Penn State and each Top 25 game
Utah has defeated Southern California three consecutive times, including twice last season to single-handedly keep the Trojans out of the College Football Playoff.
16 USC will get some revenge, and a needed bounce-back win after last week’s debacle in South Bend, against the No.
Yes, Utah’s defense has been great and USC’s has still been mostly bad; but you need to score some points to beat the Trojans and the Utes just can’t do it.
Utah is sitting 115th in yards per game and is tied for 109th in scoring.
USC trails only Oregon in points per game and is No.
9 in total offense – and it seems unlikely Caleb Williams is going to throw three picks two weeks in a row.
It might be a long day for the Utes at the L.A.
Alabama’s offense comes alive and sparks a blowout win against Tennessee.
A more complete performance in double-digit win against the Volunteers would show how far the Tide have come since losing to Texas and struggling against South Florida.
This weekend will go one of two ways for Texas.
The buildup of disappointment from the past two weeks after the loss to Oklahoma will be released in cathartic fashion against Houston.
The alternative is that stewing for that long will allow the Longhorns to take their eye off the ball when traveling to face the Cougars, whose season will be made by beating their former Southwest Conference rival in their only season as Big 12 opponents.
Past versions of the Longhorns would slip up in this spot.
We'll not go that far, but expect a raucous home crowd help keep Houston in the game and the finish to be way closer than expected.
— Erick Smith
Utah will emerge victorious against Southern California in the Coliseum.
At first blush this might not seem like a bold pronouncement, since the Utes beat the Trojans not once but twice last season.
Nevertheless, with the Utes still likely to be without quarterback Cam Rising, the Trojans are touchdown favorites at home according to most outlets.
But we’re not buying.
Sure, USC still has Caleb Williams.
But the reigning Heisman winner doesn’t have the elite receiving talent he had a year ago, nor does he have the same pass protection.
Notre Dame forced five turnovers last week, and the Utes’ defensive front is even nastier.
Utah should also be able to move the ball on the ground, with or without Rising.
They might not win it going away, but the Utes will prevail.
The Ohio State game has been the biggest negative on James Franklin's resume at Penn State.
But is that really a Penn State thing, or is it just illustrative of how hard it is for anyone to beat Ohio State in this era?
I think it's the latter.
But the Buckeyes appear to be just a tiny bit more beatable this year — not by much, but by enough to put them in jeopardy of losing to perhaps Franklin's best team at Penn State.
While the Nittany Lions aren't necessarily as dynamic offensively as you'd like, we saw how much trouble Notre Dame's defense gave Ohio State earlier in the season.
And Penn State's defense is probably a cut above that.
So even in Columbus, this lines up as the year for Franklin to get Penn State's first win in the Horseshoe since 2011.
Visa-free travel for short-term visits to the U.S. for Israelis is now available.
Israel officially became part of the U.S. Visa Waiver Program on Thursday, which allows eligible Israeli citizens and nationals to travel to the U.S. for up to 90 days on business or tourism without having to first obtain a visa.
The admittance came earlier than estimated.
On Sept. 27, when admittance to VWP was announced, authorities said it would take until Nov. 30 to complete.
The VWP requires the person looking to come to the U.S. sans visa to "be from a country that extends to U.S. citizens and nationals the privileges we would extend to their citizens and nationals," according to a DHS press release.
Learn more: Best travel insurance
More:US airlines suspend flights to Israel as State Department urges caution
People can apply for the program via the U.S. Customs and Border Protection’s (CBP) Electronic System for Travel Authorization (ESTA) or via its mobile app.
Approval may take up to 72 hours.
To be eligible for VWP, Israeli citizens and nationals must have a biometrically enabled passport book.
Currently, the application is only available in English, but other languages are slated to come on Nov. 1.
The change comes as the conflict continues to build in the Middle East.
The death toll of Israelis and Palestinians surpassed 5,000 on Thursday, becoming the deadliest war on the Gaza Strip.
Kathleen Wong is a travel reporter for USA TODAY based in Hawaii.
You can reach her at kwong@usatoday.com.
Amsterdam will increase its tourist tax in 2024 in a continued effort to crack down on rowdy tourists.
The new rate will be the highest in Europe and the fourth highest globally.
The new tax rate for overnight visitors will be 12.5%, up substantially from 7%, according to an announcement by the city earlier this month.
The more expensive tax means tourists will be contributing more to the very city they're enjoying.
More:Why Amsterdam wants tourists to 'stay away'
Learn more: Best travel insurance
With the average room rate of €175 ($185.32), this translates to a €21.80 ($23.09) per night tax.
Currently, the tax would be €15.25 ($16.03).
Cruise passengers will also be paying more too.
The current tax is €8 ($8.41), and it's slated to go up to €11 ($11.56) per person per day.
By increasing the tourist tax, the city said it won't raise parking fees or property tax rates for its residents, according to the announcement.
The tourist tax revenue will go directly into enhancing Amsterdam neighborhoods, such as growing the city's green spaces.
The city's ongoing battle between troublesome tourists and locals goes back years.
Amsterdam isn't the only city making travelers pay for their share.
A few weeks ago, Iceland announced a tourist tax that would help protect its natural resources, which are a main draw for visitors.
So did Venice and Bali.
Even places in the U.S. charge a tourist tax.
In Honolulu, travelers have to pay a total of 13.25% for their accommodations, and that money supports services like lifeguards and hiking trail maintenance.
Kathleen Wong is a travel reporter for USA TODAY based in Hawaii.
You can reach her at kwong@usatoday.com
The holiday season is fast-approaching, and beginning next month Universal's theme parks will have plenty of ways to get in the spirit.
Universal Orlando Resort’s festivities will begin in mid-November, where visitors “can experience a mix of merry and mischief brought to life from holiday classics to experiences inspired by pop culture icons,” according to a news release.
Universal Studios Hollywood will kick off its celebrations later that month.
With fan favorites returning and some new features, here’s what guests can expect.
Holiday festivities run from Nov. 17-Dec. 31 at Universal Orlando Resort, and Nov. 24-Jan. 1 at Universal Studios Hollywood.
Meanwhile, Universal’s Holiday Parade featuring Macy’s will fill Universal Studios Florida with festive floats and performances, culminating in a cameo from Santa Claus and the lighting of a Christmas tree measuring 80 feet high.
Guests can see “The Magic of Christmas at Hogwarts Castle” there, too, lighting up the school with a projection show starting every night at dusk.
Holiday travel 2023:How to book the cheapest flights, according to experts
All holiday activities at Universal Studios Hollywood are included with park admission.
Universal Orlando Resort's holiday offerings are included with admission as well, but some, like Universal’s Holiday Tour, cost extra.
You can reach him at ndiller@usatoday.com.
UPDATE: This story has been updated with news that within hours of publication of USA TODAY's investigation, MSU suspended Coach Mel Tucker without pay.
Two years ago, one of the nation’s star college football coaches and a prominent rape survivor teamed up to fight the culture of sexual violence in sports.
Their partnership should have been a force for good.
Instead, it has devolved into scandal, with the activist accusing the coach of the same misconduct that both of them preached against.
Accusing him is Brenda Tracy, a rape survivor who has made educating athletes about sexual violence her life’s work.
Over eight months, they developed a professional relationship centered on her advocacy work.
Tucker invited Tracy to campus three times – twice to speak to his players and staff and once to be recognized as an honorary captain at the team's spring football game.
But their relationship was upended during a phone call on April 28, 2022, Tracy says in a complaint she filed with the university’s Title IX office in December that remains under investigation.
According to her complaint, Tracy sat frozen for several minutes while Tucker made sexual comments about her and masturbated.
His violation, she said, reopened 25-year-old wounds from her rape by four men – two Oregon State University football players, a junior college player and a high school recruit.
“The idea that someone could know me and say they understand my trauma but then re-inflict that trauma on me is so disgusting to me, it’s hard for me to even wrap my mind around it,” she told USA TODAY.
“It’s like he sought me out just to betray me.”
In his statements to the Title IX investigator, Tucker acknowledged masturbating on the call but said Tracy grossly mischaracterized the episode.
According to him, they had consensual “phone sex.”
Michigan State hired an outside Title IX attorney to investigate the complaint.
She finished her investigation in July.
A formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated the school’s policy banning sexual harassment and exploitation is scheduled for Oct. 5 and 6, during the Spartans’ bye week.
The stakes are high for everyone.
Tracy says Tucker is following through on a threat to ruin her career and reputation by painting her as a woman who mixes professional and personal relationships and files false reports.
She fears he will undo her legacy.
Tucker, who signed one of the most lucrative contracts in college sports history two years ago, could lose out on the roughly $80 million he is owed if Michigan State fires him for cause, which would be a stunning fall from the elite ranks of college coaches.
Reached by USA TODAY on his cellphone Saturday night, Tucker hung up after a reporter mentioned the case.
Hours after USA TODAY published its investigation, the university suspended Tucker without pay, pending a resolution of the Title IX case.
“This step, suspending Mel Tucker without pay, is … necessary and appropriate for today's circumstances,” Interim President Teresa Woodruff said at a Sunday evening press conference.
“These actions are not taken lightly.”
USA TODAY typically does not identify people who allege sexual harassment.
Tracy agreed to be identified and shared more than 1,200 pages of case documents.
Title IX, the federal law banning sex discrimination in education, requires schools to investigate allegations of sexual harassment that took place in the context of a school program or activity.
Such claims are inherently difficult to adjudicate because of many of the factors at issue in this case: a lack of eyewitnesses and recordings, the passage of time and the thorniness of litigating consent.
Adding to the uncertainty, the institution tasked with sorting out the facts is perhaps best known for missing repeated opportunities to stop one of the most prolific sexual abusers in American history.
Gymnastics and campus physician accused of sexually assaulting more than 300 female athletes under the guise of medical treatments.
He has been sentenced to a minimum of 100 years in prison.
Amid its efforts to rebuild trust among students, employees, alumni and the East Lansing community, Michigan State's leaders must now decide whether the face of its prestigious football program is guilty of sexually harassing one of the country’s most influential advocates against gender-based violence.
For some, how the university navigates the crisis will send a clear message about its commitment to progress.
“This goes beyond coach Tucker and Brenda Tracy,” said Jennifer Gomez, a Boston University professor who researches the effects of interpersonal trauma and violence.
“What happens here has the potential to be very healing or very harmful for lots and lots and lots of other people.”
Tracy and Tucker met in August 2021 during her first visit to Michigan State, after a mutual acquaintance introduced them.
Standing before a packed auditorium in the Spartans’ football operations building, Tracy told a gut-wrenching story of turning her pain into purpose two decades after filing a police report saying she had been gang-raped as a 24-year-old mother of two.
At the end, she challenged the “good men” in the room to use their privilege and influence to educate themselves and call out bad behavior.
By then she had delivered versions of the speech more than 100 times to at least 40,000 athletes and coaches.
Michigan State paid her a $10,000 speaking fee.
Tucker was in his second season as head coach.
A former University of Wisconsin-Madison defensive back, he had spent two decades coaching defenses for 10 college and NFL teams before landing the top job at the University of Colorado in late 2018.
Michigan State lured him away a year later by doubling his salary.
Mel Tucker's career at Michigan State: A timeline
Tucker and Tracy “hit it off” immediately, they would both later tell the Title IX investigator.
They bonded over their love of Jordan sneakers, shelves of which lined Tucker’s office walls.
Tucker had been moved by her speech, and she had been a big hit with players, he told the investigator.
They discussed her coming back to campus in the future.
Tracy left East Lansing feeling she had found a champion in Tucker, she told the investigator.
He seemed engaged with her cause, leading his players in signing her pledge to, among other things, obtain “ongoing, affirmative consent” before engaging in sexual acts with another person.
During that time, the two also talked on the phone at least 27 times, Tracy’s phone bills show – an average of once every two weeks for a half hour.
They often spoke at night to accommodate their work schedules, they said.
They chatted about their jobs and eventually more personal matters, such as their families, mental health and daily lives.
In November, Michigan State signed him to an unprecedented 10-year, $95 million deal that came fully guaranteed, even if it fired him for poor performance.
The only way he could lose out on the money, the contract said, was if he materially breached it, was convicted of a crime or engaged in “conduct which, in the University’s reasonable judgment, would tend to bring public disrespect, contempt or ridicule on the University.”
It was around then that Tucker, who had been married for more than two decades, started becoming interested in Tracy romantically, they both told the investigator.
Whether Tracy reciprocated is where their accounts diverge.
Tucker told the investigator that he and Tracy developed a romantic connection and talked openly about it.
They frequently made flirtatious comments about each other’s looks and bodies, Tucker said.
Tracy told him she wanted a “sugar daddy” who would pay her a monthly amount to be his girlfriend, he said, and that she would be “all over” him if he wasn’t married.
Tucker said they had acknowledged their mutual desire for a romance but agreed it would be “too messy” because of his marriage and the physical distance between them.
By contrast, Tracy told the investigator that Tucker’s romantic interest in her was entirely one-sided.
She said she came to feel he was less interested in her cause than in her.
Tucker messaged her photos of herself that he had found on her Instagram page, making comments such as, “This is the one,” or complimenting her eyes, Tracy said.
Once, Tucker called Tracy via FaceTime.
He was in bed, shirtless.
He talked about his unhappy marriage, describing himself as “more or less single.” Then, during a Nov. 9, 2021, call, she said he asked her, “If I wasn’t a football coach and if I wasn’t married, would you date me?”
Tracy said she responded that she would not because they worked together – one of several times she recalled trying to set boundaries.
She said she made clear to Tucker on a Dec. 1 call that they would only be friends, and he seemed to agree.
Then, after the spring game, Tucker called her four times, phone records show.
Tracy said he repeatedly asked her to meet him alone, without her assistant, and even suggested slipping into her hotel through a back door so no one would see him.
She said no.
Twelve days later came the call.
Tracy was in her home office in Oregon.
Tucker, who was in a hotel in Florida, called her at 12:39 a.m. EST, phone records show.
The call lasted 36 minutes.
According to Tucker, he became aroused when Tracy made a comment about needing to hit the gym more to look better without clothes on.
“Unequivocally, there’s no doubt about it,” Tucker told the investigator, case documents show.
“She was the one who said we’ll do it.”
Tracy denies all of that.
The call started off normal, she said.
But when she sent Tucker a photo of them together from the spring game, she said he responded by commenting on her buttocks and calling himself an “ass man.”
She remembered Tucker’s voice getting deeper and weirder as he continued talking about her buttocks.
She asked him what he was doing, and he said he had a “hard dick” and was touching himself.
“You’re touching yourself?” Tracy asked, according to the investigation report.
Tucker responded, “Yes.”
Tracy said she thought to herself, "Oh my god, this is happening, and I can’t stop it."
Eventually she said something along the lines of, “If you do this, I don’t ever want to hear about it, we are only friends, that’s it.”
When he finished, Tracy said, Tucker told her, “Thank you, good night, sweetheart.” She responded, “Yeah,” and he hung up.
Then she sat at her desk for a while, staring at her phone and crying.
Three months passed between the call and the next time Tracy and Tucker spoke.
At first, Tracy tried to pretend to herself that nothing had happened.
Tucker, however, was not responding to her text messages.
And he abruptly canceled her in-person training, planned for July 25, three days before it was supposed to take place.
A team staffer told her they had double-booked, but Tracy believed she knew the real reason.
When Tracy finally got Tucker on the phone about a week later, he was angry, she said, accusing her and her assistant of gossiping about his marital problems.
Tracy recalled that Tucker made comments such as, “I can’t trust you,” “If you say anything about this, I’ll hear about it,” and “I’ll be fine, it’s you that I am worried about.” She viewed it as a threat to destroy her reputation if she spoke out about him.
Tucker at one point told her he had done nothing wrong.
According to Tracy, she started to say, “Well, something…” referring to his masturbation, and Tucker interrupted, saying, “But nothing happened.”
Tucker recalled the Aug. 2 phone call much differently.
He told the investigator that Tracy apologized to him for discussing his marriage with her assistant, and he accepted.
Although they ended the call on good terms and discussed postponing her visit until next year, Tucker said he had lost trust in Tracy.
The training was never rescheduled, and they never spoke again.
Tracy initially stayed quiet about Tucker for the sake of her career, she said.
Ultimately, she decided that if she let it slide, she wouldn’t be the person she claimed to be – the one who encourages people to speak up about sexual misconduct and hold others accountable.
She filed her complaint in December – eight months after the call.
In dry and bureaucratic language, the record of that complaint begins: “The specific allegations of prohibited conduct against Respondent are as follows …” A notification was delivered to Tucker the following day.
Tucker was “absolutely shocked,” he would tell the university’s investigator.
In subsequent correspondence, he and his attorney suggested Tracy’s motive: She held a vendetta against Spartans athletics because of its history of sexual misconduct scandals and falsely accused him for financial gain.
“To say that I have learned from this situation is an understatement,” Tucker wrote in a letter to the investigator on March 22.
“I will never again allow myself to be duped by kindness.”
A former Indiana sex crimes prosecutor who now heads a private practice, she also previously worked in the Title IX offices at Michigan State and the University of Michigan.
Jacqueline Swanson, Tracy’s attorney who is also her friend, turned over a copy of the notes she took from their conversation on a yellow legal pad.
She shared a screenshot of a Dec. 2 text message in which Tracy told her she had just spoken with Tucker, who had agreed they could only be friends.
“I’m glad it didn’t get weird,” Tracy wrote.
Tracy provided phone bills and emails that corroborated her timeline of events and showed Tucker had been calling her from his personal cellphone.
Tracy said no.
In January, they sent a 12-page letter to the school arguing it lacked jurisdiction to investigate Tucker's “purely personal” relationship with Tracy.
“How far does MSU intend to go in policing the private conduct of its employees, and how does it expect its 20,000+ employees to react when they find out that they no longer have private lives outside the reach of their employer?”
Michigan State was not persuaded.
The alleged conduct would be covered by school policy, it concluded, because it took place in the context of Tracy’s work as a vendor for the school and affected their ongoing business relationship.
The case would go forward.
Tucker sat down for his interview on March 22.
He said he wanted to be transparent and set the record straight.
For instance, Tucker claimed he had made the phone sex call from home in East Lansing – not in a Florida hotel.
He had just returned from a trip to Florida, he said, where he had been doing charity work unrelated to his employment with the school.
An expense report Tucker submitted to Michigan State for his hotel and meal costs showed the trip's purpose was “administrative” and did not involve any personal travel.
The costs were paid by the Spartan Fund, the athletic department’s fundraising arm; he had flown to Florida on a donor’s private plane.
The information, Tucker said, made him question how Tracy “goes about her business.”
“I’m perplexed that Mel Tucker would respond to a complaint of sexual harassment by involving me or ESPN.”
Tucker did not identify any witnesses who could support his version of events, including his associate, whom he said he had promised anonymity.
That same associate, Tucker said, told him that Alvarado, Tracy’s assistant, had been gossiping about his marriage – a claim Alvarado denied.
Along the way, she had learned that one potentially rich source of evidence was missing: Both Tracy and Tucker had deleted their text messages with each other.
Tucker would tell her that he deletes his messages regularly because he receives so many; Tracy said she did so in a panic after their last phone call, feeling she needed to cut all ties with him.
At the hearing, planned for October, both sides will have the opportunity to present evidence and make arguments.
Another outside Title IX attorney hired by the school will then decide whether the evidence shows that Tucker likely violated school rules.
Among the witnesses who will be missing from Tracy’s witness list is her assistant and best friend, Alvarado.
She died in a car accident in June.
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
It was a private event thrown by the school to promote its migrant student services program, which provides financial aid and support to farmworkers seeking college degrees.
After the April 28, 2022, tour, disclosed in records obtained by USA TODAY this week, Tucker met with community leaders and alumni.
That night, Tucker would make the now-infamous phone call from his hotel room in nearby Naples, during which he is accused of masturbating and making unwanted sexual comments to Brenda Tracy, a prominent rape survivor and activist he had hired to speak to his team about sexual violence.
Yet, when Tucker met with the university’s outside investigator in March for his interview in the sexual harassment case against him, he insisted the trip was not work-related – a claim the investigator would disprove in her report.
It’s just one example of Tucker failing to keep his story straight at the most consequential moment of his career.
With his job, reputation and the roughly $80 million left on his contract at stake, Tucker repeatedly made false statements to the investigator and misled her about basic facts, such as his location during the phone call and the date it occurred, a USA TODAY review of more than 1,200 pages of case documents found.
Michigan State suspended Tucker without pay on Sept. 10, hours after Tracy went public for the first time with her story in USA TODAY.
On Monday, the school informed Tucker it plans to fire him for cause based on the conduct he had admitted to and the embarrassment he had caused the school.
Investigation:Michigan State football coach Mel Tucker accused of sexually harassing rape survivor
Although Tucker denied sexually harassing Tracy, he acknowledged masturbating on the call, saying he and Tracy had been in a romantic relationship and had consensual “phone sex.” Tracy said Tucker’s romantic interest in her was completely one-sided and that she had tried to set boundaries multiple times during their yearlong business partnership.
Per his contract, Tucker has until Tuesday to make a case for keeping his job.
Regardless, a formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated school policies against sexual harassment and exploitation is expected to proceed on Oct. 5 and 6.
He accused the school of conducting a “sham” hearing and having “ulterior motives.” Yet even in these written statements, the central details of his story changed entirely.
Tucker, who previously hung up on a reporter who called him on his cellphone asking about the case, did not respond to a message seeking comment for this story.
Tracy declined to comment for this story.
“Very often you’re weighing credibility based on little bits and pieces of information.”
“I believe a fact finder could assess these pieces of evidence about credibility and make a determination that Brenda is more credible than Mel,” she said.
“In my experience, a clear sign of a lack of credibility is generally taken very seriously.”
The school had informed him of Tracy’s complaint on Dec. 22, the day after she filed it.
Tucker was the only holdout.
Rather than tell his side of the story right away, Tucker and his attorney spent three months trying to stop the investigation, case documents show.
They wrote legal arguments urging Michigan State to drop the case and twice approached Tracy’s attorney proposing a settlement agreement.
Tracy said no, and the school pressed forward.
Only a handful of text messages remained; he and Tracy both told the investigator they had deleted their texts with each other in the months after the April 2022 phone call.
In his interview, which lasted 3 ½ hours, Tucker questioned whether Tracy had mixed up the date of the call.
He said he recalled being at his home in East Lansing when it occurred, but his own records showed that he had been in Florida on April 28, attending a charity function that was “absolutely not a University-sponsored event.”
His seven-page account told a different story – that he had called her while he was “alone in a hotel room.”
But by then she knew what he told her in the interview was untrue: she had already obtained records proving he had not been home in East Lansing.
An expense report he had submitted to the university for reimbursement of his hotel and meals shows Tucker flew to Naples, Florida, to attend a golf fundraiser hosted by The Greg H. Montgomery Jr. Foundation for Ultimate Growth, which raises awareness for suicide prevention.
It showed he stayed at the Hilton from April 27 to 29, that the trip’s purpose was “administrative” and that it did not involve personal travel.
He had flown there on a donor’s private plane.
The event was titled “Working to make dreams a reality,” according to an agenda obtained from the university by USA TODAY through a public records request.
The agenda features Tucker’s name prominently.
Tucker posted photos from the tour on his Twitter account.
That Tucker was on a university-sponsored work trip during the incident was a contributing factor in the university’s determination that it had jurisdiction to investigate, the investigation report shows.
Tucker’s lists of calls and text messages also were missing an important detail: They did not show any communication with Tracy on April 28.
He acknowledged in the interview, however, that he had not reviewed the lists before submitting them and that they may have been incomplete.
Tucker and Tracy did not speak in the three months after the April 28 call.
Meanwhile, their assistants were planning Tracy’s third visit to campus – an in-person training with coaches and players scheduled for July 25.
Tucker canceled that training three days before, the investigation report shows.
When Tracy spoke to him by phone on Aug. 2 seeking to find out why, she would tell the investigator in her interview that Tucker insinuated he would harm her career if she spoke about his conduct.
He never rescheduled her visit, and they never spoke again.
The cancellation became a key focus of the investigator – one of a series of alleged incidents that taken together would meet the definition of sexual harassment, which can include pressuring someone into engaging in sexual behavior for an employment benefit and threatening that rejecting such behavior will carry a negative consequence.
Tucker tried to distance himself from the cancellation in a public statement on Sept. 11, the day after Michigan State suspended him without pay.
“I never cancelled any presentation,” he wrote.
But that statement contradicts what he told the investigator.
Such timing would not make sense, he added, because most of his new players would not yet be on campus.
Tucker also told the investigator why he canceled the visit, blaming it on a scheduling conflict.
He said he had recently hired a mental conditioning coach, Ben Newman, who needed to implement his new program on short notice.
There was limited time in fall camp, Tucker said, and he didn’t want to “overwhelm” the players.
He said he decided to yield the time to Newman.
He had been meeting with them weekly since June 6, the records showed but held no meetings between July 15 and July 28.
One of Tucker’s assistants, who is a witness in the case, also told the investigator that Tucker asked him via text message to cancel it.
He said he was never instructed to reschedule.
Tucker confronted Tracy about the alleged gossiping during the Aug. 2 phone call, they both told the investigator.
Tracy said he berated and bullied her, repeatedly saying he could not trust her.
She said she told him she did not know what he was talking about.
During the Aug. 2 call, Tracy said she pressed Tucker to identify his source – the associate.
In her report, she wrote that he said he had “given (his) word that (he) wouldn’t divulge their name.”
Tucker never revealed the associate’s name to the investigator, nor did he identify anyone who could support his version of events.
In his Sept. 11 public statement, however, he lamented that the hearing would not afford him the opportunity to “offer any substantive evidence of innocence.”
It was not the only claim he attributed to his anonymous associate.
It turned out to be yet another falsehood.
“Neither the organization nor Tracy is or has been the target of any investigative reporting.”
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
Contributing: USA TODAY reporter Steve Berkowitz.
The bullets came in plywood crates.
Any given box was about the size of a small microwave oven.
The printed label stuck to each one demonstrated a militaristic brevity.
“CARTRIDGES FOR WEAPONS, INERT PROJECTILE,” next to a bright yellow hazmat sticker, “EXPLOSIVES.”
Inside the boxes: drab green steel cans of .50-caliber ammunition.
Each round was giant, more than 5 inches long, built to be fired from a gun so big it is typically bolted to a truck.
The bullets were clipped together in long strands for rapid, machine-gun fire.
By the time Bill Brown got to the boxes, they sat double-stacked eight high atop wooden pallets inside a Missouri warehouse.
The pallets went on, row after row.
Three million bullets in all.
It was enough ammunition to feed a single machine gun – if fired nonstop at its rated speed eight hours a day, seven days a week – for almost six months.
Brown’s job was to get it out of there and toward the Ukrainian front lines.
The faster, the better.
“War is bad,” Brown said.
There would be virtually no public record of this Ukrainian arms shipment.
As a weapons dealer, Brown’s company would deliver the bullets under a system known as a direct commercial sale.
Instead, it was part of a shadowy system of brokers, exporters, arms dealers and country-to-country transfers that has become one part of the race to meet demand on distant battlefields.
President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said the effort was delayed in part by the wait for more arms.
Most of America’s $44 billion in documented support to Ukraine came in the form of old U.S. military stock, donated directly by the federal government.
In general, commercial sales over $14 million, and sales of military-grade weaponry like mortars or missiles, require State Department approval and congressional notification.
But other aid comes via private sales.
More than 14,000 U.S. entities are registered to conduct defense trade activities.
Their deals are monitored by an alphabet soup of agencies including Departments of Homeland Security, Commerce, Defense and the Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
Trade secrecy clauses in federal law mean this flow of gear, weapons and ammunition is almost never revealed to the public.
Brown, who works for a small Nevada-based logistics company called Battle Born Munitions, provided USA TODAY with a rare look behind the curtain of these private sales.
Details about the shipment were verified by his employer and the European government that made the purchase.
State Department officials declined to answer questions about the specific shipment Brown described.
This March sale and the secret number of other shipments like it fuel Ukraine’s fight against a Russian invasion.
Those sales also release an unknown amount of weaponry into the world.
What becomes of that weaponry after it’s sold – and especially after it’s delivered – is difficult to track.
As Brown surveyed the warehouse in Missouri, a crew steered forklifts and skid lifts among the stacks of plain wooden boxes.
From high in the trusses, suspended lamp fixtures bathed the boxes in artificial daylight.
Brown lifted his camera and started snapping photos.
In just a few hours, he and his cargo would be boarding a jumbo jet.
From Ukraine:War crimes in Ukraine may be unprecedented.
So is the country's push for swift justice.
The bullets had once been bound for Saudi Arabia.
Lot number SMQ19K401L026 had rolled off the assembly line in 2019 at Lake City Army Ammunition Plant near Kansas City.
Lake City, owned by the government and run by a contractor, sprawls across nearly 4,000 acres of green Missouri farmland.
Roads curve past World War II-era bunkers known as igloos, spaced out amid the countryside – far enough apart that an explosion in one won’t trigger a chain reaction in the others.
Lake City has been pumping out ammunition almost without pause since 1941.
It is the largest small-arms manufacturing plant in the world.
And in 2019, Saudi Arabia was stocking up on weapons during the Trump administration, fueling the war in Yemen and other conflicts that drew criticism from congressional Democrats.
The plant manufactures .50-caliber ammunition on a rolling basis, for both military and commercial buyers.
That’s a testament to just what a legend the bullet – and the gun that shoots it – has become.
In 2019, the technology was already a century old.
The .50 caliber was the brainchild of American gunsmith John Browning during World War I.
Built to respond to German anti-tank rifles, the M2 was first tested in 1918, and it entered widespread service in 1923.
It earned the nickname “Ma Deuce” and has served in combat ever since, bolted to trucks, ships, planes and handheld stands on the battlefield.
The .50-caliber rounds – named for their diameter, about half an inch – can easily hit targets more than a mile away.
At closer ranges, they will blast through solid concrete or armored vehicles.
The gun can fire at a sustained rate of about 40 shots per minute.
Military setups use strings of “linked” ammunition to feed into machine guns.
Spaced out after every fourth bullet, so-called tracer rounds have small pyrotechnic charges that illuminate the line of fire, aiding in targeting.
The gun’s longevity and versatility made it popular for militaries the world over.
But this particular batch of bullets wouldn’t end up being sold to Saudi Arabia.
The Biden administration put a temporary freeze on sales to the Saudi government in 2021 as it reviewed weapons deals approved under Donald Trump.
Instead, Brown said, the bullets were sold to a U.S. ammunition provider, only to be held up again.
Ultimately, they were mothballed.
Then, in spring 2023, the bullets found a buyer, or actually two: first Battle Born; ultimately, the Netherlands.
The European country, a NATO ally, needed a big supply of ammunition.
It wouldn’t be keeping the bullets but giving them to Ukraine.
Its purchase, essentially a donation, would count toward the country’s required NATO contribution.
Brown had a line on exactly what they needed.
It was sitting in the warehouse in Missouri.
He arrived in March to personally oversee the shipment.
As he prepped for delivery, Brown dropped tiny black tracking devices onto several of the pallets.
Just $55 apiece, the units use GPS and cell signals to keep tabs on the load.
The idea was to ensure it wouldn’t fall into the wrong hands.
But packing up the bullets was just the beginning.
As with anything that’s deadly and made of metal, the shipping costs can be extreme.
Forty-five to 60 days on a ship?
Brown – or Chief Bill, as he prefers – is a no-nonsense 35-year veteran of the U.S. Army and former helicopter pilot.
He retired as a chief warrant officer and lives in Orlando.
Now 59, he still spends a lot of time on the road – 10 international trips this year.
He says his arms logistics work takes him to places most Americans would rather avoid – near the Syrian border or to unstable regions of Iraq.
He’ll travel halfway around the world, he quips, “have some soup, and go back to Warsaw to head home.” The trips aren’t really about the destinations.
They’re about the cargo.
On that spring day in Missouri, forklifts carefully loaded 107 pallets of the ammo onto 18 flatbed semitrailers.
They’d all make the eight-hour drive to O’Hare International Airport.
In Chicago, two Boeing 747-400s operated by National Airlines would be ready for the freight.
Four pallets each were stacked and shrink-wrapped to create “air pallets” or “cookie sheets” weighing 12,800 pounds.
Each plane could carry up to 17 of the pallets that ran the length of each plane secured by white cargo netting.
Flight records Brown provided show the two planes departed about seven hours apart, one in early afternoon, one after dark.
The flight would take nine hours.
Brown wasn’t going to the Netherlands, even though it was the buyer.
The planes were bound for Rzeszów, Poland.
The ancient city sits at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains in southeastern Poland.
It has a gleaming modern airport next to a major east-west freeway.
From there, it’s barely 60 miles to the border with Ukraine.
It was an expensive journey.
The trucking company’s bill for those 18 semis?
Chartering the two 747s?
But this shipment of .50-cal rounds was profitable for Battle Born Munitions, according to Brown.
The company purchased the 3 million rounds from Northrop Grumman at a bargain and resold them for more than double the price.
(In subsequent interviews, representatives at BBM disputed the specific totals Brown mentioned, saying the accurate figures were protected by “various commercial and government non-disclosure agreements.” They did not dispute the other specifics of the deal he provided.)
Retail prices for .50-caliber ammunition run roughly $5 per bullet.
At that rate, the whole shipment would have been worth $15 million.
The pricing might also be elastic.
The Dutch mark up the price of the bullets and count it toward their NATO contribution, pegged to a percentage of gross domestic product, Brown said.
The Netherlands has contributed about $15 billion to NATO this year, or about 1.7% of its GDP and just under the NATO mandate of 2%.
Representatives of the Dutch military confirmed the shipment to USA TODAY but declined to comment further about the pricing or details.
The war in Ukraine has only increased the demand for private deals.
The State Department signed off on more than $154 billion in commercial arms deals directly to foreign countries in 2022, a 48% increase from the previous year.
Direct commercial sales represent a modest portion of the contribution to Ukraine compared with the $44 billion donated by the U.S., but they still amounted to more than $600 million in sales from U.S. companies to the Ukrainian government last year alone.
That doesn’t include sales to other countries that also support Ukraine – sales like the one Brown described.
Jim Bartlett, an attorney with expertise in the specialized international arms transactions, said private U.S. businesses are playing a small but important role in the conflict.
“American companies are happy to export defense articles to foreign buyers approved by the U.S. State Department,” Bartlett said.
Those sales also come with risks.
Direct sales face fewer regulatory controls, oversight and enforcement, said Robert Nichols, an international military sales expert and attorney at the law firm Nichols Liu.
“You can imagine the range of characters involved in supplying a war effort,” Nichols said.
So far, the Department of Justice has indicted just a handful of arms brokers over deals related to the war in Ukraine.
They allegedly lied to Commerce Department agents and told them the parts were bound for Turkey.
Both pleaded not guilty to the charges this summer.
A State Department spokesman declined to provide details of enforcement actions but said, “The United States takes seriously our responsibility to protect American military and dual-use technologies and prevent their diversion, including through strong enforcement actions.”
NATO said it oversees allied arms deliveries, and that those arms generally reach Ukraine.
NATO itself technically only provides non-non-lethal aid, like fuel, medical supplies and generators.
Brown, of Battle Born, says he fields calls weekly from “clowns” without the proper licensing, whom he reports to the State Department for potential violations.
Some raise red flags when they approach him about transactions that include payment via diamonds or gold.
He prefers traditional wire transfers with approved sales partners since he knows government officials are watching.
He validates the contracts and checks certificates for the final users.
That’s part of why he traveled with the ammunition.
He would be meeting a Dutch military official for the official handoff.
“My job is to keep us all out of jail,” Brown said.
The two 747s touched down in Poland, one before the sun, the other in late morning.
Brown exchanged paperwork with a young Dutch military staffer who signed for the delivery, he said.
They traded military patches as souvenirs.
They snapped a photo together.
The bullets bought by the Netherlands would never touch Dutch soil.
U.S. aid:Billions from the US flows to Ukraine.
Here's where it comes from, and how it adds up
Despite playing a small role proportionately in the war, $600 million in direct commercial sales can buy a lot of small weaponry.
Put another way: It’s hard to sneak away an F-16 or a missile launcher the size of a tractor-trailer.
But a bunch of guns or a pallet of ammo?
Much easier to resell.
After Russia invaded Ukraine in 2014, the Small Arms Survey, a Swiss arms research project, estimated that within a year, battlefield seizures and other forms of diversion led to 300,000 small arms and light weapons going missing, including 100,000 in Crimea alone.
When small arms go missing, they can go missing into another country, maybe one led by a despot or even a terrorist organization.
The U.S. government says diversion of American donations has been widely absent so far in Ukraine.
That could be a combination of intensive “end-use-monitoring” programs and the reality of the battlefield, where supplies are rapidly put to use.
But even if not now, unused ammo could be resold someday.
“These are commodities with very long shelf lives.”
Florida-based Global Ordnance, another State Department-licensed exporter, is a competitor in the direct weapons sales business.
General counsel Bryan Van Brunt said the company has extensive protocols in place to track shipments and make sure the end-users are federally approved, though he declined to provide specifics about those systems.
Brown, with Battle Born Munitions, says the company employs a mix of simple and sophisticated tracking technology to ensure his shipments are tracked to end users.
The black GPS devices he dropped onto his cargo tracked the ammo all the way across the globe.
But that system only works as long as Brown is actually tracking.
“Technically, my role ends when I deliver it to NATO,” he said.
Sometime after the 747s touched down in Poland, along with signing the paperwork and snapping a selfie with the Dutch official, Brown found the tiny black GPS trackers and lifted them off the pallets.
Ukrainian trucks would arrive at the airport to pick up the ammunition.
They would point toward the border, and onward to Lviv, and some distant battlefield.
Brown would point in the opposite direction.
Just like one of his quips: Fly in, have soup, get home.
He headed toward Warsaw, with the GPS trackers in his bag.
Contact him at npenz@usatoday.com or @npenzenstadler, or on Signal at (720) 507-5273.
The geography professor didn’t hide his clown fetish or the fact that he sometimes indulged his urges by recruiting students as subjects.
He posted regularly about it on social media.
He submitted his resignation the same day their story was published.
His interactions with students and open discussion of his fetish happened in both mainstream and tailored digital spaces.
He popped into Facebook groups geared toward new students and niche forums on websites like Reddit.
He posted videos on YouTube.
Over the years, two students reported him to campus police; others complained online.
He left Kent State University after pleading no contest to something different: a theft charge that involved entering his peers’ offices without permission and taking a USB drive.
Nicholls State, for example, told USA TODAY Network reporters it does not routinely check social media for new hires.
The money was appealing but the interactions soured.
“I thought maybe they could prevent anything bad from happening since other girls would go with him.”
She said there was never any followup from campus police – or anyone else.
The two who expressed public concerns on social media told USA TODAY they never heard from their campus officials either.
She said she would pass along that reporters were trying to reach him.
He said his contract was not renewed because he was the target of a “grade inflation task force.”
She has seen the pattern often in her work maintaining a database of publicly documented sexual misconduct by faculty and staff.
As for grad students?
“I don’t on purpose,” she said, “because that’s information that almost never comes out.”
He was working toward his doctorate and researched fading businesses.
His work about shopping malls in the Rust Belt won several awards.
Like many graduate students, he also taught classes.
“I will literally pay you!”
What’s more, she figured out that he was a graduate student, a fact she said he didn’t disclose in his posts.
It arrived at midnight and contained no message, although writing on his shirt read: “I'm not a failure.”
“It’s definitely burned into my mind.”
He would send “get to know you” messages, the police report said, and then ask the student if she was “interested in having her face painted for one of his class projects.”
“She does not have any concerns for her safety, but just wanted this documented,” the police report read.
In July 2017, another student had retweeted a message from Kent State’s Twitter account that asked for Kent State love stories.
She said she tweeted to draw officials’ attention to it and moved on but now wishes she had reported it officially.
College campuses are supposed to offer students special protections from sexual harassment even when it falls short of criminal behavior.
Title IX, often associated with equity in women’s sports, also addresses “sex-based harassment, which encompasses sexual assault and other forms of sexual violence” at schools that receive federal funding.
Colleges infrequently and unevenly enforce the rule, however.
A 2022 USA TODAY investigation found just one of every 12,400 students was suspended in connection with sexual misconduct.
The student who shared her story online said the only response she received was from a graduate student in the geography department, who contacted her on Oct. 1, 2018.
In an email, he wrote that he had seen her post and suspected he knew which faculty member had asked her about face painting.
“I brought it to the attention of some of our faculty because I was pretty sure I knew who it was, but they were certain it wasn’t that individual and that you probably just meant geology,” he wrote.
He went on to reference another student being “approached in (at least by just looking at your tweet) a much more aggressive way.” The grad student asked the undergraduate for more information, but, she told USA TODAY, she didn’t respond.
She said she started drafting a reply, but a year had passed.
She wanted to move on.
Kent State would not say whether any actions were taken after the students’ reports, but Eric Mansfield, a spokesman for the university, said the police department confirmed that the students who filed police reports were provided with “university resources, which would include other non-criminal avenues to pursue (Counseling Services, Title IX, Center for Sexual and Relationship Violence Services, etc.)
Mansfield also said that the university monitors social media but that colleges “can’t always see or track every mention on social media.”
A blotter item in the local newspaper shows police obtained an arrest warrant in connection with a third-degree felony burglary charge.
“Also, we do not comment on personnel matters.”
In more recent years, Buckley has become critical of the law and how schools interpret it.
He told the Columbus Dispatch in 2010 that “the law needs to be revamped.”
Survivors of sexual violence and students accuse universities of using the law to avoid negative media coverage.
Students with a history of bad behavior may jump from one school to another without the public ever knowing about their histories.
One case involved Brandon Austin, who was accused of sexual assault at Providence College in 2013 while on the school’s basketball team.
But Providence College initially said Austin was suspended for violating the school’s code of student conduct and declined to share further details with the Providence Journal, citing federal privacy laws.
Austin denied wrongdoing and was not charged with a crime.
Austin was able to transfer to the University of Oregon, where he was again accused of sexual assault, along with other players.
Police investigated the claims, and the local district attorney declined to press charges.
And it doesn’t apply when a student is “seeking or intending to enroll” at another college.
He blamed the overuse of the law on fear of being sued.
While most U.S. employers conduct background screening, according to trade group data, those inquiries typically focus on criminal history.
Social media receives far less attention even though that is where people are most likely to share their unguarded thoughts.
Undertaking a full review of a person’s social media presence is more difficult than just checking an applicant’s Facebook page.
Does an applicant have an account on X, formerly Twitter?
How about an account with Discord, an online platform frequented by gamers, where leaked Pentagon documents were recently shared?
Or what about a Telegram account, a messaging platform popular among white nationalists?
Further complicating things, it’s common on sites like Reddit for users to adopt usernames and describe experiences with little to no ties to reality.
A little digging, however, can turn up a lot of dirt.
His time as a student and instructor at Kent State is absent.
That is the same handle used on Reddit by someone with a special interest in face paint.
Other posts mention a “clown fetish.” In a forum titled “Creepy,” he wrote, “I convince pretty girls to let me paint their faces,” along with a photo with multiple women in white face paint.
That and other similar posts remained live for years until they were taken down after the Nicholls students published their story in late March.
USA TODAY Network reporters captured screenshots before they disappeared.
With dates in 2019, the posts feature a young woman wearing a Kent State T-shirt.
The material would have been available to administrators at Northern Illinois before the start of the fall 2019 semester.
Joe King, a spokesman for Northern Illinois, said departments hiring new graduate students are “not required to check social media or investigate a disciplinary history.” He added some departments may reach out to the graduate students’ former advisers.
But there are signs the behavior continued.
She said she declined to do it but was aware that other Northern Illinois students had participated.
She asked, had anyone complained?
Many students would find a reason to complain, as Nicholls State student journalist Sally-Anne Torres learned firsthand.
It started in January when one of her fellow reporters picked up an odd rumor: a professor was offering extra credit for students willing to paint their faces like clowns.
Initially, Torres dismissed it because it seemed too unusual and there weren’t a lot of leads to follow.
He blamed his departure on giving too many A’s.
That seemed suspicious to Torres.
“It wasn’t just this innocent thing that a lot of these girls thought it was,” Torres said.
Some, she said, were followed on Twitter by him while others opted into an extra credit assignment he offered.
The women told Torres he sometimes giggled and laughed as they painted their faces in his office.
It seemed unusual at the time, Price said, because his friend wasn’t in the class.
It became more concerning to him on reading the student newspaper’s report.
“I feel frankly disgusted and disappointed that Nicholls couldn’t do a proper background check on this professor, because this is unacceptable,” Price said.
Ramos learned that the person behind the account was likely a professor at the university.
She posted about the behavior in January 2022, but nothing came of it.
On March 27, the same day the student newspaper published its piece, Ramos posted screenshots of her discoveries on Twitter with the message, “Found a Nicholls state university professor on Reddit.”
“I wish the university had acted sooner because all this information was public on the internet,” she told USA TODAY.
No one from the university, she said, has ever reached out.
He can be reached at CCampo@gannett.com.
"So if you think you can intimidate me, go … suck it up, buttercup!"
Washington, D.C., was gridlocked this week as House Republicans failed to elect a new speaker.
The caucus nominated Jordan, an ultraconservative representative from Ohio.
But, she told reporters, she had concerns about whether Jordan could unify the party, and she was worried about the looming threat of a government shutdown.
"As soon as the vote was had in conference, and then, not two hours later, we had that coming out."
She cast her vote Wednesday for U.S. Rep. Kay Granger of Texas, a Republican who chairs the Appropriations Committee.
Jordan then lost a secret ballot and withdrew his nomination.
She anticipates House Republicans will successfully choose a speaker "next week."
"I have told everybody I’m not doing anything until Sunday."
Katie Akin is a politics reporter for the Register.
Reach her atkakin@registermedia.com.
Follow her on Twitter at @katie_akin.
The latest guilty pleas from two key allies in Donald Trump's high-profile Georgia election interference case put new pressure on the former president and raise questions about whether his once-loyal associates may one day flip on him.
Coming after a third defendant, Scott Hall, pleaded guilty in September, their deals bolster the weapons in prosecutors' toolbox, and may pressure other defendants to flip -- a move that would raise the legal stakes for Trump.
"It is ominous for the other defendants in the state or federal cases, above all Donald Trump."
"The defendant provided detailed instructions to co-conspirators in Georgia and other states for creating and distributing these false documents," she said.
Sixteen co-defendants in the Georgia case, including Trump, Eastman and Giuliani, have pleaded not guilty.
Powell, an election lawyer who spread baseless claims of voter fraud, pleaded guilty Thursday to a half-dozen misdemeanors associated with tampering with election equipment in Coffee County, Georgia.
Legal experts said Powell's agreement to provide testimony could have a weighty impact on the wider case because she had significant dealings with Trump, Giuliani, and others.
Powell can also describe how co-defendants tried to overturn the 2020 election.
She and Giuliani attended a raucous meeting at the White House with Trump, where they discussed having the military seize voting machines.
Trump never acted on the proposal.
Hall, a bail bondsman who served as a go-between for several of the co-defendants, pleaded guilty in September to five misdemeanors dealing with interfering with election duties.
Hall also made multiple calls to co-defendants in the case.
For example, Hall spoke with Jeffrey Clark, a former assistant attorney general, for more than an hour Jan. 2, 2021, according to the indictment.
Clark, who pleaded not guilty, is charged with drafting a letter of false statements about Justice Department concerns with the 2020 election, to be sent to Georgia officials.
Hall also spoke repeatedly with co-defendants accused of trying to intimidate election workers to change their stories about what happened with ballot counting at State Farm Arena on election night 2020.
Summer said McAfee would have to take the schedules for Trump's other criminal trials into account, as well as his attorneys' scheduling conflicts.
"Assuming he's acquitted in the DC case, I think then they'll probably specially set a trial for sometime after that, maybe the fall of 2024," she said.
Who could benefit the most from Biden’s latest attempt at student loan forgiveness?
Undergraduates at public two-year colleges might be in the best position – if the administration’s new policy holding predatory colleges more accountable goes as planned, that is.
And borrowers who earn certificates, rather than four-year degrees, using the new income-driven repayment plan will have to pay back only about a third, on average, of what they borrowed.
Those findings were laid out in a research analysis published this week by the Urban Institute, a social and economic policy think tank.
The report uses data from the College Scorecard, an online Education Department tool that lets consumers compare colleges, to determine what loan repayment might look like under the policy revision dubbed by the administration "Saving on A Valuable Education," or SAVE.
The system bases monthly loan repayments on borrowers' incomes and family sizes, according to the Education Department, lowering payments for almost everyone who participates.
Income-driven repayment is not a new concept, but Education Secretary Miguel Cardona has referred to the newest iteration of the program as the “most affordable repayment plan ever.” For some borrowers, it will reduce monthly payments to $0.
More than 4 million borrowers have already enrolled, and it will be fully available to all federal student-loan borrowers starting July 1, 2024.
Undergraduates are in luck, the report says.
Nearly all the largest undergraduate fields in the country will see a decrease in the number of programs in which borrowers typically repay their loans in full.
Yet the plan, according to researchers, is less likely to increase the already large benefits for typical graduate borrowers, who have historically benefited disproportionately compared with undergrads from income-driven repayment plans.
Graduate students on average take out more loans than undergraduates, and a 2020 report from the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office showed they received the most help from income-based programs.
Undergraduate psychology programs could also see an easier path to repayment, according to the report.
Under current income-driven repayment policies, nearly 100% of programs require such borrowers to fully repay, the report says.
That number will drop to a little more than a quarter of programs under SAVE.
The program seems to be good news for borrowers pursuing humanities and teaching degrees, too.
A smaller difference, the researchers suggest, is expected for borrowers pursuing degrees in engineering, finance or registered nursing.
In those fields, most undergraduate programs based on income already require the typical borrower to fully repay their loans.
That doesn’t seem likely to change, at least not significantly, because those borrowers generally go on to higher-paying jobs.
When it comes to the SAVE rollout, one big question mark will be the implications of the Biden administration’s efforts to crack down on predatory colleges, according to Jason Cohn, a research analyst at the Urban Institute and one of the authors of the report.
The analysis, for instance, predicts the highest loan forgiveness rate under SAVE will be at public two-year institutions.
But it's a conclusion that can only be made after excluding programs likely to fail new accountability metrics rolled out last month by the Education Department.
Without the new so-called "gainful employment" rule, Cohn told USA TODAY, the highest forgiveness rate could actually be at for-profit institutions.
“A lot of it really comes down to how institutions and students see this issue, how this information gets spread, and also how accountability efforts play out,” he said.
You can reach him by email at zschermele@usatoday.com.
Follow him on X at @ZachSchermele.
Lots of candy.
To get at that candy, trick-or-treaters might well have to ring your doorbell.
Halloween is possibly the day of the year when your doorbell gets used the most, so why not make it part of the spooky season festivities?
Thanks to modern technology and the creation of smart doorbells, that's easy to do.
Ditch the classic ding-dong and instead opt for a more holiday-appropriate sound, like a howl, a cackling witch, or other creepy sounds.
Looking to add some spooky lighting to your Halloween setup?
Watch this video to see how you can easily take your Halloween lights to the next level.
There are a lot of smart doorbells on the market.
With so many options, the exact steps on how to change your doorbell sound will vary depending on which smart device you have.
To change your doorbell sound:
The sounds that are available will vary depending on which doorbell you have.
The festive doorbell chimes are only available for a limited period.
Purchases you make through our links may earn us and our publishing partners a commission.
Reviewed helps you find the best stuff and get the most out of what you already own.
Our team of home experts test everything from air purifiers to vacuum cleaners help you shop for the best of the best.
We already knew Bad Bunny was a wrestling fan – and a participant after his appearance at a WWE event in May.
Now, Bad Bunny fans can fight as the performer themselves in the new WWE 2K23 video game.
WWE 2K23 The Bad Bunny Edition, which includes the Bad Bunny character clad in the clothing he wore in the Backlash 2023 event in Puerto Rico and more perks, is out now.
This version of the game, priced at $139.99 for PCs on Steam, Microsoft Xbox Series X and Xbox One, and Sony PlayStation 5 and PS4 game consoles, is rated Teen for ages 13 and up.
It also includes the Icon Edition of the video game released back in March (priced at $119.99), with a season pass for downloadable content, throwback versions of John Cena and other wrestlers, exclusive arenas and more.
Another version, the Bad Bunny Bundle ($89.99), has all the special content related to the performer and the WWE 2K23 Cross-Gen Standard Edition for PlayStation or Xbox consoles, plus virtual currency.
Bad Bunny:He and Kendall Jenner go Instagram official with joint Gucci campaign
Players who already own the WWE 2K23 video game can separately purchase the Bad Bunny Superstar Pack for $9.99.
Don't own the game yet?
The standard version is 50% off through Oct. 25 for PlayStation consoles (digital download) and PCs on Steam.
The video game announcement comes amid a busy time for the rapper and singer.
And this week, he announced his Most Wanted Tour, with a four-month, 31-city itinerary, kicking off Feb. 21 in Salt Lake City, Utah, and running through May to end with three consecutive shows in Miami.
Oh, and on Saturday night, Bad Bunny is not only the host on "Saturday Night Live," but also the musical guest, too.
Gaming monitors:2023's best 24-inch gaming monitors
What's everyone talking about?
Sign up for our trending newsletter to get the latest news of the day
A grocery store in Petersburg, Alaska had an unexpected customer Tuesday, leaving store employees and other shoppers in shock.
A black bear cub was spotted roaming the produce aisle at the Petersburg's Trading Union IGA, scaring customers, Alaska News Source reported.
Alaska State Troopers, two wildlife troopers and units from the Petersburg Police Department were called to the scene, where officers chased the cub through the aisles of fruits and vegetables with a steel catch pole, video footage from the incident shows.
After some struggle, authorities were able to corner and catch the young cub where the shopping carts are stored.
The black bear was escorted out and loaded into the back of a trooper vehicle, after a lot of fuss and protest.
Watch:Mama bear, cub raid Krispy Kreme delivery van in Alaska, scarf dozens of doughnuts
The bear cub unfortunately had to be euthanized, Justin Freeman, a public information officer with the Alaska State Troopers told USA TODAY.
Freeman said that the decision was made in coordination with the Alaska Department of Fish and Game for a variety of reasons.
"The bear was small and emaciated for this time of year," explained Freeman.
The spokesperson further said that the bear would not likely be able to handle the stress of transportation to a holding facility, and no known facilities had placement for a black bear.
Watch:Black bear takes casual stroll in Asheville, North Carolina, spooks tourists
There are an estimated 100,000 black bears in the state of Alaska, according to the Department of Fish and Game.
Here's what the department recommends if you encounter a bear:
Reach her at sshafiq@gannett.com and follow her on X, the platform formerly known as Twitter @saman_shafiq7.
She's gentle, but loves a fuss.
She'll outdo you any day in a sniffing contest.
Nanny, a 4-year-old black and white 'moggy' with a tan streak on her face and big hazel cat eyes is a rare breed.
Or so the animal rescue sheltering her posted on social media Thursday.
And has a very large noggin.
According to the World Health Organization, the disorders, also called birth defects, are structural or functional abnormalities present from birth in both humans and animals.
Although WHO said the disorders can contribute to long-term disability.
Cat breaks record for loudest purr:'She likes to be loud with television'
Reach her at nalund@usatoday.com and follow her on X @nataliealund.
Animal encounters can be magical, and at an aquarium in Gulfport, Mississippi, an adorable toddler had the experience of a lifetime when a baby dolphin stopped to chat.
Dolphins are said to be the most intelligent animals on the planet after humans.
They're also extremely social.
Watch the video below to see a toddler's cute reaction to a chatty little dolphin
Humankind is your go-to spot for good news!
Click here to submit your uplifting, cute, or inspiring video moments for us to feature.
Also, click here to subscribe to our newsletter, bringing our top stories of the week straight to your inbox.
A Southwest Airlines cabin crew family reunion, a sweet toddler meeting his newborn baby sister for the first time, and a pair of rambunctious grandma BFFs topped our Humankind stories of the week.
During a Southwest Airlines flight from Dallas, Texas, the pilot took a moment to inform passengers about a very special cabin crew on board.
Air hostess Angel had been working for Southwest for 27 years.
But that's not all– their father Gregg, a retired flight captain, was on board too!
If that isn't a bestie, we don't know what is.
Watch a surprise on a Southwest flight, a toddler meeting his baby sister, a sweet father-son driving lesson, and more on the week's Best of Humankind.
When two-year-old Matteo Clarke entered the hospital room where his newborn sister lay, he was in a hurry to see her.
"Where's my sister?"
When Matteo finally got to see and hold the baby in his arms, his excitement at meeting his new best friend was palpable.
And the core memory is surely something the 11-year-old will never forget.
Finally, in the UK, Phil Garner found a bedraggled duck named Freda at a local fishing pond.
After taking the bird home, Phil and his wife Julia nursed her back to full strength.
Freda stayed with them for 18 months, then mysteriously disappeared.
But eventually, the prodigal duck returned home with a new boyfriend and 11 ducklings in tow!
Now Phil, Julia, Freda, and her brood are one big happy family.
Donald Trump was fined $5,000 Friday by the judge in his New York civil trial because a social media post disparaging one of his staffers remained visible for weeks.
But the post remained visible for weeks.
The dispute illustrated how judges could potentially penalize Trump even before verdicts in the various civil and criminal cases pending against him.
"No Court in American history has imposed a gag order on a criminal defendant who is campaigning for public office − least of all, on the leading candidate for President of the United States," Trump's lawyers said in the filing.
Trump wasn’t in court Friday, but the post was removed late Thursday.
Before the post was removed, Trump’s campaign sent it out as an email to his supporters.
America’s most visited national park, Great Smoky Mountains, saw more visitors last year than the next two parks combined, Grand Canyon and Zion.
Part of the reason is the location.
Many people drive through the park on the way to another destination.
But the park’s appeal can’t be underestimated.
“Really, I think it should be called the Awesome Smoky Mountains.”
Here’s why and what travelers should know about Great Smoky Mountains, the latest national park in USA TODAY’s yearlong series.
“It’s just a beautiful place.”
Along with that beauty is a sense of belonging many visitors and rangers experience at the park.
“It's like going home to your grandparents,” he said.
The park stretches across more than 522,000 acres of East Tennessee and Western North Carolina.
Its two visitor centers are located near Cherokee, North Carolina, and Gatlinburg, Tennessee.
The closest airport to the park’s Gatlinburg entrance is McGhee-Tyson Airport, which is about 45 miles away, near Knoxville.
The closest airport to the Cherokee entrance is Asheville Regional Airport, which is about 60 miles away.
The name stems from the Cherokee term for the area, which translates to “place of the blue smoke,” according to Free and the Tennessee State Museum.
“The Cherokee have been here for thousands of years,” Free said.
The Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians still share their rich culture with visitors in Cherokee, North Carolina, a destination unto itself just outside the park.
Free noted there doesn’t appear to have been any permanent Cherokee villages within the park proper, but they hunted and gathered there, as evidenced by 9,000-year-old arrowheads found in the park.
“The early European explorers and settlers that came through here learned so much about how to survive in these mountains from the Cherokee that were here,” he said.
There are no fees to enter the park.
However, parking fees are required for any vehicle parking in the park for longer than 15 minutes.
Parking passes cost $5 for one day, $15 for seven days and $40 for annual parking.
They don’t even know a national park is here.
Other visitors come just for a scenic drive, but Free said to really know the park, visitors need to get out and hit the trails.
“It really depends on what you’re looking for,” Free said.
The Cherokee entrance is less crowded and very scenic, with numerous streams.
“It actually takes you over the mountain and back over to this side over here, which is I think a very pretty drive,” Free said.
A third option is a park entrance near Townsend, Tennessee.
The busiest months in the park are May through October, but Free said, “Each season has something, really a gift for everybody.”
He cited wildflowers in the spring, greenery in the summer and the rainbow of colors in the fall.
He loves the wintertime in the park, when crowds fade and the mountains really come into view.
No one corner covers it all, but Free said Alum Cave trail comes close.
“It's a five-mile round trip, but that trail there has pretty much everything the park offers on the trail, except for a waterfall,” he said.
“It's got streams, got geology, got elevation, got views, got old growth forest … If you do one trail, do that trail.”
Free recommends at least two days in the park, with one day spent in the higher elevations and another day in the lower elevations.
“But all that's going to do is just get your taste buds ready for something else,” he smiled, adding that five days would provide a better foundation.
“I’ve been here a long time, and I still haven't done everything.”
On a cloudy fall day in Washington, D.C., Brandon Washington lit up the field with an electric 63-yard touchdown run.
On his third offensive play of the game, the quarterback took the snap, scampered through the line of scrimmage and sprinted his way straight down the middle of the field all the way to the end zone.
Not only was it the Gallaudet Bison’s first score of the day, but it was the first touchdown for the 5G-connected helmet, a technology the world’s only liberal arts university for deaf and hard-of-hearing students developed with AT&T.
Wearing the helmet, a player doesn’t have to hear a play call, but can see it.
After Washington and the Bison beat the Hilbert Hawks 34-20 in the Oct. 7 home game at Hotchkiss Field, the junior was named the Eastern Collegiate Football Conference co-offensive player of the week for putting up 124 rushing yards and three touchdowns.
"Brandon is one of the most electrifying players that we've had come through here," Coach Chuck Goldstein said.
"The stands were going crazy," Smith Kenny said of Washington's first score.
The 5G-connected helmet uses the same technology that powers cell phones across the United States.
It is connected to a lens mounted on the top of the helmet's facemask.
A coach can select a play on a tablet and then send it to the player, who can then see the play displayed on the lens.
Goldstein explained how Gallaudet, who invented the huddle in 1894 because the team needed to protect their communication using American Sign Language, embraced the helmet.
SEE MORE:How a high-tech football helmet could level the playing field for deaf athletes
We’re living with whatever play that’s called, that's it.
This gives us an opportunity for me to get his attention.
There’s a red exclamation point on the tablet, I hit it, it pops up.
Athletic director Warren Keller pondered how the helmet could have a positive impact for hearing players as well.
Carr explained to his teammate that they help block out crowd noise.
Smith Kenny said the possibilities for the helmet go beyond football.
"We've had people reach out to us saying, 'Hey, if you think about the capabilities of the helmet, could a 5G-connected helmet improve safety on construction sites or for first responders, or even potentially lead to more job opportunities for the deaf community?'"
"It's incredibly exciting and inspiring."
The helmet is giving them opportunities to shine on a national stage.
Washington was cheering next to Goldstein as Adams scored a touchdown using the helmet.
He offered feedback to the AT&T team as the helmet went through several iterations, including that an early version was too heavy due to a bulky battery pack.
This is his second year playing quarterback after Goldstein moved him from wide receiver because of depth needs.
I want the ball in my hands.
He had 1,363 yards of total offense on the season, including eight rushing touchdowns.
Last year, Adams captured the eight-man football championship with the California School for the Deaf-Riverside to cap off an undefeated season with an 80-26 victory.
He wanted to attend Gallaudet because both of his parents went there, and his father played football for the Bison.
The family attended a celebration for the school's 150th anniversary, which was observed through the 2013-14 school year, and Adams wanted to carry on the tradition.
The future is really looking good.
Gallaudet prides itself on being at the forefront of innovation to create equality for the deaf and hard-of-hearing community.
She was named one of USA TODAY's Women of the Year for her leadership.
That's my job.
While the 5G-connected helmet is a major breakthrough, there is still a ways to go in leveling the playing field for deaf and hard-of-hearing athletes.
"There is a communication barrier."
One of those barriers is with officials who don't sign.
"An official can tell a hearing player on the other team to scoot back or, 'Hey watch your hands on this' or 'Don’t do that,'" Goldstein said.
"If he does communicate that with our players, our player’s probably reading his lips, and that’s not fair."
Gallaudet's players also can't hear a whistle being blown, which can be a safety issue.
"If somebody, the whistle’s blown and somebody makes an athletic move on the other team, we’re going to tackle him, always," the coach continued.
And while the helmet helps with player-coach communication, it was only authorized by the NCAA for use in one game and was only worn by the quarterback.
Who could benefit the most from Biden’s latest attempt at student loan forgiveness?
Undergraduates at public two-year colleges might be in the best position – if the administration’s new policy holding predatory colleges more accountable goes as planned, that is.
And borrowers who earn certificates, rather than four-year degrees, using the new income-driven repayment plan will have to pay back only about a third, on average, of what they borrowed.
Those findings were laid out in a research analysis published this week by the Urban Institute, a social and economic policy think tank.
The report uses data from the College Scorecard, an online Education Department tool that lets consumers compare colleges, to determine what loan repayment might look like under the policy revision dubbed by the administration "Saving on A Valuable Education," or SAVE.
The system bases monthly loan repayments on borrowers' incomes and family sizes, according to the Education Department, lowering payments for almost everyone who participates.
Income-driven repayment is not a new concept, but Education Secretary Miguel Cardona has referred to the newest iteration of the program as the “most affordable repayment plan ever.” For some borrowers, it will reduce monthly payments to $0.
More than 4 million borrowers have already enrolled, and it will be fully available to all federal student-loan borrowers starting July 1, 2024.
Undergraduates are in luck, the report says.
Nearly all the largest undergraduate fields in the country will see a decrease in the number of programs in which borrowers typically repay their loans in full.
Yet the plan, according to researchers, is less likely to increase the already large benefits for typical graduate borrowers, who have historically benefited disproportionately compared with undergrads from income-driven repayment plans.
Graduate students on average take out more loans than undergraduates, and a 2020 report from the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office showed they received the most help from income-based programs.
Undergraduate psychology programs could also see an easier path to repayment, according to the report.
Under current income-driven repayment policies, nearly 100% of programs require such borrowers to fully repay, the report says.
That number will drop to a little more than a quarter of programs under SAVE.
The program seems to be good news for borrowers pursuing humanities and teaching degrees, too.
A smaller difference, the researchers suggest, is expected for borrowers pursuing degrees in engineering, finance or registered nursing.
In those fields, most undergraduate programs based on income already require the typical borrower to fully repay their loans.
That doesn’t seem likely to change, at least not significantly, because those borrowers generally go on to higher-paying jobs.
When it comes to the SAVE rollout, one big question mark will be the implications of the Biden administration’s efforts to crack down on predatory colleges, according to Jason Cohn, a research analyst at the Urban Institute and one of the authors of the report.
The analysis, for instance, predicts the highest loan forgiveness rate under SAVE will be at public two-year institutions.
But it's a conclusion that can only be made after excluding programs likely to fail new accountability metrics rolled out last month by the Education Department.
Without the new so-called "gainful employment" rule, Cohn told USA TODAY, the highest forgiveness rate could actually be at for-profit institutions.
“A lot of it really comes down to how institutions and students see this issue, how this information gets spread, and also how accountability efforts play out,” he said.
You can reach him by email at zschermele@usatoday.com.
Follow him on X at @ZachSchermele.
FORT DODGE, Iowa — Allison Roderick has a warning and a pledge for rural residents of her county: The water from their wells could be contaminated, but the government can help make it safe.
Roderick is the environmental health officer for Webster County in north-central Iowa, where a few thousand rural residents live among sprawling corn and soybean fields.
Many draw their water from private wells, which are exempt from most federal testing and purity regulations.
Roderick spreads the word that they aren’t exempt from danger.
The college football season has reached the back nine with seven weeks down and seven more to go before the playoff pairings and bowl lineup is announced.
Between now and then, there's sure to be surprises along the way.
The hard part is sorting out when and where they're going to come from.
This Saturday, however, provides plenty of opportunity for upsets and unlikely results with a Big Ten showdown between Penn State and Ohio State leading the schedule and key conference matchups in the SEC, Pac-12 and ACC.
That's why we're here to make sense of things.
And if the Falcons keep winning, the College Football Playoff committee will be forced to pay attention, and with good reason.
The defense is also doing its part, ranking in the top 10 in rushing defense, passing defense, scoring defense, and total defense, with that unit being on the field for the fewest plays of any team in the nation.
MUST-WATCH: Big Ten clash leads six best games of college football's Week 8
WEEKEND FORECAST: Picks for Ohio State-Penn State and each Top 25 game
Utah has defeated Southern California three consecutive times, including twice last season to single-handedly keep the Trojans out of the College Football Playoff.
16 USC will get some revenge, and a needed bounce-back win after last week’s debacle in South Bend, against the No.
Yes, Utah’s defense has been great and USC’s has still been mostly bad; but you need to score some points to beat the Trojans and the Utes just can’t do it.
Utah is sitting 115th in yards per game and is tied for 109th in scoring.
USC trails only Oregon in points per game and is No.
9 in total offense – and it seems unlikely Caleb Williams is going to throw three picks two weeks in a row.
It might be a long day for the Utes at the L.A.
Alabama’s offense comes alive and sparks a blowout win against Tennessee.
A more complete performance in double-digit win against the Volunteers would show how far the Tide have come since losing to Texas and struggling against South Florida.
This weekend will go one of two ways for Texas.
The buildup of disappointment from the past two weeks after the loss to Oklahoma will be released in cathartic fashion against Houston.
The alternative is that stewing for that long will allow the Longhorns to take their eye off the ball when traveling to face the Cougars, whose season will be made by beating their former Southwest Conference rival in their only season as Big 12 opponents.
Past versions of the Longhorns would slip up in this spot.
We'll not go that far, but expect a raucous home crowd help keep Houston in the game and the finish to be way closer than expected.
— Erick Smith
Utah will emerge victorious against Southern California in the Coliseum.
At first blush this might not seem like a bold pronouncement, since the Utes beat the Trojans not once but twice last season.
Nevertheless, with the Utes still likely to be without quarterback Cam Rising, the Trojans are touchdown favorites at home according to most outlets.
But we’re not buying.
Sure, USC still has Caleb Williams.
But the reigning Heisman winner doesn’t have the elite receiving talent he had a year ago, nor does he have the same pass protection.
Notre Dame forced five turnovers last week, and the Utes’ defensive front is even nastier.
Utah should also be able to move the ball on the ground, with or without Rising.
They might not win it going away, but the Utes will prevail.
The Ohio State game has been the biggest negative on James Franklin's resume at Penn State.
But is that really a Penn State thing, or is it just illustrative of how hard it is for anyone to beat Ohio State in this era?
I think it's the latter.
But the Buckeyes appear to be just a tiny bit more beatable this year — not by much, but by enough to put them in jeopardy of losing to perhaps Franklin's best team at Penn State.
While the Nittany Lions aren't necessarily as dynamic offensively as you'd like, we saw how much trouble Notre Dame's defense gave Ohio State earlier in the season.
And Penn State's defense is probably a cut above that.
So even in Columbus, this lines up as the year for Franklin to get Penn State's first win in the Horseshoe since 2011.
A former Connecticut postmaster could face 20 years in prison after pleading guilty to defrauding the U.S.
Postal Service of $875,000 through bribery and embezzlement schemes.
Additionally, he said he embezzled over $80,000 with credit cards to rent vehicles for personal use and approved fraudulent travel expense reimbursement claims exceeding $8,000 for a co-worker.
The former employee's work responsibilities included supervising maintenance and repair for USPS equipment, facilities and vehicles.
See also:Florida man found guilty of killing wife over her refusal to go on home renovation show
In late 2020, Nguyen required that all maintenance and repair for the postal services go through a specific vendor despite knowing another vendor had been contracted for the office, the news release states.
He also demanded the vendor provide free vehicle maintenance and repairs for himself, a co-worker, one of his children and an employee of Nguyen's personal business.
In 2022, the former employee asked for and received $90,000 from the same vendor through cash bribes causing USPS to overpay the vendor for vehicle service that he called a "raise," according to the news release.
The accumulation of these defrauding schemes adds to about $874,930.59, the release states.
Postal Service of hundreds of thousands of dollars.
The federal public defender representing Nguyen has declined requests for comment, according to the Associated Press.
More:Chick-fil-A reportedly agrees to $4.4 million settlement over delivery price upcharges
PHOENIX − It was completely dead silence inside the Philadelphia Phillies’ clubhouse late Friday evening.
Players stared vacantly into their lockers in utter disbelief.
The Phillies front office talked in hushed tones inside manager Rob Thomson’s office.
Owner John Middleton stood silently down the hallway.
When the Phillies spoke after their stunning 6-5 meltdown to the Arizona Diamondbacks, it was in short, subdued snippets for cameras and reporters, trying to convince everyone they’ll be fine.
The look on their faces, however, lacked all confidence.
This is a team that arrived into Phoenix three days ago, talking about jumping into the pool at Chase Field once they swept away the Diamondbacks, debating who they’d rather play in the World Series.
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
They instead spent the night watching a safe eighth-inning lead melt in the desert, and are now in a fight for their lives.
They have a chip on their shoulder.
He lost Game 3 in the ninth inning, and for an encore, blew a 5-3 lead in the eighth inning.
He faced six batters Friday.
Four batters reached base.
He dropped to his knees in agony as Thomas danced around the bases, basking in the deafening ovation.
I'm so grateful to have that moment.
It's just unreal.
Four batters later, it was all over.
This is a guy who just three days ago was discussing the Hall of Fame in an interview room.
This night, he was proving why he’ll fall short of a Cooperstown induction.
It’s one thing to have the seventh-most saves in baseball history, but when the Boston Red Sox snub you during their 2018 World Series run by using starter Chris Sale for their final outs, and the Los Angeles Dodgers leave you completely off the roster in last year’s postseason, and you melt down for the Phillies a year later, you have a tarnished Hall of Fame resume.
Who knows if the Phillies will now trust him again the rest of the postseason?
Certainly, not in a critical moment.
He responded quickly, succinctly, but had no real answers for the meltdown.
It was terrible.
Question: How’s your confidence?
I roll up in here and cost us two games.
… I can’t let that get in the way of what my job is and what I need to do.
Question: How do you keep your mind right?
I’ve lost a lot of ball games and I won a lot of ball games.
And the only way you come back to be successful is believing you can.
And I believe the next time I touch the ball it’s going to be great.
And, so it went for 1 minute, 42 seconds.
Really, the Phillies have no idea who’ll be available until they check in with their relievers before Saturday’s game, praying that Wheeler, can go at least six innings, preferably seven, if not longer.
Still, they know they are in trouble.
They have an exhausted bullpen, using 11 relievers in the last two games to combine for 26 outs.
So, while the Diamondbacks are winning a game using eight different relievers like Friday, the Phillies are using an 11-man staff instead of 13, and suddenly are without a reliable closer.
And twice has imploded.
He gave up three consecutive hits without retiring a batter in Game 3, and walked two batters and got one out in Game 4.
He suddenly has lost command, falling behind in counts, and the price.
The swagger is gone.
They may have games 6 and 7 scheduled in Philadelphia, but they can’t solely rely on their fans saving them from disaster.
It’s enough for the D-backs to believe they can not only play with the powerful Phillies, but slay the dragon, shocking the baseball world.
We’re not done yet.
We recognize that mistakes may happen – or that new information can emerge after a story is published – and we pledge to address all concerns quickly, fairly and transparently.
If a correction or clarification is warranted, we will highlight that in the original file and explain to readers why the change was made.
Any correction or clarification would also be published on our corrections log.
To report corrections & clarifications, contact:
Please indicate whether you're responding to content online or in the newspaper.
The following corrections & clarifications have been published on stories produced by USA TODAY's newsroom:
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated who is affected by this rule.
The story has been updated to reflect the proposed rule affects satellite and cable providers.
Money: A previous version of this story misstated the number of people 62 and older who have student debt loans.
Sports: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed the locations for Big Ten games.
"5 Things" podcast: On the Oct. 5 show in our segment about school psychologists, we misstated the ratio of counselors to students at a school in Hershey, Pennsylvania.
At 1 to 1000, it is half of the recommended ratio.
Money: An earlier version of this story mischaracterized the competitiveness of Capital One's savings-account interest rates.
The reference has been removed.
Jarrett Payton covers the Chicago Bears.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the amount of Fox Corp.'s settlement with Dominion Voting Systems in a defamation lawsuit.
Money: The UAW strike affects 38 locations across 20 states.
An earlier alert undercounted the number of states affected.
See the list.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly identified an organization.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified the Higher Education Advisory Group.
Sports: A headline on the story incorrectly described Christian Coleman's winning time in the men's 100 meters.
He won with a time of 9.83 seconds, tied for the world's fastest time this season.
News: This article was updated to remove incorrect details about math courses and departments at the University of California, Santa Cruz.
News: A previous version of this video misstated the Longwood Garden's distance from the prison.
His personal security guard ran onto the field to restrain the person.
A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the name of the home team.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified Chester County Prison.
It's the University of Pennsylvania.
News: A previous version of this video misstated how many co-defendants had been booked.
Money: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed among states with no Social Security tax Minnesota, which expanded in May 2023 a state tax exemption for benefits without eliminating the tax.
News: An earlier version of this story contained inaccurate or incomplete facts about the history of language.
Social media: A previous version of this post graphic contained a name misspelling of Scooter Braun.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the extent of the standing water around Dodger Stadium.
Sports: The USA TODAY Sports’ MLB power rankings in the Aug. 15 edition misstated the leader of the American League Central Division.
The Minnesota Twins lead the division.
News: A previous version of this video misidentified USA TODAY’s National Political correspondent, David Jackson.
Entertainment: The location of the bookstore in an earlier version of this story was incorrect.
Wild Geese Bookshop is located in Franklin, Indiana.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the next opponent for the U.S. women should they advance from their Round of 16 game vs. Sweden.
The Americans would then play the winner of Japan vs. Norway in the quarterfinals.
Money: Due to a typo, an earlier version of this story misstated total U.S. sales of the Kia Stinger.
The automaker has sold more than 65,000 Stinger sedans in the U.S. since the model's launch.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees between Madrid, Spain, and a mountainous area in Spain.
It also misstated a temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees in reference to average temperatures in Tunisia.
News: An earlier version incorrectly identified Victoria McQueen's title at her high school.
She is student body president.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified the Norwegian Gem.
It is a Jewel-class cruise ship.
News: A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the origins of Blue Moon.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the Iowa State teams being investigated by the Iowa Racing and Gaming Commission.
The school does not have a baseball program.
News: This article has been updated to include additional nonpartisan sources of data and research.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated 10-year-old J'Adore's diagnosis date.
News: In a 1A story on July 5 about primary care doctors, the relationship between physicians and health professionals such as nurse practitioners and physician assistants was unclear.
Paraprofessionals generally work under the supervision of a licensed physician.
Entertainment: A photo included in an earlier version of this report was misidentified as The Beatles.
The new record featuring John Lennon’s vocals will be a song.
Graphics: A previous version of this story misstated the number of competing teams in the Tour de France.
News: This story has been updated to clarify how many people died on the Titanic.
Money: This story has been updated to clarify details about local liquor laws.
News: A June 19 article on Page 2A misstated the year the 13th Amendment was passed.
Life: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated when the rescue was made.
Travel: A previous version of this story incorrectly described the Airbus A321 with new livery.
The aircraft is part of JetBlue’s existing fleet.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the number of states under red flag warnings.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly named ISR courses.
The courses are called Infant Swimming Resource courses.
News: This story has been updated to correct how far away the body was found from where the missing doctor was last seen.
News: An earlier version of this story did not make clear which versions of the AP African American Studies course framework excluded the word "queer."
It has been updated to clarify that versions in May 2022 and February 2023 did not include the word.
Travel: An earlier version of the story incorrectly listed how police resolved the case.
News: A previous version of this article incorrectly referred to the tornado data provided by the Storm Prediction Center of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Sports: A story on the documentary movie “It Ain’t Over” in the May 12 edition misstated the number of league MVP titles won by Yogi Berra.
The Yankees legend won three.
The information has been updated.
Those portions have been removed.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the Australian Open women's singles champion.
News: In some editions, the March 30 1A story about attackers targeting schools misstated the partners in the mass killing database.
They are USA TODAY, The Associated Press and Northeastern University.
News: This story originally included an inaccurate detail related to one woman's application for a domestic violence restraining order.
The information on Alison Kessler has been updated.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the comparative price between electric vehicles and gas-powered vehicles.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the year of Paul Walker's death.
News: A previous version of this article misstated Terry Wilson's employment status.
He remains a Fresno State employee but was granted leave from the position to serve as a staff-wide union representative.
News: An earlier version of this podcast incorrectly stated that USA TODAY ran the Dilbert comic strip.
It was the USA TODAY Network, not USA TODAY.
News: USA TODAY did not publish the Dilbert comic strip.
A previous version of this article was incorrect.
Facebook: A previous version of this post contained photos from other events earlier this month in Florida.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated salary figures of bartenders and pharmacists.
News: A story on Page 1A Feb. 16 about corporate diversity gave the incorrect date of Southern Co.’s annual meeting.
It takes place later this year.
News: A previous version of this graphic misstated the title of a movie.
News: A previous version of this article misstated the number of Maryland’s Eastern Shore counties.
Social media: An earlier version of this video had an incorrect description.
News: An earlier version misstated the requirements in the Biden administration’s proposed Title IX rule for determining the outcome of sexual assault cases.
The proposed regulation would require schools to use the “preponderance of evidence” standard most of the time.
News: An earlier version of this video misstated the status of a House Ethics Committee investigation.
Social media: A previous post misidentified the award Beyoncé won.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the home state of Sen. Chris Coons.
He is from Delaware.
Social media: A previous version of this post included an incorrect year of death.
News: An earlier version misstated the name of Hillsdale College's spokesperson, Emily Stack Davis.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated the new price of the Tesla Model Y.
It is $52,990.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this gallery included a photo incorrectly identifying Paige Butcher.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified who created Seven Principles of Leave No Trace.
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2016
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2017
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2018
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2019
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2020
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2021
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2022
The USA TODAY Opinion section publishes analysis, argument and essays on a wide variety of subjects.
We're looking for timeliness (pegged to news), persuasion pitched to the other side, new information, novel arguments, revelatory insights, passion without partisanship, first-person experience, original reporting that reveals fresh angles and makes news, expert knowledge, and/or a topic that will drive conversation on social media and in the real world.
We accept only pieces that are submitted exclusively to USA TODAY.
We do not accept material that has been published on blogs, social media or anywhere else.
Columns typically run 550 to 750 words.
They should be pasted directly into an email and sent to theforum@usatoday.com.
Pieces should include links (URLs, not headlines or footnotes) to back up quotes and factual material.
People featured in columns must be identified by their real, full names.
We do not publish open letters, class projects or material that has been submitted to multiple outlets.
Rebuttals to editorials and columns published in USA TODAY should be submitted as letters to the editor, not as full-length op-eds.
Due to the volume of submissions, we can’t respond to all columns sent to us.
If our Opinion team is interested in yours, you will hear from us within three business days.
Submissions may be edited for accuracy, clarity, style, standards and length.
Please include with your submission a short biography, two sentences at most, to run at the end of your column, as well as a current photograph, to which you own publishing rights.
If you or a business, trade group or other institution with which you are associated stands to gain financially or in any other way from your column, you should disclose that information in detail.
In most cases, it should also be included in the body of the piece or in the author's biographical information.
Columns are accepted for online publication; print publication is not guaranteed.
All columns published by USA TODAY are available for use online and in print by the more than 250 properties in the USA TODAY Network.
They include Austin; Bergen County, New Jersey; Burlington, Vermont; Cincinnati; Columbus, Ohio; Des Moines; Detroit; El Paso, Texas; Indianapolis; Louisville, Kentucky; Memphis, Tennessee; Milwaukee; Nashville, Tennessee; Phoenix, Reno, Nevada; Palm Beach, Florida; and Wilmington, Delaware.
Authors may post their columns elsewhere 48 hours after they are published at USA TODAY.
By submitting a column to USA TODAY and agreeing to its publication, authors are granting exclusive rights to the piece to the USA TODAY Network for 48 hours and non-exclusive rights thereafter.
To get a sense of our range, preferences and requirements, check out our op-ed section, follow us on Twitter and Facebook, or sign up for our daily Opinion newsletter.
If you're interested in joining conversations about topics in USA TODAY, email letters@usatoday.com, comment on Facebook or use #tellusatoday on Twitter.
Letters are edited for accuracy, clarity and length and to conform to our editorial style and standards.
Submissions of 200 words or fewer have the best chance of being published.
Letters must include a name, address and phone number.
Corrections to published letters or columns follow USA TODAY guidelines.
She had fun learning the chants that fans perform at football games.
“I knew that I was in a safe space.”
This has in the past two years become an important consideration for college-bound students from all backgrounds and beliefs.
The digital tables also list, for every four-year institution in the country, such things as racial and gender diversity among students and faculty, the number of student veterans enrolled, the incidence of on-campus race-motivated hate crimes, free-speech rankings and if the university or college serves many students from rural places.
Test our new College Welcome Guide:These tools offer a new lens on campus life.
Students have long picked schools based on their academic reputations and social life.
But with campuses in the crosshairs of the culture wars, many students are now also taking stock of attacks on diversity, course content and speech and speakers from both ends of the political spectrum.
They’re monitoring hate crimes, anti-LGBTQ+ legislation, state abortion laws and whether students like them ‒ Black, rural, military veterans, LGBTQ+ or from other backgrounds ‒ are represented and supported on campus.
When they look at colleges in various states now, she said, “There are students who are asking, ‘Am I really wanted here?’”
For some students on both sides of the political divide, the answer is no.
In the chaotic new world of American colleges and universities, many say they feel unwelcome at certain schools, while others are prepared to shut down speakers and report faculty with whose opinions they disagree.
It’s too early to know how much this trend will affect where and whether prospective students end up going to college since publicly available enrollment data lags real time.
But there are early clues that it’s having a significant impact.
One in 4 prospective students has already ruled out a college or university for consideration because of the political climate in its state, according to a survey by the higher education consulting firm Art & Science Group.
Among students who describe themselves as liberal, the most common reason to rule out colleges and universities in a particular state, that survey found, is because it’s “too Republican” or has what they consider lax gun regulations, anti-LGBTQ+ legislation, restrictive abortion laws and a lack of concern about racism.
Students who describe themselves as conservative are rejecting states they believe to be “too Democrat” and that have liberal abortion and gay rights laws.
Of these, 8 in 10 say they would prefer to go to a state with greater access to reproductive health services.
“We have many young women who will not look at certain states,” said Levine.
One of her own clients backed out of going to a university in St. Louis after Missouri banned almost all abortions following the Supreme Court’s Dobbs decision, she said.
Institutions in Alabama, Florida, Louisiana and Texas are the most likely to be knocked off the lists of liberal students, according to the Art & Science Group survey.
They’re generally most likely to steer clear of the South and Midwest, while conservative students avoid California and New York.
One in 8 high school students in Florida say they won’t go to a public university in their own state because of its education policies, a separate poll, by the college ranking and information website Intelligent.com, found.
“You are attacking kids who are already vulnerable,” said Javier Gomez, an LGBTQ+ student in his first year at Miami Dade College.
It’s not yet evident whether the new laws are affecting where LGBTQ+ young people are choosing to go to college, said Casey Pick, director of law and policy at The Trevor Project, which supports LGBTQ+ young people in crisis.
But LGBTQ+ adults are moving away from states passing anti-LGBTQ+ laws, she said.
And “if adult employees are taking this into account when they decide where they want to live, you can bet that college students are making the same decisions.”
“The real attack here is on the feeling of belonging,” said Jeremy Young, who directs the Freedom to Learn program at PEN America, which tracks laws that restrict college and university diversity efforts and teaching about race.
“What it really does is hoist a flag to say to the most marginalized students, ‘We don’t want you here.’”
More than 40% of university and college administrators say the Supreme Court ruling curbing the use of affirmative action in admissions will affect diversity on their campuses, a Princeton Review poll found as the school year was beginning.
College students of all races and political persuasions report feeling uncomfortable on campuses that have become political battlegrounds.
It found that those who answer in these ways are more likely to frequently experience stress and more likely to drop out.
Nearly two-thirds say that faculty and administrators don’t understand the challenges they face, and 70% say the same thing about their non-veteran classmates.
Colleges should be “safe and affirming spaces,” said Pick, of the Trevor Project ‒ not places of isolation and alienation.
Of those, 72% say they worry their opinions would be considered unacceptable by classmates and 45%, by their professors.
Conservative students are less likely than their liberal classmates to believe that all points of view are welcome and less willing to share theirs.
“Is that really an intellectually diverse environment?” asked Sean Stevens, director of polling and analytics at the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression, or FIRE, which has launched a campus free-speech ranking based on students’ perceptions of comfort expressing ideas, tolerance for speakers and other measures.
“Anecdotally and from personal experience, there’s certainly a pocket of students who are weighing these factors in terms of where to go to college,” Stevens said.
Eighty-one percent of liberal students and 53% of conservative ones say they support reporting faculty who make comments that they find offensive, the same survey found.
It used sample comments such as, “There is no evidence of anti-Black bias in police shootings,” “Requiring vaccination for COVID is an assault on individual freedom” and “Biological sex is a scientific fact.”
A professor at Texas A&M University became the subject of an investigation when a student accused her of criticizing the state’s lieutenant governor during a lecture, though she was ultimately exonerated.
An anthropology lecturer at the University of Chicago who taught an undergraduate course called “The Problem of Whiteness” said she was deluged with hateful messages when a conservative student posted her photo and email address on social media.
More than half of all freshmen say that colleges have the right to ban extreme speakers, according to an annual survey by an institute at the University of California, Los Angeles; the College Pulse poll says that sentiment is held by twice the proportion of liberal students as conservative ones.
A group of Stanford students in March disrupted an on-campus speech by a federal judge whose judicial record they said was anti-LGBTQ+.
When he asked for an administrator to intervene, an associate dean for diversity, equity and inclusion confronted him and asked: “Is it worth the pain that this causes and the division that this causes?” The associate dean was put on leave and later resigned.
“Today it is a sad fact that the greatest threat to free speech comes from within the academy,” pronounced the right-leaning American Council of Trustees and Alumni, which is pushing colleges to sign on to its Campus Freedom Initiative that encourages teaching students about free expression during freshman orientation and disciplining people who disrupt speakers or events, among other measures.
“I have to imagine that universities that have a bad track record on freedom of expression or academic freedom, that it will affect their reputations,” said Steven Maguire, the organization’s campus freedom fellow.
Some colleges are now actively recruiting students on the basis of these kinds of concerns.
Colorado College in September created a program to ease the process for students who want to transfer away from institutions in states that have banned diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives; Hampshire College in Massachusetts has offered admission to any student from New College in Florida, subject of what critics have described as a conservative takeover.
Thirty-five have so far accepted the invitation.
Though many conservative critics of colleges and universities say faculty are indoctrinating students with liberal opinions, incoming freshmen tend to hold left-leaning views before they ever set foot in a classroom, according to that UCLA survey.
Fewer than 1 in 5 consider themselves conservative.
Three-quarters say abortion should be legal and favor stricter gun control laws, 68% say wealthy people should pay more taxes than they do now and 86% that climate change should be a federal priority and that there should be a clear path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants.
Prospective students say they are watching as new laws are passed and controversies erupt on campuses and actively looking into not just the quality of food and available majors at the colleges they might attend, but state politics.
Florida’s anti-LGBTQ+ laws prompted Javier Gomez to leave his native state and move to New York to go to fashion school.
“People ask me, ‘Why the hell are you back in Florida?’” said Gomez.
It’s overwhelming at times.
It can be very mentally depleting.
Sign up for our higher education newsletter.
Thousands of Israelis and Palestinians have been killed and Palestinians have been ordered to evacuate from the northern Gaza Strip ahead of Israel's impending ground invasion, leading to a humanitarian crisis that has brought protests from the United Nations and around the world.
The U.N. said about 1 million Gaza residents have been displaced in just a week, about half of them finding refuge in U.N. schools and other facilities where water supplies are diminishing.
The war has claimed more than 4,000 lives since Hamas launched an unprecedented surprise attack Oct. 7.
Meanwhile, the World Health Organization pleaded with Israel on Sunday to immediately reverse evacuation orders for hospitals in northern Gaza, saying the deadlines are impossible to meet and risk additional loss of life.
"Evacuation orders by Israel to hospitals are practically impossible to implement and are a death sentence for the sick and injured."
Here are several organizations that are providing aid to people caught in the conflict.
How to cope:The videos out of Israel, Gaza are graphic, but some can't look away
"Our members are speaking loudly and clearly about the values that unite our community: Opposition to this horrific violence, and a commitment to Israeli/Palestinian partnership on the path to ending it, and achieving peace and equality," the agency said in a statement.
The organization is asking for donations to improve access to essential services like water and to support livelihood projects.
Doctors Without Borders is a nongovernmental organization that describes itself as an "independent, impartial and neutral" charity that provides humanitarian aid to people affected by conflict, disease outbreaks and natural and human-made disasters.
The agency is seeking donations to continue to provide medical care in the area.
The agency has reported overcrowding in hospitals, a lack of medical supplies, and dangerous working conditions as it tries to support the thousands injured by the fighting.
UNRWA has designated shelters to host the estimated 127,000 people displaced in Gaza.
The agency is seeking donations to support its work.
The Jewish Agency for Israel North American Council, an American charity organization, is accepting donations to help victims of terrorism.
Save the Children issued an emergency alert in response to the conflict, noting that escalating violence has left 1.2 million children in need of humanitarian aid.
The agency is accepting donations.
National and international organizations that aid victims in the conflict include the Palestine Children's Relief Fund (PCRF), which works to provide lifesaving medical relief and humanitarian aid.
Founded by former President Jimmy Carter and his wife, Rosalynn Carter, in partnership with Emory University, The Carter Center is a humanitarian aid organization that has been promoting peace and a viable two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict for decades.
After Israel declared war, The Carter Center released a statement condemning the targeting of Israeli and Palestinian civilians and called for international action to end the violence.
The soap opera that has consumed members of Congress for nearly three weeks over electing a new speaker is testing the patience of the voters who sent them to Washington, a new USA TODAY/Suffolk University Poll finds.
An overwhelming 67% say the House should elect a speaker as soon as possible, given the need to approve wartime aid for Israel and Ukraine and to prevent a government shutdown that looms next month.
Just 25% of those surveyed say they don't care whether a speaker is elected, on the theory that the impasse is preventing Congress from wasting more taxpayer money.
"I don't think that a speaker in the House is going to do anything other than, you know, just keep kicking that ball along."
The poll of 1,000 registered voters, taken by landline and cell phone Tuesday through Friday, has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.1 percentage points.
In a political world where bipartisanship is the exception, there is a broad consensus on this.
By double-digit margins, the idea of electing a speaker, and fast, was endorsed not only among Democrats (86%-10%) but also Republicans (57%-34%) and independents (59%-32%).
"How often do you see Democrats, Republicans, and independents agree on anything in DC?"
They are all speaking the same seven words in unison: 'Elect a speaker and do your job.'"
The previous House speaker, Rep. Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., was ousted from the post by a handful of combative conservatives, just eight of them but enough given the GOP's narrow majority.
Since then, no potential successor has been able to command the 217 votes needed.
Ohio congressman Jim Jordan was defeated three times before the Republican caucus voted Friday to sideline him.
House Republicans are scheduled to meet late Monday to figure out what to do next.
The scenes of Capitol chaos displayed on cable TV last week may be eroding voters' confidence in the ability of the nation's leaders in the White House and Congress to address the nation's major challenges.
Just 4% of those surveyed express "a lot" of confidence in leaders; another 32% had "some" confidence.
But the largest group, 35%, have "very little" confidence and another 27% had none at all.
"If I could go negative five, I would give it a negative 100," Gibbons said.
Democrats, who traditionally have supported a bigger role for government, have more confidence in its ability to solve problems; 63% had "a lot" or "some" confidence.
But Republicans, whose leaders in recent years have portrayed the government as either incompetent or dangerous, were overwhelmingly skeptical that Washington could be trusted to do anything right.
A plurality of Republicans, 42%, said they had no confidence in government; another 38% had "very little."
Ratings for the Senate are nothing to brag about, with 36% having a favorable view, and 42% an unfavorable one.
But ratings for the House are even worse.
Just 25% see it favorably; more than double that, 54%, view it unfavorably.
Once there is a speaker, most voters have a suggestion of what they want them to do next: A compromise that avoids a government shutdown when the latest temporary funding bill expires Nov. 17.
More than six in 10, 61%, want negotiations to reach a deal.
"I mean, don't we live in a bipartisan world?"
But there's a catch.
While just 31% want their representatives to stand firm on demands to cut spending, even if it means a government shutdown, that group includes a 55% majority of Republicans.
Only 37% in the GOP endorse a negotiated compromise.
And Republicans control what happens in the House − assuming, of course, they succeed in electing a speaker.
I have recently been diagnosed with severe anxiety and depression, anxiety induced insomnia, and I suffer from panic attacks, PTSD and night terrors.
She was named an alternate at the Tokyo Olympics in 2021 and was a member of Utah’s teams that finished third at the NCAA championships in 2022 and 2023.
Utah is one of the top programs in women’s college gymnastics.
USA TODAY Sports has reached out to the University of Utah for comment.
She alleged “loud and angry outbursts” that involved cursing from a coach.
To say I was shocked would be an understatement and this is a prime example of gaslighting.
It's well known that having obesity increases the risk of a wide range of health conditions, but data suggests it may not be just the extra weight that adds risk.
Medications may not work as well on people with obesity, studies suggest, because, although people with a lot of body fat metabolize drugs differently, they aren't required to be included in research trials.
So prescribed doses may be too high in some cases and linger too long in others.
And with more than 40% of Americans now living with obesity, and a wide range of popular drugs potentially affected, this dosing deficit is likely having a major impact on many people's lives and health, several experts said.
Studies have found people taking regular medication for birth control, or to combat high cholesterol, depression or panic disorders might be getting the wrong amount of needed medication.
It's "a huge problem for the population," said Dr. William Dietz, who directs the STOP Obesity Alliance at George Washington University in Washington, D.C., and co-wrote a recent paper on the topic.
Dietz blames weight bias for the lack of attention to a major portion of the population.
"I think it's because people don't care about obesity."
For Courtney Gilbert, of Big Rapids, Michigan, the depression that overtook her in 2019 was deep and lingering and drugs simply weren't helping.
"This coming up does make me wonder if my weight had something to do with it."
She eventually overcame her depression with therapy, a strong support system, more stability and the passage of time after a major loss.
The dosage of antipsychotic medications, like the one Gilbert took for months to no effect, does not get altered by prescribing doctors based on a patient's weight.
Medications also hang around a large body longer, potentially causing side effects or interacting with other medications.
When body mass, a typical measure of obesity, is mentioned, it is generally used to exclude people with obesity from being in a trial altogether, they found.
"It's not like you have to do deep studies with every drug, but at minimum, we ought to be saying, 'Oh, would this be a problem?'"
The Food and Drug Administration, which regulates drug approvals and sets requirements for drugs trials, acknowledges the problem.
He said he hoped workshop participants from FDA, the University of Maryland and elsewhere would help close this information gap "to ensure that we're making progress toward appropriate drug dosing in the obese patient."
People with obesity aren't necessarily excluded from clinical trials, but they may be reluctant to participate because of poor experiences with the medical system.
They may also be excluded because of other health issues they face, such as high blood pressure or diabetes.
Or it's possible that companies running the trials simply do not analyze obesity even as they consider sex, age and race important factors.
Regulators have said obesity adds to variability in trials, which is why companies aren't required to include people with obesity at the outset.
But Dietz, from the STOP Obesity Alliance, said that's precisely why they should be included.
Also, he said, only half-jokingly, he'd expect drug companies would want to identify patients who would benefit from a higher dose of medications because they could be charged more.
Dr. Fatima Cody Stanford, an obesity medicine specialist at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, praised the companies involved in COVID-19 vaccine trials for including a large percentage of people with obesity.
If they could do it, with the time pressure they were under, then other companies can do it, too, she said.
"I'm not going to give them a pass on this," she said of other drug companies and trials.
At least 40% of adults and 20% of children in clinical trials for all sorts of drugs, not just those addressing obesity, need to be of a higher body mass index, she said.
People with schizophrenia or depression are more likely to have obesity than the general population.
One 2017 study found that 59% of people with schizophrenia had obesity.
Drugs used to treat schizophrenia are known to increase body weight.
"There are so many layers of badness that can happen here if it's not tested well and doesn't reach effective levels in people with obesity," she said.
"This is a recipe for disaster in a condition that's not well understood, even if it is well treated."
Dietz and several colleagues published a paper in August showing that a number of commonly used drugs are fat soluble, meaning they would take longer to reach an effective dose in the bloodstream of someone with a lot of body fat.
The paper listed a number of common drugs its authors thought might be affected by a person's body size:
But there's no instruction about what the right dose might be.
And because it lasts in the body of a larger person longer than in a person without obesity, it might interact with other drugs given at the same time.
If these drugs are not adjusted for the person's body fat they may be less effective or not effective at all, said Dietz, who also directs the Sumner M. Redstone Global Center for Prevention and Wellness at George Washington University's Milken Institute School of Public Health.
"The provider's response might be, 'Why aren't you taking the drug?'
What Dietz wants is for every doctor who treats a patient with obesity to know if the drug they are prescribing is potentially affected by that patient's body weight.
"It should be top-of-mind when writing a prescription," he said, though he admits it's unclear how to adjust drug dosage.
For her part, Gilbert said she naturally assumed because her medication had been prescribed by a doctor that it had been researched and dosed properly.
Luckily, she got through her period of suicidal thinking without acting on it, but other people, given an ineffective dose, might not.
"Starting with judgments or assumptions that we don't care that we're overweight or this is just a choice ‒ and that because we're overweight we don't deserve adequate medical care."
"That's not okay."
The Israeli military ramped up its reach Sunday, striking targets in Syria, the West Bank and Gaza amid growing concerns the war will spread more widely across the Middle East.
The intensified military actions came as a convoy of humanitarian aid trucks made its way into Gaza from Egypt for a second day.
But the U.N. warned the aid is about 4% of the daily average of imports into previous conflicts and a fraction of what is needed.
Israel has been pounding Gaza relentlessly since Hamas' stunning, brutal attack Oct. 7 that killed more than 1,000 Israelis and saw the seizure of more than 200 hostages.
"Bombardments continue almost unabated as hostilities enter the 15th day in Gaza," the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs said in its latest situation report.
First humanitarian aid reaches Gaza:Convoy arrives after 2 weeks of Israel-Hamas war
The U.N. humanitarian affairs agency says it is "imperative" to increase the number to at least 100 trucks per day.
Syria said it was forced to shut down international airports in Damascus and Aleppo because of the Israeli strike.
The Syrian Transport Ministry said landing strips at both airports were damaged by missiles and one civilian worker was killed and another wounded at Damascus International Airport.
Israel has carried out several strikes in Syria since the war began, citing the need to prevent Hezbollah and other militant groups from bringing in arms from Iran, which also supports Hamas.
In the Israeli-occupied West Bank, Israeli forces killed at least five people there early Sunday, according to the local Health Ministry.
Palestinian militants have fired over 7,000 rockets into Israel since the war began, the Israel Defense Force says, and tens of thousands of Israeli's have been forced to flee their homes.
Hamas says it targeted Tel Aviv early Sunday.
The Israeli death toll has surpassed 1,400, most of the civilians killed in the first hours of Hamas' bloody attack on border villages.
At least 212 people were taken hostage; two Americans were released Friday in what Hamas described as a humanitarian gesture.
The Gaza Health Ministry put the Palestinian death toll at 4,385; almost two-thirds of the fatalities are children and women.
More than 1,000 people have been reported missing and are feared trapped or dead under the rubble.
Israel repeated its calls Sunday for Palestinians to leave northern Gaza.
Israeli authorities say an estimated 700,000 have already fled, but hundreds of thousands remain.
Fleeing to southern Gaza has provided little relief as Israeli airstrikes there have also battered cities and infrastructure.
Gaza's Housing Ministry says more than 160,000 homes and apartments − more than 40% of all dwellings − in Gaza have been damaged or destroyed since the war began two weeks ago.
The result is that about 1.4 million of Gaza's 2.3 million people have been "internally displaced," and 566,000 of them are staying in U.N. emergency shelters, the U.N. says.
The State Department designated Hamas a terrorist group in 1997, and several other nations also consider Hamas a terrorist organization.
In 2006, Hamas won parliamentary elections, and in 2007 the group violently seized control of Gaza from the Palestinian Authority, which was controlled by the rival Fatah movement that still governs the West Bank.
There have been no elections since.
The group calls for the establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel and believes in the use of violence to carry out the destruction of Israel.
Hamas receives financial, material, and logistical support from Iran.
So far, however, the U.S. and other nations have said there is no evidence that Iran was directly involved in Hamas’ attack.
Contributing: The Associated Press
A prominent Detroit synagogue board president was found stabbed to death early Saturday outside her home.
Police have yet to identify a motive or a suspect in her killing.
Religious leaders and public officials decried the killing.
The American Jewish Committee said it was "heartbroken" at the news, calling her a "ray of sunlight to all who knew her" and "a passionate Muslim-Jewish bridge builder."
I have no words.
She always had a sweet smile to offer and the warmest eyes to greet you.
Our community is devastated and we are shocked.
Detroit Police offered no clarity about the motive behind the killing by the end of the day, but Chief James White said Saturday night the department was continuing to investigate.
"Understandably, this crime leaves many unanswered questions," he said in a statement.
Earlier, Detroit police said they were investigating a report that a woman had been found unresponsive, with multiple stab wounds, in the 1300 block of Joliet Place in the city's Lafayette Park neighborhood.
A trail of blood led back to the victim's home, where police said they believe the crime occurred.
The FBI referred all questions to local police.
In addition to leading the reopening and renovation of the downtown synagogue, she was poised to get a new job.
"She was endlessly positive, just a wonderful person who was doing so much good and could bring so much happiness and joy," Chang said.
In her name we will never give up.
"Separately, in politics & in the Jewish community, she dedicated her short life to building understanding across faiths, bringing light in the face of darkness," the congresswoman wrote.
She was driven by her sincere love of her community, state and country.
"By extending her hand and creating space for connection between Muslims and Jews, she has exemplified the values of healing the world," The Detroit Jewish News article said.
PHOENIX — It was like a professional sumo wrestler strolling into an all-you-can-eat Brazilian steak house and ordering a salad.
It was like seeing a Ferrari going 50 mph on the Autobahn.
It was spending the evening with Kevin Hart without cracking a smile.
It was the powerful Philadelphia Phillies stunning everyone in the house Saturday night at Chase Field with a sneak attack that even had their own players scratching their head.
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
The Phillies dismantled the Arizona Diamondbacks 6-1, taking a 3-2 lead in the National League Championship Series.
The D-backs are still trying to figure out what hit them.
Sure, the Phillies still showed off their muscle, hitting three home runs, two within seven pitches for a total of 905 feet.
Still, the play that left everyone gasping for air occurred right out of the gate in the first inning, completely changing the complexion of the NLCS.
He couldn’t stop laughing as he ran to first.
It set up the play of the night, if not the series.
They were attempting a rare double steal.
The execution was perfect.
Harper crashed into Moreno's left shoulder, and scored.
And just like that, the Phillies had their first steal of home in a postseason game in franchise history.
The Phillies, without hitting a home run or even producing an extra-base hit, had a 2-0 lead, and Harper became the oldest player to steal home in a postseason game since the great Jackie Robinson.
Sure, it wasn’t a straight steal of home like Robinson’s in Game 1 of the 1955 World Series, but it counted just the same.
Big collision at the plate.
It was just what the Phillies needed after watching their bullpen blow the last two games.
They have their swagger back just in time for a trip to Citizens Bank Park where they have the biggest home-field advantage in baseball.
If he went, Harper was instructed to take off.
If Moreno doesn’t throw down, the Phillies have two runners in scoring position.
Yet, it was executed to perfection.
Last year, I ran the same play (against the Mets), and I was thrown out by 10 feet.
It’s a big-time play.
He’s got to make a good throw to second, a good throw back to home, he’s got to tag him.
It turned out the Diamondbacks didn’t make one good throw, and you better believe that when they take the field to work out Sunday at Citizens Bank Park, defending the double steal will be on the agenda.
We were anticipating it.
It was well-timed by our guys.
And, oh, did Wheeler come through at a time the Phillies desperately needed it.
“I told him after the game, like, 'You're one of the best pitchers I've ever played with, man.'
I've played with a lot of good ones, and he's easily top three.
It's so much fun to watch.
I love playing behind him.
Certainly, the timing was impeccable.
The Phillies’ bullpen was exhausted, using 11 relievers in the last two games to combine for 26 outs.
Wheeler came out and absolutely dominated.
He pitched seven innings, giving up six hits while striking out eight, leaving with a 6-1 lead.
If it happens, it would be the first World Series rematch since 1977-1978, when the Los Angeles Dodgers and New York Yankees met.
Gwyneth Paltrow has been offering lifestyle advice for more than a decade, but don't expect her to escort you into old age.
The Oscar-winning actress says she may just disappear from public life when the time comes to sell her lifestyle and health company Goop.
"Or … I might just disappear, and no one will ever see me again."
Goop., which launches on Amazon and Target on Sunday, Oct. 22.
The lower-priced line of skincare and wellness brands launched under Goop Beauty features "clinically proven beauty products" like moisturizers, exfoliating scrubs, and shampoos, according to a press release.
And Amazon, too, is a plus because it makes the product even more accessible.
Read about Gwyneth Paltrow Trial:The Gwyneth Paltrow ski trial has our attention.
It's strange, juicy and exactly what the internet wanted.
I don't know, I find it hard.
"Then, of course, I need it for work, and they always make me do these stupid things on it."
Michigan State University has issued an apology after Adolf Hitler was featured in a pregame trivia segment displayed on the Spartan Stadium scoreboard ahead of the Spartans' 49-0 blowout loss to in-state rival Michigan on Saturday.
Hitler was featured in a pregame trivia segment that asked fans where the German dictator was born, according to many photos circulating on social media.
Michigan State confirmed Saturday night that Hitler was displayed in the pregame segment the school says was created by a third party.
"We are deeply sorry for the content that was displayed, as this is not representative of our institutional values."
The pregame quiz featuring an image of Hitler coincides with a spike in antisemitism amid the ongoing conflict between Israel and Hamas.
Less than 90 miles away from Spartan Stadium, a prominent Detroit synagogue board president was found stabbed to death outside her home early Saturday.
It also marks the latest controversy for Michigan State after football coach Mel Tucker was fired after an investigation into a sexual harassment complaint was reported by USA TODAY.
As we can see in Ukraine and now the Middle East, wars of aggression, acts of genocide, tyranny and terrorist atrocities do not happen in isolation.
The shadows of the Holocaust loom large, with contemporary Western society constructed upon the principle of "never again."
Yet, disturbingly, echoes of the past resurface as Jewish populations face vile antisemitism in Europe and America, and calls for "peace" mask veiled justifications for Hamas' heinous acts, which, at their core, revel in cruelty and degradation.
The Soviet Union's oppressive legacy endures.
Countless individuals, particularly in Eastern Europe and notably Ukraine, grapple with fractured family histories and tales of ancestors deported, killed or incarcerated.
Such generational trauma requires immense time and understanding to be fully addressed and healed.
The Syrian war, with its novel brand of horror, did not emerge spontaneously.
The alliance between Hezbollah, a notorious Lebanese terrorist entity, and Russia, which at that point was a widely accepted partner of the free world, started in 2015 in Syria and has not stopped.
Now, the repercussions of every past atrocity reverberate globally.
The same culprits, repeatedly emboldened, perpetrate murder, torture and degradation as the world seeks reassurance and the illusion of peace.
Hamas, responsible for the deaths of entire Israeli families, finds camaraderie in Moscow.
Syria's Assad regime deploys chemical warfare on its populace, bolstered by Hezbollah and Russia.
Hezbollah launches assaults on Israel, underpinned by its intricate ties with Iran, Syria and Russia.
Russia's savage invasion of Ukraine persists, with Iranians providing applause and weaponry.
African nations are inundated with propaganda, giving a stage to ruthless Russian mercenaries – while China quietly acquires the continent piece by piece.
And China's menacing stance toward Taiwan, combined with its support for Russia's aggression toward Ukraine, signals a broader threat to the free world.
This vicious cycle offers no genuine peace.
Ukraine working to document war crimes:Ukrainians need America's help to hold Russian war criminals accountable for atrocities
Regrettably, the free world isn't merely an idle observer.
Much of the technology utilized by Russia and terrorist factions originates in the West.
Billions in humanitarian aid have flowed into Gaza, only to line the pockets of Hamas leaders living lavishly in Qatar or to finance militants who funnel these funds into weapon smuggling.
European aid items, including water pipes, have been repurposed by Hamas to fashion missiles aimed at Israel.
Microelectronics are incorporated into missiles that wreak havoc upon civilians in Ukraine and anywhere else terrorists enact their terror.
Why do these companies persist in servicing equipment instrumental in aiding a nation led by an accused war criminal to produce arms?
Greed appears to be the likeliest culprit.
Such convenient "ignorance" of the end-users (Russian arms manufacturers) does not make an excuse for silent war crimes enablers.
To those who argue that Europe or the United States should abstain from intervening in distant conflicts, a sobering reality check is due: Their involvement is already apparent, just not in a way most of the people imagine.
This is evidenced by the surging exports to nations that orbit Russia – for instance, German exports to Kyrgyzstan soared by 949% last year, according to a Reuters analysis, with a significant proportion finding its way to Russia.
Concurrently, China capitalizes on its position as the manufacturing hub for Western tech, striving to replicate and pilfer Western innovations.
The sobering truth is that countries such as China, Iran, Belarus and Russia are already waging a covert war against the free world, and it's high time the latter acknowledged this reality and stopped fighting against itself.
True global tranquility remains elusive until the world recognizes that witnessing brutality is never a standalone event.
The civilizational war has started, and it’s time for all to choose their allegiance.
Worlds collide:Formula 1, PGA Tour stars come together for "The Netflix Cup" live golf tournament
Nobody asked him to provide play-by-play either.
That just so happened to be the best shot of the bunch.
"I've met him a few times through that, because I help out with that."
It costs around $600 for a single tee time at Pebble Beach.
There are additional fees that come too though if you or anyone in your group wants a caddy or cart.
That's a lot, but Pebble Beach is regarded as one of the nicest courses in America.
I would definitely think people would pay thousands and thousands of dollars to have that happen.
For the last four decades, invasive Burmese python snakes have terrorized mammals and the greater ecosystem of the Everglades National Park and throughout South Florida.
Now, a recent study shows what is biting back.
The Southeast Asian apex predator can grow up to 19 feet long, weigh more than 150 pounds and eat everything from rabbits to deer.
The pythons and their appetites are also blamed for the disappearance of almost all the fur-bearing mammals in the Everglades and surrounding areas.
A new study by the U.S. Geological Survey and partner organizations in Florida studied the deaths of 19 baby Burmese pythons from May 2021 to February 2022 to see how this part of the python population might meet its fate.
But studies like this provide data points to fill in the gaps of their life cycle.
"We need more information and are continuing to track juvenile pythons in Southern Florida to understand their ecology, particularly movement, habitat use, and survival."
Burmese pythons:Latest hunt netted over 200 of the invasive species in the Everglades
Burmese pythons are native to Southeast Asia.
They were imported to Florida to be sold to pet owners, and were likely released or escaped.
Since then, they have wreaked havoc on the natural environment, eating everything from rabbits to deer with few species being able to check the population.
The USGS estimates there are tens of thousands living in the Everglades.
A 2012 study showed that pythons' diets have drastically cut the populations of Everglades-area mammals.
Raccoon, opossum and bobcat populations had dropped 85%-99%, and rabbits and foxes had "effectively disappeared."
Humans may be one known predator of the python, but the recent USGS study shows there are more, at least for the babies.
More:Florida will teach you how to hunt, kill Burmese pythons.
Practice and you could get paid
Juvenile Burmese pythons were opportunistically collected throughout more than a year.
They were implanted with high-frequency radio transmitters equipped with mortality sensors that notified researches when the snake stopped moving for 24 hours.
During the length of the study, 19 baby snakes died.
At that point, scientists would go to the scene of the crime and conduct some detective work to discover the cause of death.
Here is what they found:
Among the deceased juveniles recorded as part of the study, one ambitious snake set a new record for pythons that size.
The study says this is notable in more ways than one.
While maladaptive behaviors are naturally selected out of the population overtime, the native species can also adapt to the invasive species in that time.
He said that the range of predators they found in the study was a pleasant surprise.
A cottonmouth snake, for example, would never be able to eat an adult python, but did consume one of the juveniles in the study.
"Our role as scientists is to try to tip the scales in the direction of the native species and identify the weaknesses of the invasive species that we can exploit for management purposes," he said.
This story includes detailed plot points of the new movie "Killers of the Flower Moon" and the real-life events on which it's based.
The 3-hour-and 26-minute film, starring Robert De Niro, Leonardo DiCaprio and Lily Gladstone, tells the story of Osage Nation tribal members, newly wealthy from the discovery of oil on their otherwise parched reservation lands, and the duplicitous non-Native Americans who swoop in to steal their bounty.
But while it plays like an allegory, the story is true.
“Because of the vast oil deposits on their lands, by the 1920s the Osage were among the wealthiest people per capita in the world.”
People of the Osage Nation had been moved around by the federal government for years before winding up in a barren stretch of Oklahoma, which wasn’t worth much at the turn of the 20th century.
But when oil deposits were discovered, everything changed.
And while “few Americans owned a car at that time, many Osage had numerous cars, as well as many servants, often white.”
‘Maybe we’re all capable of this’:Martin Scorsese on ‘Killers of the Flower Moon’ movie
But as the book and movie explain, sometimes there were shootings or slow poisonings to make the deaths look like mysterious ailments.
Many people were complicit: Doctors with their poison, morticians covering up causes of death, lawmen staying silent.
“There is no evidence that I know of that Mollie spoke to the president about the murders,” he says.
“But it needs to be underscored that the Osage did go to Washington, D.C., and she might have been on a trip.”
In 1921, a young J. Edgar Hoover, who would wind up as the notorious and longstanding director of the FBI, took over a new office then simply called the Bureau of Investigation.
“At the time, this office had limited jurisdiction over crimes nationally, but it did have jurisdiction over crimes on federal (Native American) lands.”
Hale served his time and died at 87 in Arizona in 1962.
Our critic says:In 'Killers of the Flower Moon,' Martin Scorsese crafts a gripping story of love, murder
Ohio State's defense blanketed Penn State to deliver a 20-12 win in one of the most important games of the regular season.
Five years after James Franklin promised the Nittany Lions would eventually graduate to join the top teams in the Bowl Subdivision, the loss reinforces the program's place: Penn State is very good, but not elite.
The Nittany Lions are treading water.
And Ohio State is finding new ways to win games in the Big Ten.
Clearly influenced by back-to-back losses to Michigan, the Buckeyes are a physical team defined more so by defensive excellence than by an offense that has top-end skill talent but has taken a noticeable step back from the past two seasons.
Penn State failed to convert a single third-down attempt until there was under a minute left.
The Nittany Lions averaged just 2.6 yards per attempt on 25 carries.
A significant portion of his yardage and lone touchdown came on his team's final drive after Ohio State held a 14-point lead.
The Buckeyes' failed fourth-down attempt on the goal line and a turnover on special teams gave Penn State chances to draw even in the second half.
When in similar situations in the recent past, Ohio State has pulled away from the Nittany Lions with pure offensive firepower.
But the seventh win in a row in this series was sparked by a defense that may be one of the most improved units in the FBS.
After Saturday, the Buckeyes are giving up just 3.9 yards per play.
This level of stinginess has been enough to offset a hit-or-miss offense that thrives when delivering the ball to All-America wide receiver Marvin Harrison Jr., who had 11 receptions for 162 yards and a touchdown.
Going up against the Nittany Lions' own stout defense, the Buckeyes managed to run for 79 yards while Kyle McCord went 23 of 35 for 286 yards.
The win sets up a breezy four-game run before meeting the Wolverines to end November.
Next, Ohio State goes to Wisconsin and Rutgers before returning home for Michigan State and Minnesota.
This monthlong stretch will give Ryan Day and the Buckeyes' offense more time to develop before heading into the winner-take-all rivalry game in Ann Arbor.
The immediate future is hazier for Penn State.
This was an incredible opportunity to end a long losing streak against an Ohio State that has clear flaws relative to the program's recent standard.
With the loss, the Nittany Lions are once again no better than a New Year's Six participant with Michigan still to come in November.
The disappointment is palpable.
The Buckeyes and Nittany Lions top Saturday's biggest winners and losers:
Basically buried after losing to Texas and struggling to put away South Florida in September, Alabama has put together a series of close victories culminating in a 34-20 win against Tennessee to climb right back into the College Football Playoff race.
Down 20-7 at halftime, the Crimson Tide outscored the Volunteers 27-0 in the second half to avenge last year's shootout loss.
And while the flash is missing, the Crimson Tide have shown extreme mental toughness in weathering the early-season swoon to look like Georgia's biggest threat in the SEC.
Florida State got 330 yards of total offense from quarterback Jordan Travis and remained unbeaten with a closer-than-it-looks 38-20 win against Duke.
But the game turned at the moment Leonard left: FSU trailed 21-17 when Leonard went down but was in total control from that point forward.
While Duke continues to impress even in defeat, the Seminoles managed to pull out another resourceful win against one of the top teams in the ACC and remain on track for a conference championship game appearance and potential playoff berth.
Missouri is good.
The Tigers are now 7-1 after dispatching South Carolina, taking a 24-3 lead at halftime and then sleepwalking through the second half to win 34-12.
Missouri's defense did a nice job with Spencer Rattler, limiting him to just 5.4 yards per attempt, while the offense drew 159 yards and two touchdowns from running back Cody Schrader and a team-leading 90 receiving yards from potential All-America pick Luther Burden.
Up next are Georgia, Tennessee and Florida, as Missouri prepares for meaningful November football for the first time in several years.
Now 4-3, the Cornhuskers will have chances to get to six wins against a very friendly home stretch of games — Purdue, Michigan State, Maryland, Wisconsin and Iowa — and could conceivably make the Big Ten title game.
Kansas State was all over TCU from the opening whistle of a 41-3 win that's probably the Wildcats' most complete performance of the season.
While two tough setbacks against Missouri and Oklahoma State have knocked them out of the Top 25, the Wildcats have moments when they look like one of two or three best teams in the Big 12 — Saturday being one of them.
Kansas State continues to use a very interesting two-quarterback rotation of upperclassman Will Howard and true freshman Avery Johnson, with the pair combining for 244 yards and four touchdowns without an interception with another 135 yards on the ground.
Saturday's loss drops Franklin to 1-9 against Ohio State and 4-15 combined against the Buckeyes and Michigan, the Nittany Lions' opponent on Nov. 11.
The Nittany Lions could end up with double-digit wins but losing to the Buckeyes and Wolverines would only be a reminder of how far the program still has to go before truly competing for national championships.
Another week, another awful loss.
And unlike last week's blowout defeat at Notre Dame, this one came at home and featured more traditional heartbreak: Utah drove 54 yards in the final 1:46 and made a 38-yard field goal as time expired to beat Southern California 34-32.
Quarterback Bryson Barnes had 235 passing yards, four total touchdowns and a crucial scramble on the final drive to offset Caleb Williams' 256 passing yards and one rushing score.
While this was a better performance overall than against the Fighting Irish and one that saw more moments of effectiveness from the USC defense, these two losses in a row have caused the floor to give way for the Trojans, and this year could get even worse with games ahead against Oregon, Washington and UCLA.
There was always this sense that unbeaten North Carolina was living on borrowed time.
The Cavaliers had possession for more than 37 minutes and ran the ball 54 times for 228 yards, offsetting the production of a UNC offense that still had 26 first downs and nearly 500 yards despite the limited touches.
Clemson continues to drift toward its worst season since 2010 after a 28-20 overtime loss to Miami.
The Tigers turned the ball over three times, had a nonexistent running game and were still in position to win this game late into the fourth quarter, only to allow the game-tying field goal with under two minutes left and fail to punch it in from inches away from the end zone in the second overtime.
The loss is a devastating one for Clemson, essentially ending any hope of regaining the ACC crown and officially signaling a second year in a row out of the playoff.
This is the worst team in the SEC West and the worst offense in the SEC, and that's combined to leave Sam Pittman on some shaky ground heading into the final four games of the regular season.
You can write off any legitimate shot at the postseason after a 7-3 loss to Mississippi State, the Razorbacks' sixth loss in a row and worst of the bunch.
It was fun and games when Iowa was winning.
You know exactly where this going.
Even after punting back to Wake Forest only 23 seconds later, Pittsburgh needed just one last defensive stop to secure a second win in a row.
FORT DODGE, Iowa — Allison Roderick has a warning and a pledge for rural residents of her county: The water from their wells could be contaminated, but the government can help make it safe.
Roderick is the environmental health officer for Webster County in north-central Iowa, where a few thousand rural residents live among sprawling corn and soybean fields.
Many draw their water from private wells, which are exempt from most federal testing and purity regulations.
Roderick spreads the word that they aren’t exempt from danger.
A former Connecticut postmaster could face 20 years in prison after pleading guilty to defrauding the U.S.
Postal Service of $875,000 through bribery and embezzlement schemes.
Additionally, he said he embezzled over $80,000 with credit cards to rent vehicles for personal use and approved fraudulent travel expense reimbursement claims exceeding $8,000 for a co-worker.
The former employee's work responsibilities included supervising maintenance and repair for USPS equipment, facilities and vehicles.
See also:Florida man found guilty of killing wife over her refusal to go on home renovation show
In late 2020, Nguyen required that all maintenance and repair for the postal services go through a specific vendor despite knowing another vendor had been contracted for the office, the news release states.
He also demanded the vendor provide free vehicle maintenance and repairs for himself, a co-worker, one of his children and an employee of Nguyen's personal business.
In 2022, the former employee asked for and received $90,000 from the same vendor through cash bribes causing USPS to overpay the vendor for vehicle service that he called a "raise," according to the news release.
The accumulation of these defrauding schemes adds to about $874,930.59, the release states.
Postal Service of hundreds of thousands of dollars.
The federal public defender representing Nguyen has declined requests for comment, according to the Associated Press.
More:Chick-fil-A reportedly agrees to $4.4 million settlement over delivery price upcharges
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
That was a big, big moment for him.
OK, I get it.
But obviously, you’ve got to give me a warning or something.
We’re just trying to compete.
And Garcia obviously inflamed the situation, earning an ejection himself after he jawed at Maldonado and forced home plate umpire Marvin Hudson to wedge himself between them.
How that manifests, he does not know.
But when emotions get high – have you ever gotten in an argument with your mom or your dad or your brothers?
And you don't script it.
“That’s crazy, it’s like, are you kidding me?”
In May, the chair’s armrests were damaged after a flight on Southwest Airlines, but the device was still usable.
“I just started crying, I was so upset, I said, ‘how could you do this?’ ” she said.
“I was numb, I was just in shock.”
United Airlines acknowledged the incident in a statement to USA TODAY.
I can’t go to the grocery.
“I asked them how am I going to get to work, how am I going to continue to be able to put food on the table for my family if I can’t get around?” she said.
She said the whole situation makes her feel unwanted by the travel industry.
“I just feel even more angry that we are isolating this whole section of society who otherwise would be productive and moving around and working … It’s almost like a fear mechanism you’ve created that prevents people from doing what they need to do,” she said.
According to the Department of Transportation, airlines "mishandle" on average about 1.5% of the mobility equipment they transport.
In 2022, that translated to 11,389 incidents reported by U.S. airlines, up from 7,239 in 2021.
This year, USA TODAY wants to highlight what those figures mean for travelers with disabilities.
We're looking to track these incidents throughout 2023 with the goal of bringing light to an all-too-common problem.
If your own mobility equipment was damaged or lost by an airline this year, please share your story with us using the form below:
You can reach him at zwichter@usatoday.com
The crowd at the historically Black Catholic university's Convocation Center rose to its feet for the 22-year-old graduating with a biology degree and a Spanish minor.
Editor's note: Part one of a five-part USA TODAY series revealing why America hasn't solved its long struggle with Type 2 diabetes.
For chef Robin Ray, newly married with young stepchildren, the turning point came when a stabbing chest pain sent her rushing to the emergency room.
“I didn’t think you’d make it,” the doctor said.
The moments were turning points for all three to get serious about addressing their diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes, in which the body can’t properly regulate blood sugar, has become so common it’s almost considered inconsequential.
More than 1 in 10 Americans have the disease (though many don't know) and another nearly 4 in 10 are at risk for it.
In total, half of all adults and a quarter of teenagers have diabetes or pre-diabetes.
Its financial costs are astronomical.
The country spends more than $300 billion a year to address diabetes, accounting for $1 out of every $4 spent on health care.
And its personal tolls are even worse: heart attacks, amputations, blindness, kidney disease, double the risk of premature death.
It also causes what’s known as “diabetes distress,” the daily burdens and emotional toll of living with and managing a chronic ailment that can lead to regular dips in energy, foggy thinking and depression, and a sense of isolation.
The most frustrating aspect of Type 2 diabetes, experts say, is that it has long been largely preventable and controllable.
“We have made tremendous gains in understanding diabetes,” said Dr. Donald Berwick, a pediatrician and former administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Roughly 40% of people who died early in the coronavirus pandemic had Type 2 diabetes, a rate four times higher than people without the disease.
Even when elevated blood sugar levels are below the threshold for type 2 diabetes, the risk for heart disease jumps 30% to 50% compared with people with normal blood sugar levels.
(Type 1 diabetes, which accounts for 5% to 10% of diabetes, is caused by the immune system and is unrelated to diet or lifestyle.)
America’s failure to address Type 2 diabetes highlights larger problems with our food and medical systems, Berwick and other experts said.
A soda costs less than a bottle of water, a double cheeseburger and fries less than a carton of blueberries.
Patients wait months for medical appointments only to see the back of a white coat for the short time they’re allotted.
Treating disease costs society far more than preventing it but typically provides more profit for insurance companies, hospitals and the pharmaceutical industry.
The USA TODAY Health team spoke with scores of health care providers, researchers, community leaders and patients for this five-part series to understand why Type 2 diabetes continues to worsen in America despite known solutions.
The answer isn't simple.
It involves systemic problems facing everyone in society, not just those with diabetes: a food system designed to sell products; a medical system in which cutting off a leg is less expensive than saving it; the high cost of healthy living and the fact that breaking habits takes a lot more than just personal willpower.
This first story looks at what it takes for people to cope with or overcome the disease.
Then, we explore one community in a David vs. Goliath battle against a food system that fails to prioritize people's health.
More in series:Diabetes runs deep in rural Mississippi.
Locals have taken to growing their own solutions.
We next travel to Colorado, which has the lowest level of diabetes in the nation.
Yet even in this state, where hiking trails and gorgeous views abound, economic and other disparities make it easier for some people to avoid diabetes than others.
More in series:A diabetes disparity: Why Colorado's healthy lifestyle brand isn't shared by all
It's tough to manage a chronic illness in the face of high medical costs, scattered care and caregiver frustration and burnout, so we highlight that next.
More in series:The steep cost of Type 2: When diabetes dragged her down, she chose to fight
Finally, we explore solutions, addressing why it will take a combination of education, medication, medical devices and improved food access to solve this national problem.
More in series:Solutions exist to end the Type 2 diabetes dilemma but too few get the help they need
But it will take "sensible action" from across many sectors, including health care, science, nutrition, business, public health and politics to change the financial and other incentives that drive so many Americans toward sickness instead of health.
"If we do it incrementally or don't do it at all, we're all going to be toast in 50 years from diet-related illnesses and a depleted environment."
There’s no question personal responsibility plays a role in fighting diabetes.
They’ve reduced their dependence on daily medication and hope to have saved themselves the horrors of more amputations, blindness and dialysis.
They’ve extended their lives and improved the quality of that time.
But like many medical problems, the challenges of diabetes go well beyond individual responsibility and blame.
Agarwal recently led a series of studies in the journal The Lancet that looked at diabetes rates around the world.
Poverty, the studies showed, was a major driver of diabetes, along with racism and unequal access to healthy food and high-quality medical care.
Personal stories illustrate how these structural issues play out in the lives of so many Americans.
 “I’m healthy because of privilege – not diet, not exercise, not determination,” he said.
“It’s going to be all right after a while, as long as I keep this spirit,” he said.
Ray’s love for food began when she was 8 years old, watching Julia Child on TV.
During family gatherings, she would run around taking everyone’s dinner order.
Then she’d scurry back to the kitchen with a notepad full of scribbles.
Throughout her life, she made fried chicken, pork chops, baked mac and cheese, collard greens, and even a whole roasted chicken filled with wild rice and two sticks of butter – everything that made her soul sing.
In her world, food was home.
Food was family.
Food was love.
But that was some pretty tough love.
In 2002, Ray was diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes.
Her father, grandmother, aunts and uncles all had diabetes.
She knew what it meant.
“For you to tell me I can’t have ice blue raspberry Kool-Aid was like you shut down my world,” Ray said.
She didn't dwell on the diagnosis and continued with life.
Her culinary career took her to Italy, where she learned and fell even more in love with food.
She returned to St. Louis, got married and became a mom to her husband’s two children ‒ “beautiful bonus babies,” as she described them.
Through the years, she continued to express love through cooking and eating.
In 2015, a stabbing chest pain sent her to the emergency room.
Doctors assured Ray she hadn’t had a heart attack, but they warned that her life was on the line.
At 5-foot-2, she weighed 334 pounds and had an A1C, a measure of average blood sugar of 11%, well above the 6.5% cutoff to be considered diabetic.
Her diabetes – and her diet – were out of control.
She and her primary care doctor decided she would pursue weight loss surgery.
But she also decided to use her culinary prowess to transform her diet.
She reconfigured favorite foods, substituting healthier ingredients: Collard greens cooked in smoked fats or ham hocks turned into a kale, turnip and rutabaga recipe flavored with natural chicken broth fat, oils and seasonings.
She fostered her feelings into new recipes and brought them to North Sarah Food Hub, which partnered with Barnes-Jewish Hospital to make packaged, pre-made meals for St. Louis residents with diabetes and limited access to fresh food.
“I became excited about food again, and food became a joy.”
It isn’t always easy, of course.
Ray admits to an occasional cookie craving.
But now she takes the time to think about how her body processes that cookie and whether it’s worthwhile.
She hopes her cooking can help other people make the same transformation she did.
Her staff at North Sarah helps her create new recipes for others.
She wants to provide nourishment that allows people to avoid illness and medicine.
The lifetime risk of developing Type 2 diabetes if a parent has it is 40%.
If both parents have it, the risk jumps to 70%.
He knew he was at risk, but he pushed his luck, he said, by eating poorly during the pandemic and falling out of his exercise routine.
With the luxury of working from home, walking to the kitchen and bathroom was often the extent of his daily activity.
On Feb. 14, 2022 – Valentine’s Day – he went to an urgent care clinic, concerned his breathing trouble meant he had bronchitis.
His blood pressure measured 210 over 110, well above normal levels that top out at 120 over 80.
A chest X-ray showed fluid filling his lungs, leading to congestive heart failure.
The clinic sent him straight to a local emergency room, where he was diagnosed with a blockage of the left descending artery – a clogged artery made worse by diabetes.
If he had waited any longer, he would have had a massive heart attack, his doctor later told him.
After his release from the hospital, he went to the drugstore to fill his new prescriptions.
The pharmacist told him she couldn’t fill one because it would cost $1,000.
He’d have to wait until his insurance approved it.
“Please fill it,” he said.
She stressed the cost.
“Fill it,” he pleaded, putting the charge on his credit card.
Medication helped him lose 70 pounds in three months.
When his local drugstore ran out of the weight-loss drug, he easily drove to another pharmacy and then another to find what he needed.
His 100 hours of high-quality cardiac rehabilitation were fully covered by insurance.
He could devote all his energy to getting well because he didn’t have to focus on how to afford his care.
When they finally show up in the emergency room, “because they will,” they will cost the system far more, he said.
On the day Haynes stepped on a rusty nail in 2019, he walked all day as the nail pierced the sole of his sneaker and then his foot.
By the time he took off his shoe that night, his foot was infected.
He landed in the hospital for two months as doctors and nurses tried, mostly unsuccessfully, to get the infection and Haynes’ blood sugar under control.
By the time he was released, he knew enough about Type 2 diabetes to realize his daily blood sugar levels – typically in the mid-400s – were four times above what he had been told to shoot for.
But nothing he did or ate seemed to make a difference.
He had long since traded ribs for salads, beer for water.
His wife, Angela, barely noticed when James started wearing multiple pairs of socks, pouring powder on his feet and buying bigger shoes.
His feet tingled a lot, he said, but he was coping with it.
James ended up in the emergency room again, dehydrated and in need of antibiotics.
The doctor amputated the baby toe on his right foot, leaving a large open wound.
“I didn't like that we're not going to try to save anything, we're just going to start cutting.”
James was fading.
Antibiotics left him looking sickly, his voice so weak Angela could barely hear him.
“I felt like I was watching my husband slowly dying,” she said.
She thought it would take months to get James in to see the heart disease specialist, but the office called and asked if they could come the next day.
“We started looking forward to these visits because there was always hope,” Angela Haynes said, though she felt guilty they were taking up so much of the important doctor’s time.
Haynes had blockages in blood vessels on both legs.
Once he got the blood flowing again, Haynes began to feel better.
His flesh returned to its normal color.
The wound started healing at last.
Walking became easier.
Then disaster struck again.
On July 2, 2022, Haynes caught COVID-19.
"Everything went downhill after that," he said.
During his 13-day illness, the bacteria in his foot raged out of control.
Every week, a surgeon would come to the door of his hospital room and before even stepping all the way in ask Haynes whether he had decided to get his leg amputated.
I was born with this.
He was worried about how he’d get around, how he’d be able to work to support his family if he had only one leg.
No one took the time to explain why they thought the leg needed to come off or how he’d cope without it, Haynes said.
In late November, he was finally sent home in a wheelchair.
Back at the hospital, Haynes was told his foot was broken, essentially beyond repair.
He agreed to a below-the-knee amputation.
Released right before Christmas, he spent the next three weeks in bed wondering how he’d manage the rest of his life.
Finally, it looked as if his luck might be turning around.
With the leg gone, his diabetes improved.
His blood sugar dropped into the 120s or one-teens.
His blurry vision cleared up.
During his long hospital stay, he befriended nurses and learned about a program for people who needed prostheses.
The man who ran it called early in the year and said he had received a donated leg.
If it fit Haynes, he could have it while waiting for insurance to pay for a personalized one.
Miraculously, it did.
Haynes spent the next six months teaching himself to walk again.
The donor leg was heavy and uncomfortable.
He wasn't mobile enough to hold down a job.
One late spring night, picking up dinner at a nearby restaurant, he headed to the bathroom for a pit stop.
A sink had been leaking all day and Haynes slipped in the puddle, falling backward.
He's still recovering from the resulting wrist surgery.
He and Angela are living – barely – off her part-time salary as a secretary and a church organist.
Haynes has tried "at least three or four times" to receive government assistance, but they keep losing his paperwork, or not believing he's disabled, though he once checked himself out of the hospital and arrived at an appointment in his wheelchair to prove he didn't have a leg.
Still, he clings to his faith and the positive attitude he has long used to cheer up himself and others.
These are his secret weapons against diabetes and everything else life throws his way.
"I try to put a smile on other people's faces," he said.
"It keeps my day going."
This story is part of a reporting fellowship sponsored by the Association of Health Care Journalists and supported by the Commonwealth Fund.
Our goal remains the same: Provide book lovers with the best, most accurate snapshot of what people are reading by showing which titles are selling.
It is a master list, unbound by genre and format, of what’s selling broadly across the U.S.
Her novel "It Starts With Us" claimed the No.
1 spot in its first week, her highest debut ever, selling more than 800,000 copies on its first day of sales.
It was her fourth book to hit No.
1 in 2022.
The USA TODAY list is a ranking of the top-selling titles each week from a broad range of businesses including major chains, independent bookstores and online retailers.
It reflects combined sales of titles in print and electronic format, if available.
Our data team weighs and compiles those numbers to generate the week's 150 top-selling titles.
The rankings reflect sales from the previous Monday through Sunday.
The full list will publish online at 6 a.m. Wednesdays, with the top 50 titles publishing in print Thursdays.
The list, which began in 1993, went on hiatus in December.
It is the longest-running USA TODAY data journalism project.
In our continued commitment to bring readers more books coverage, USA TODAY is also excited to announce a new content partnership with The Novel Neighbor, an independently owned and operated bookstore in St. Louis.
They are expert booksellers and passionate readers who are deeply connected to what their community is reading.
With the partnership will come regular profiles of independent bookstores across the country, highlighting the important role of these businesses in their local communities.
Novel Neighbor will also be sharing expert book recommendations and fun takes on book trends.
We can't wait to see what you've been reading!
Since the Israeli military ordered civilians to flee Gaza as it pursues Hamas militants, more than 1 million Palestinians have left their homes in the face of mounting airstrikes.
Vehicles carrying relief supplies stood motionless at Egypt's border with the Gaza Strip this week while locals and aid organizations begged for food, water and fuel for generators.
They said the tiny territory sealed off by Israel after last week’s rampage by Hamas was near total collapse.
Hundreds of thousands of Palestinians who had been forced from their homes were searching for bread.
Hospitals in Gaza were on the brink of power outages, endangering the lives of thousands of patients.
As an Israeli ground invasion seemed a certainty, Hamas militants continued their relentless rocket fire, and tensions grew along the Israel-Lebanon border to the north.
The Gaza power plant and power cables from Israel, which were Gaza's two primary suppliers of electricity, are no longer operational.
At the beginning of the siege, Israel cut off its supply of electricity to the city, and the power plant ceased operations almost a week ago because of a shortage of fuel.
Unable to view our graphics?
Click here to see them.
On Oct. 11, the Gaza Power Plant in Deir al-Balah, immediately south of the evacuation area, closed for lack of fuel.
And with the suspension of Israeli supplies, Gaza is now without energy.
Hospitals and other large facilities have backup generators, but when the fuel runs out, Israel's blockade will prevent new supplies from coming in.
Hospitals in Gaza "risk turning into morgues" without electricity, according to the International Committee of the Red Cross.
The death toll on both sides has surpassed 5,000, making the conflict the deadliest of five wars involving the narrow, densely populated strip of land bordering Israel, Egypt and the Mediterranean Sea.
SOURCE AP, UN Office of Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, USA TODAY research
The Israeli military ramped up its reach Sunday, striking targets in Syria, the West Bank and Gaza amid growing concerns the war will spread more widely across the Middle East.
The intensified military actions came as a convoy of humanitarian aid trucks made its way into Gaza from Egypt for a second day.
But the U.N. warned the aid is about 4% of the daily average of imports into previous conflicts and a fraction of what is needed.
Israel has been pounding Gaza relentlessly since Hamas' stunning, brutal attack Oct. 7 that killed more than 1,000 Israelis and saw the seizure of more than 200 hostages.
"Bombardments continue almost unabated as hostilities enter the 15th day in Gaza," the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs said in its latest situation report.
First humanitarian aid reaches Gaza:Convoy arrives after 2 weeks of Israel-Hamas war
The U.N. humanitarian affairs agency says it is "imperative" to increase the number to at least 100 trucks per day.
Syria said it was forced to shut down international airports in Damascus and Aleppo because of the Israeli strike.
The Syrian Transport Ministry said landing strips at both airports were damaged by missiles and one civilian worker was killed and another wounded at Damascus International Airport.
Israel has carried out several strikes in Syria since the war began, citing the need to prevent Hezbollah and other militant groups from bringing in arms from Iran, which also supports Hamas.
In the Israeli-occupied West Bank, Israeli forces killed at least five people there early Sunday, according to the local Health Ministry.
Palestinian militants have fired over 7,000 rockets into Israel since the war began, the Israel Defense Force says, and tens of thousands of Israeli's have been forced to flee their homes.
Hamas says it targeted Tel Aviv early Sunday.
The Israeli death toll has surpassed 1,400, most of the civilians killed in the first hours of Hamas' bloody attack on border villages.
At least 212 people were taken hostage; two Americans were released Friday in what Hamas described as a humanitarian gesture.
The Gaza Health Ministry put the Palestinian death toll at 4,385; almost two-thirds of the fatalities are children and women.
More than 1,000 people have been reported missing and are feared trapped or dead under the rubble.
Israel repeated its calls Sunday for Palestinians to leave northern Gaza.
Israeli authorities say an estimated 700,000 have already fled, but hundreds of thousands remain.
Fleeing to southern Gaza has provided little relief as Israeli airstrikes there have also battered cities and infrastructure.
Gaza's Housing Ministry says more than 160,000 homes and apartments − more than 40% of all dwellings − in Gaza have been damaged or destroyed since the war began two weeks ago.
The result is that about 1.4 million of Gaza's 2.3 million people have been "internally displaced," and 566,000 of them are staying in U.N. emergency shelters, the U.N. says.
The State Department designated Hamas a terrorist group in 1997, and several other nations also consider Hamas a terrorist organization.
In 2006, Hamas won parliamentary elections, and in 2007 the group violently seized control of Gaza from the Palestinian Authority, which was controlled by the rival Fatah movement that still governs the West Bank.
There have been no elections since.
The group calls for the establishment of an Islamic Palestinian state that would replace the current state of Israel and believes in the use of violence to carry out the destruction of Israel.
Hamas receives financial, material, and logistical support from Iran.
So far, however, the U.S. and other nations have said there is no evidence that Iran was directly involved in Hamas’ attack.
Contributing: The Associated Press
Palestinian terror groups’ false accusation that Israeli forces destroyed a hospital in Gaza was instantly covered as fact by journalists.
As the unconfirmed allegation was highlighted in headlines, news feeds and push notifications, the reaction was immediate, threatening Jewish communities around the world.
This happened even as the allegation was quickly rebutted by the Israeli government.
And U.S. sources have said that the missile likely was fired from within Gaza by Palestinian Islamic Jihad, a local terror organization that essentially serves as a junior version of Hamas.
As the sun rose, it became clear that, while the misfired missile had claimed casualties, the hospital had not been flattened.
Indeed, independent experts assessed that it had been set ablaze by an explosion on the ground.
Based on overhead imagery, communications intercept and open-source data, governmental and nongovernmental sources confirmed that the damage likely had been caused by a rocket fired by terrorists inside Gaza.
But it was far, far too late.
Journalists' knee-jerk assumption that Israel bombed a hospital already had attained escape velocity, traveling around the world and inflaming hatred along the way.
It was expected for Arab media to report the lie.
Outlets like Al Jazeera has dispensed with any pretense of objectivity.
But it was even more damning to see Western media, including the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal, jump on the Hamas-driven charge and spread it without the normal processes that ensure the integrity of their reporting.
“Israeli Strike Kills Hundreds in Hospital, Palestinians Say,” blared a headline in The Times (later changed to “Israelis and Palestinians Blame Each Other for Blast at Gaza Hospital That Killed Hundreds.”)
In addition, reputable newspapers such as The Washington Post and news organizations such as The Associated Press and Reuters amplified the accusatory claims.
The level of incompetence was staggering – and dangerous.
In the 24 hours after the incident, the misinformation fueled a wave of antisemitic hate.
There are almost too many examples to count.
A synagogue in Germany was firebombed.
Anti-Israel protesters descended on the U.S. Capitol and flooded Amman, Jordan; Beirut, Lebanon; and other capitals.
This is just the beginning.
Some, but not all, news outlets have backtracked on the claim and corrected the record.
Fortunately, no one has been killed as a direct result of this irresponsible coverage.
But the odds seem likely that people might be killed if this kind of misreporting reoccurs.
'Take a lesson from the dead':Fatal stabbing of 6-year-old serves warning to divided US as Israel-Hamas war rages
How does this happen?
When Hamas makes a claim, media outlets must ask hard questions.
As a terrorist organization that forbids free speech and outlaws open expression, it has a track record of spreading lies and propaganda.
Its leaders actively engage in information warfare, using all the means at their disposal.
For example, rather than cite the Ministry of Health in Gaza as a source, it would be more accurate to reference it as the Hamas Health Ministry, because it is an arm of the terrorist government.
Outlets also should stop referring to Hamas operatives as “fighters” or “militants.” They are unrepentant terrorists whose malevolence is confirmed by more than 1,400 body bags in Israel, let alone the over 200 hostages, ranging from infants to the elderly, held against their will in the Gaza Strip.
But the problem is not just the official Hamas line.
Western news agencies cannot operate bureaus in Gaza as they do in Israel and other democracies around the world.
Reporters are not allowed to roam around and pursue stories at will.
Instead, Hamas restricts who can report on the situation – and who cannot.
It is time for journalists to acknowledge their accountability in this crisis.
Irresponsible reporting can enable the spread of a modern-day blood libel.
The blood libel is an ancient charge, a pernicious myth that Jewish people intentionally kill non-Jews for any number of reasons.
An ancient form of fake news, the blood libel fueled antisemitic pogroms in Europe and was later imported to the Middle East.
Today, we see the blood libel in full effect when the world recklessly blames Israel for any number of crimes.
It proliferates when, in this delicate moment, major media outlets fail to apply the normal checks and balances used to minimize misinformation.
It has always been dangerous, but it is even more explosive in the Information Age because Jews around the world will be the victims.
As the Hamas war rages and tensions rise, media services around the world must take responsibility and prevent false information from spreading and fanning the flames of hate.
Jonathan A. Greenblatt is CEO and national director of ADL (the Anti-Defamation League).
As we can see in Ukraine and now the Middle East, wars of aggression, acts of genocide, tyranny and terrorist atrocities do not happen in isolation.
The shadows of the Holocaust loom large, with contemporary Western society constructed upon the principle of "never again."
Yet, disturbingly, echoes of the past resurface as Jewish populations face vile antisemitism in Europe and America, and calls for "peace" mask veiled justifications for Hamas' heinous acts, which, at their core, revel in cruelty and degradation.
The Soviet Union's oppressive legacy endures.
Countless individuals, particularly in Eastern Europe and notably Ukraine, grapple with fractured family histories and tales of ancestors deported, killed or incarcerated.
Such generational trauma requires immense time and understanding to be fully addressed and healed.
The Syrian war, with its novel brand of horror, did not emerge spontaneously.
The alliance between Hezbollah, a notorious Lebanese terrorist entity, and Russia, which at that point was a widely accepted partner of the free world, started in 2015 in Syria and has not stopped.
Now, the repercussions of every past atrocity reverberate globally.
The same culprits, repeatedly emboldened, perpetrate murder, torture and degradation as the world seeks reassurance and the illusion of peace.
Hamas, responsible for the deaths of entire Israeli families, finds camaraderie in Moscow.
Syria's Assad regime deploys chemical warfare on its populace, bolstered by Hezbollah and Russia.
Hezbollah launches assaults on Israel, underpinned by its intricate ties with Iran, Syria and Russia.
Russia's savage invasion of Ukraine persists, with Iranians providing applause and weaponry.
African nations are inundated with propaganda, giving a stage to ruthless Russian mercenaries – while China quietly acquires the continent piece by piece.
And China's menacing stance toward Taiwan, combined with its support for Russia's aggression toward Ukraine, signals a broader threat to the free world.
This vicious cycle offers no genuine peace.
Ukraine working to document war crimes:Ukrainians need America's help to hold Russian war criminals accountable for atrocities
Regrettably, the free world isn't merely an idle observer.
Much of the technology utilized by Russia and terrorist factions originates in the West.
Billions in humanitarian aid have flowed into Gaza, only to line the pockets of Hamas leaders living lavishly in Qatar or to finance militants who funnel these funds into weapon smuggling.
European aid items, including water pipes, have been repurposed by Hamas to fashion missiles aimed at Israel.
Microelectronics are incorporated into missiles that wreak havoc upon civilians in Ukraine and anywhere else terrorists enact their terror.
Why do these companies persist in servicing equipment instrumental in aiding a nation led by an accused war criminal to produce arms?
Greed appears to be the likeliest culprit.
Such convenient "ignorance" of the end-users (Russian arms manufacturers) does not make an excuse for silent war crimes enablers.
To those who argue that Europe or the United States should abstain from intervening in distant conflicts, a sobering reality check is due: Their involvement is already apparent, just not in a way most of the people imagine.
This is evidenced by the surging exports to nations that orbit Russia – for instance, German exports to Kyrgyzstan soared by 949% last year, according to a Reuters analysis, with a significant proportion finding its way to Russia.
Concurrently, China capitalizes on its position as the manufacturing hub for Western tech, striving to replicate and pilfer Western innovations.
The sobering truth is that countries such as China, Iran, Belarus and Russia are already waging a covert war against the free world, and it's high time the latter acknowledged this reality and stopped fighting against itself.
True global tranquility remains elusive until the world recognizes that witnessing brutality is never a standalone event.
The civilizational war has started, and it’s time for all to choose their allegiance.
Sebastian Cook is pursuing his dream of becoming a barber.
Some days, he spends up to 12 hours at the Brevard-based academy he attends.
With a rule passed Wednesday by the Florida Board of Education, the 19-year-old transgender man will be barred from accessing a bathroom he feels comfortable using.
"It makes me really terrified to go to school," he said.
I don't look like a woman.
FORT DODGE, Iowa — Allison Roderick has a warning and a pledge for rural residents of her county: The water from their wells could be contaminated, but the government can help make it safe.
Roderick is the environmental health officer for Webster County in north-central Iowa, where a few thousand rural residents live among sprawling corn and soybean fields.
Many draw their water from private wells, which are exempt from most federal testing and purity regulations.
Roderick spreads the word that they aren’t exempt from danger.
The crowd at the historically Black Catholic university's Convocation Center rose to its feet for the 22-year-old graduating with a biology degree and a Spanish minor.
After 75-year-old Bay View, Wisconsin, resident Paul Bailey won a gun auction through GunBroker.com in August, he received a UPS tracking number for the package and awaited his new gun's arrival.
Take it from Jim Schwartz.
It’s way too early to consider the Cleveland Browns' defense as one of the best in NFL history.
That’s no kind of knock on the amazing pace the NFL’s stingiest defense has established through five games this season.
The Browns – leading the league for fewest yards, passing yards, points, first downs and third-down conversions allowed – have some of the best numbers ever produced at this point in a campaign.
If this holds up, the comparisons to great defenses of yesteryear will be validated.
Yet it’s still early.
“Well, they don’t give out any trophies for five weeks,” Schwartz, Cleveland’s defensive coordinator, said during a news conference this week.
It’s a long season, and we’re going to have to survive a lot of highs and lows throughout the season.
We have some experienced coaches that have been there, that know that.
And I think that’s one of the things that keeps us grounded.
So let me know when the five-week stats are part of the tiebreaker.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Schwartz – whose perspective includes landing his only NFL head-coaching shot with the task of taking over a Detroit Lions squad that finished 0-16 the season before – has long been established as one of the league’s premier defensive strategists.
MORE:Five NFL players who need change of scenery as trade deadline approaches
That’s being proven again already during his first year with the Browns, as he has employed a wide-nine front and other wrinkles and surprises (see Myles Garrett’s feigned “crossover dribble” while lined up as a stand-up middle linebacker against the Bengals) to help a talented unit reach new heights.
Getting a glimpse of Schwartz fielding questions as he prepared for Sunday’s game at Indianapolis, though, showed that in addition to pushing the right buttons when it involves the X’s and O’s, he also set the proper tone against the landscape of the what-have-you-done-lately NFL.
“He’s playing 3-2, right?” Schwartz said.
Our defensive stats are 3-2, everything else, and he’s doing his job within – I don’t want to downplay it.
I just don’t want to get into the whole rate of everybody’s play.
It’s not about individuals.
We talked about that last week.
It’s about the group.
In any event, the “all 11” and additional role players on Schwartz’s unit can certainly take a bow for how they handled one of the hottest offenses in the league in the 19-17 upset of the previously unbeaten San Francisco 49ers last Sunday.
The 49ers, who scored at least 30 points in their first five games, were limited to 215 total yards.
For the season, Cleveland has allowed just 1,002 yards – third-fewest in the NFL through five games since 1970, after the 1971 Colts (836) and 1970 Vikings (945).
This is connected to the league’s best rate on third downs, with just 15 conversions on 65 attempts (23.1%).
So many of the numbers are staggering.
The Browns have allowed just 52 first downs, even more impressive when considering the team with the next-fewest, Tampa Bay, has allowed 94 first downs.
While the sack total (15) is average and the takeaways (four) way on the low end, that’s covered by the minimal yards (220.4 per game) and points allowed (77).
So maybe it’s a bit early to rank the Browns' defense among the best ever.
But even Schwartz doesn’t mind his talented unit rolling with a fair amount of swagger.
“That would look foolish if we’re out there giving up 42 points,” Schwartz said.
But I think a lot’s being said with if you’re going to have some personality and some swagger, then you better back it up on the field.
The scrutiny on new quarterback Derek Carr was intense enough when considering the disastrous results the New Orleans Saints have produced when getting near the goal line this season.
Now the heat has gone up a few notches – by Carr’s own actions during the 31-24 loss against the Jacksonville Jaguars on Thursday.
It was not a good look, and not the only example of questionable body language to express frustration.
Because that’s not going to help anything.
“I can do a better job as a leader to calm everybody down.”
He can also help the Saints reverse their red-zone patterns.
Carr, though, couldn’t be blamed for the result of a perfect pass that slipped through the fingers of tight end Foster Moreau in the end zone in the final seconds.
And what he said afterward, when it was mentioned that teammates rallied around a distraught Moreau, suggests that he gets it when considering how his response can make a difference.
In other words, pointing fingers is not the ticket.
Now he’s back, essentially for the price of a sixth-round pick.
“It’s not always just super simple,” Nagy said during a Thursday news conference, “but it is certainly easier for somebody like him that’s been here to come back in and go.”
His 2022 season, though, was cut short after eight games due to a pelvic/abdominal injury that had him hospitalized for 10 days.
That dubious distinction belongs to Washington, which heads into the matchup against the Giants on Sunday having allowed 34 sacks.
New York has yielded 33 sacks.
Pugh re-joined the team two weeks ago, while Myles and Phillips were signed this week off practice squads for Atlanta and Philadelphia, respectively, with New York losing seven of its original nine offensive linemen this season to injuries.
If one guy gets hurt, then here’s the next guy, they’re not playing that spot.
There’s been a lot of shuffling.
The Eagles signing of veteran wide receiver Julio Jones offers the promise of a playmaker with seven Pro Bowl selections on his resume … and caution.
Jones, 34, is with his fourth team in as many seasons, and has missed seven games in each of the past three seasons with Tampa Bay, Tennessee and Atlanta, due to assorted injuries.
But he must weigh that against the notion of expecting too much, too soon.
“We are going to have to make sure that we’re not putting him in danger.”
The NFL trade deadline is a natural catalyst for some fun hypotheticals.
But with the cutoff for making deals now is 11 days away, it's only natural to ponder the possibilities, even if a majority of the league's biggest stars will remain in place.
With that in mind, we asked USA TODAY Sports' NFL writers and columnists: Which NFL player – regardless of whether actually on the trade block – is most in need of a change of scenery?
His good friend Derek Carr was released, Chandler Jones was exiled, and the Raiders are hovering around the basement of the AFC.
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
The six-time Pro Bowl wide receiver stated last month that it’s not in his "mentality to sit here and try to take all season and figure it out."
But it’s become apparent that the Raiders are closer to a being in a rebuild than they are to being a contender, and they don’t have a franchise quarterback on their roster.
Adams was considered by many to be the best wide receiver in the NFL not too long ago.
Now it seems as though he’s stuck in the Raiders' black hole, one Las Vegas likely won’t escape for the next few seasons.
And the 30-year-old wide receiver doesn’t have all the time to “figure it out.” – Tyler Dragon
And he’s right.
It’s felt like Adams has been working on his cardio in his last two games, producing just six catches on nine targets for 74 yards and no scores.
Adams should be the most targeted receiver in the NFL, like he was in Weeks 3 and 4 when he had 33 targets, producing 21 catches for 247 yards and two touchdowns.
I don’t see Adams or the Raiders parting ways because of his immense value.
The Raiders are second in the AFC West and could reach the playoffs if Adams is as involved as he wants to be.
The Denver Broncos are going nowhere fast.
– Nate Davis
While it was reasonable to think that the arrival of Sean Payton earlier this year might ignite the wide receiver's production, that hasn't happened.
– Jarrett Bell
I’m also going to go with a receiver, but a different one.
We’ve got to get Justin Jefferson into a winning organization.
But the problem is what’s happening in the win-loss column.
Minnesota has made the playoffs just once in Jefferson’s three seasons there.
That came last year and the Vikings got bounced by a flawed Giants team in the wild card round.
The Vikings are now 2-4 and falling behind the Lions in the NFC North.
Jefferson is on injured reserve with a hamstring injury.
His frustrations with losing are clear on the sideline.
He's 24 and is an absolute game breaker.
He appears to be craving bigger moments and would thrive on a legitimate contender.
Now in the final season of his rookie contract, the Vikings hold leverage via the fifth-year option and, potentially, the franchise tag.
If the Vikings can’t turn their performance around, hopefully they can swing a deal and get him to a contender because it would be a treat to watch Jefferson go off in the postseason.
– Lorenzo Reyes
Prior to Thursday night's loss to the Jaguars, his average yards per target was 3.4.
His average yards per reception?
Unfortunately for the five-time Pro Bowl running back, his touches are baked-in surrender rather than an effort to move the ball.
The Dallas Cowboys won't – and shouldn't – move their No.
1 receiver this year.
That much is clear.
But it's still a real drag to see a target as dynamic as Lamb get bogged down in a stagnant, uncreative attack that ranks last in the NFL in rate of motion at the snap, according to ESPN.
A seven-catch, 117-yard performance in Monday's win over the Los Angeles Chargers helped get the fourth-year pass catcher back on track this season.
But the lack of a contract extension for Lamb – as well as Jerry Jones' response of "I don't know about that" when asked last week if he wanted more targets for his top weapon – underscores some troubling signs about Dallas' level of commitment.
Week 7 of the 2023 NFL schedule comes in light, six teams (Bengals, Cowboys, Jets, Panthers, Texans and Titans) breaking for byes.
But a decent slate of games kicks off Thursday with the New Orleans Saints hosting the AFC South-leading Jacksonville Jaguars.
No international games this week, so Sunday starts at 1 p.m.
ET with a juicy matchup in Baltimore, the Ravens facing the Detroit Lions in a battle of first-place squads.
The "Sunday Night Football" nightcap is the biggie, the Miami Dolphins (5-1) visiting the Philadelphia Eagles (5-1) – decked out anew in Kelly Green – in the latest candidate for game of the year.
Who's 6-1 on Monday?
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
Gannett may earn revenue from sports betting operators for audience referrals to betting services.
Sports betting operators have no influence over nor are any such revenues in any way dependent on or linked to the newsrooms or news coverage.
Terms apply, see operator site for Terms and Conditions.
If you or someone you know has a gambling problem, help is available.
Call the National Council on Problem Gambling 24/7 at 1-800-GAMBLER (NJ, OH), 1-800-522-4700 (CO), 1-800-BETS-OFF (IA), 1-800-9-WITH-IT (IN).
Must be 21 or older to gamble.
Sports betting and gambling are not legal in all locations.
Be sure to comply with laws applicable where you reside.
That left a lot of explaining for his media session before Wednesday’s practice.
Survive long enough as an NFL quarterback and there will be weeks like this.
Heat like this, with hot-take analysts suggesting the quarterback take a seat on the bench.
The Falcons (3-3) lost an eight-point game against Washington after two of their final three drives ended with picks by the second-year quarterback.
The other possession was rather ugly, too; the ball was turned over on downs that included a sack and two incompletions.
Was it accuracy or the play design?
Bad decisions or bad routes?
NFL STATS CENTRAL: The latest NFL scores, schedules, odds, stats and more.
So, there’s little parts in that entire game – not only with myself but with the whole offense.
In rolling with a young quarterback, the Falcons knew there would be some turbulence along the way with this learning curve.
And the defense has improved, allowing them to stay in games.
Arthur Smith, the Falcons coach and play-caller, has fingerprints on this, too.
The Falcons’ operational process during the final minutes was a mess.
Atlanta probably uses as many personnel packages as any team in the league, which can help create matchup advantages but also requires frequent substitutions.
In any event, this stuck out as the issues piled up on Sunday.
Asked about the operational issues, Smith fired back with arithmetic.
"Two-thousand plays the last two years," Smith said.
They are all different.
I wouldn’t call that some catastrophic trend.
Now they shouldn’t happen.
But they’re all different, why they happened.
You identify the problem.
It’s what happened lately.
The mishaps on Sunday came with the game on the line.
"We can play this game all day," defended Smith, in his third season at the helm.
What about New York?"
"We’ve won a lot of games handling those situations," Smith added.
We’ve got to get it fixed.
This isn’t a trend, a runaway story.
Acknowledge what happened.
Smith pointed to the turnovers, maintaining that NFL teams this season have won just 6% of the games when committing three turnovers.
"Go back to Houston, and those guys executed pretty damn good," Smith said.
He summed it up as a matter of paying better attention to detail, yet he also acknowledged the challenges with communication….especially as the play-clock winds down.
It goes back to communication.
"He’s even-keeled," Pitts said.
The soap opera that has consumed members of Congress for nearly three weeks over electing a new speaker is testing the patience of the voters who sent them to Washington, a new USA TODAY/Suffolk University Poll finds.
An overwhelming 67% say the House should elect a speaker as soon as possible, given the need to approve wartime aid for Israel and Ukraine and to prevent a government shutdown that looms next month.
Just 25% of those surveyed say they don't care whether a speaker is elected, on the theory that the impasse is preventing Congress from wasting more taxpayer money.
"I don't think that a speaker in the House is going to do anything other than, you know, just keep kicking that ball along."
The poll of 1,000 registered voters, taken by landline and cell phone Tuesday through Friday, has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.1 percentage points.
In a political world where bipartisanship is the exception, there is a broad consensus on this.
By double-digit margins, the idea of electing a speaker, and fast, was endorsed not only among Democrats (86%-10%) but also Republicans (57%-34%) and independents (59%-32%).
"How often do you see Democrats, Republicans, and independents agree on anything in DC?"
They are all speaking the same seven words in unison: 'Elect a speaker and do your job.'"
The previous House speaker, Rep. Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., was ousted from the post by a handful of combative conservatives, just eight of them but enough given the GOP's narrow majority.
Since then, no potential successor has been able to command the 217 votes needed.
Ohio congressman Jim Jordan was defeated three times before the Republican caucus voted Friday to sideline him.
House Republicans are scheduled to meet late Monday to figure out what to do next.
The scenes of Capitol chaos displayed on cable TV last week may be eroding voters' confidence in the ability of the nation's leaders in the White House and Congress to address the nation's major challenges.
Just 4% of those surveyed express "a lot" of confidence in leaders; another 32% had "some" confidence.
But the largest group, 35%, have "very little" confidence and another 27% had none at all.
"If I could go negative five, I would give it a negative 100," Gibbons said.
Democrats, who traditionally have supported a bigger role for government, have more confidence in its ability to solve problems; 63% had "a lot" or "some" confidence.
But Republicans, whose leaders in recent years have portrayed the government as either incompetent or dangerous, were overwhelmingly skeptical that Washington could be trusted to do anything right.
A plurality of Republicans, 42%, said they had no confidence in government; another 38% had "very little."
Ratings for the Senate are nothing to brag about, with 36% having a favorable view, and 42% an unfavorable one.
But ratings for the House are even worse.
Just 25% see it favorably; more than double that, 54%, view it unfavorably.
Once there is a speaker, most voters have a suggestion of what they want them to do next: A compromise that avoids a government shutdown when the latest temporary funding bill expires Nov. 17.
More than six in 10, 61%, want negotiations to reach a deal.
"I mean, don't we live in a bipartisan world?"
But there's a catch.
While just 31% want their representatives to stand firm on demands to cut spending, even if it means a government shutdown, that group includes a 55% majority of Republicans.
Only 37% in the GOP endorse a negotiated compromise.
And Republicans control what happens in the House − assuming, of course, they succeed in electing a speaker.
"So if you think you can intimidate me, go … suck it up, buttercup!"
Washington, D.C., was gridlocked this week as House Republicans failed to elect a new speaker.
The caucus nominated Jordan, an ultraconservative representative from Ohio.
But, she told reporters, she had concerns about whether Jordan could unify the party, and she was worried about the looming threat of a government shutdown.
"As soon as the vote was had in conference, and then, not two hours later, we had that coming out."
She cast her vote Wednesday for U.S. Rep. Kay Granger of Texas, a Republican who chairs the Appropriations Committee.
Jordan then lost a secret ballot and withdrew his nomination.
She anticipates House Republicans will successfully choose a speaker "next week."
"I have told everybody I’m not doing anything until Sunday."
Katie Akin is a politics reporter for the Register.
Reach her atkakin@registermedia.com.
Follow her on Twitter at @katie_akin.
The latest guilty pleas from two key allies in Donald Trump's high-profile Georgia election interference case put new pressure on the former president and raise questions about whether his once-loyal associates may one day flip on him.
Coming after a third defendant, Scott Hall, pleaded guilty in September, their deals bolster the weapons in prosecutors' toolbox, and may pressure other defendants to flip -- a move that would raise the legal stakes for Trump.
"It is ominous for the other defendants in the state or federal cases, above all Donald Trump."
"The defendant provided detailed instructions to co-conspirators in Georgia and other states for creating and distributing these false documents," she said.
Sixteen co-defendants in the Georgia case, including Trump, Eastman and Giuliani, have pleaded not guilty.
Powell, an election lawyer who spread baseless claims of voter fraud, pleaded guilty Thursday to a half-dozen misdemeanors associated with tampering with election equipment in Coffee County, Georgia.
Legal experts said Powell's agreement to provide testimony could have a weighty impact on the wider case because she had significant dealings with Trump, Giuliani, and others.
Powell can also describe how co-defendants tried to overturn the 2020 election.
She and Giuliani attended a raucous meeting at the White House with Trump, where they discussed having the military seize voting machines.
Trump never acted on the proposal.
Hall, a bail bondsman who served as a go-between for several of the co-defendants, pleaded guilty in September to five misdemeanors dealing with interfering with election duties.
Hall also made multiple calls to co-defendants in the case.
For example, Hall spoke with Jeffrey Clark, a former assistant attorney general, for more than an hour Jan. 2, 2021, according to the indictment.
Clark, who pleaded not guilty, is charged with drafting a letter of false statements about Justice Department concerns with the 2020 election, to be sent to Georgia officials.
Hall also spoke repeatedly with co-defendants accused of trying to intimidate election workers to change their stories about what happened with ballot counting at State Farm Arena on election night 2020.
Summer said McAfee would have to take the schedules for Trump's other criminal trials into account, as well as his attorneys' scheduling conflicts.
"Assuming he's acquitted in the DC case, I think then they'll probably specially set a trial for sometime after that, maybe the fall of 2024," she said.
“We are just a little young, going through our own version of adolescence, figuring out who we’re really going to be when we grow up.”
The other half, he suggested, will be to steer the policy agenda in Washington.
So what is the 38-year-old political newcomers vision for America's future?
Here's how his pitch impacts Americans across the country.
"There are certain people, good people, in this race, that will favor incremental reform of the federal government and the bureaucracy," he said.
I favor quantum leap change.
He said he’d opt to send the department's $80 billion in funding back to taxpayers to “economically empower” them to choose a school for their children.
“The correct answer is shut it down and give the power and the money back to the people.”
The same tactic was adopted by former President Jimmy Carter in the late 1970s but was not found to reduce costs and was later abandoned by former President Ronald Reagan.
Previously, the biotech entrepreneur has proposed allowing Russia to keep the Donbas region and requiring Ukraine to concede its attempts to join NATO.
He called for reopening relations between the U.S. and Russia and said that such an alliance would help counter China.
During a confrontation at the first GOP debate, for instance, former South Carolina Gov.
“Under your watch, you will make America less safe.”
Imagine a young married couple.
One partner invests heavily in his employer’s 401(k), saving for both spouses.
The other focuses on paying the bills and contributes nothing to her retirement plan, missing out on the employer's matching funds.
“My income was going toward our expenses, and he was going to focus on retirement,” she said.
“And I had a great company match, and I didn’t pay attention to that.”
The marriage eventually ended.
Her lost retirement savings provide a cautionary tale.
Protect your assets: Best high-yield savings accounts of 2023
“I don’t even want to think about it,” she said.
In fact, one in four married couples fails to take full advantage of employers who make matching contributions to 401(k) retirement plans, a recent study found.
The oversight costs them nearly $700 a year, on average.
Most plans offer a match: The employer contributes to a 401(k), matching some or all of the funds paid into the plan by the worker.
In one typical model, the employer matches half of every dollar a worker contributes, up to a maximum of 6% of the worker’s pay.
The study found that about 24% of married couples left money on the table by failing to claim some of an employer’s matching funds.
Those couples lost $682 a year, on average, money they could recover simply by changing the allocation of their retirement contributions.
The findings are based on IRS tax data and retirement plan descriptions.
The researchers stressed that their focus was not on couples that don’t save for retirement, or don’t save enough.
Instead, they looked at couples that could increase their savings merely by shifting contributions from one spouse to the other.
“It’s all about how you allocate money across accounts.”
In some couples, the researchers found, only one spouse contributed to a retirement plan, while the other ignored a plan with a generous employer match.
Other couples split retirement savings equally when they should have put more money into an account with a larger match.
“And I think a lot of people need to realize that this is not about the individual.”
The new study underscores a lack of cooperation between spouses on an important matter of household finance.
The researchers said it also speaks to the broader issue of financial communication in marriage.
The researchers found that couples that had been married longer, and couples with children, tended to do a better job at communicating and coordinating retirement savings.
Couples in shorter relationships did worse.
Couples headed for divorce were also less likely to coordinate their retirement contributions.
The researchers discovered this by studying the saving patterns of marriages that ended in divorce.
Investment advisers often recommend that American workers save 10% to 15% of their pre-tax income for retirement.
They also urge them to max out any matching funds from the employer, which boosts the worker’s effective savings rate.
If a company matches up to 6% of your salary in 401(k) contributions, "maxing out" means contributing at least that much of your annual pay.
“The first priority for any investor should be to save enough to get at least the entire employer match,” said Rob Williams, managing director of financial planning at Charles Schwab.
Yet, many partners leave the money untapped.
Vanguard, for example, reports that 31% of its retirement plan participants failed to claim some or all of an employer’s matching funds in 2022.
Retirement savings rates are lower for younger workers, whose retirement falls in the more distant future.
Among Vanguard participants, the retirement savings rate in 2022 ranged from 5.2% for workers under 25 to 9% for those over 65.
More on inflation's bite:High costs disrupt life in more ways than we can see
In the 2023 Retirement Confidence Survey, conducted by the nonprofit Employee Benefit Research Institute, 84% of workers voiced concern that the rising cost of living will make it harder for them to save money for retirement.
An employer match may not seem like much money.
But “it’s a 100% match up to 3% of your salary.”
An employee with a $50,000 salary would see a $1,500 contribution grow to $3,000.
As the holiday season approaches, two major grocery chains have announced they are reducing prices to help customers deal with inflation.
On Wednesday, Walmart announced it will be "removing inflation," offering Thanksgiving meals at lower prices than in 2022, according a press release.
The supermarket giant will offer two Thanksgiving meal options this year: one with ingredients for customers who like to cook from scratch, and one for customers who prefer more ready-to-bake options.
Walmart's Thanksgiving meal basket includes main dishes and sides options from national brands, including turkey for under $1 a pound, ham, stuffing and pumpkin pie.
These holiday prices don't just apply to Thanksgiving: Walmart's deals begin Nov. 1 and are valid through Dec. 26, 2023.
Aldi has also turned its focus toward holiday prices, announcing Wednesday that it will reduce the price on over 70 items around the store by up to 50%.
The price reductions include seasonal items like gravy, potatoes, green beans, cranberries and pumpkin pie, according to a press release, but also includes kitchen staples like butter and flour.
Aldi's price reductions will begin Nov. 1 and last through the end of the year.
USA TODAY has reported that annual inflation has fallen this year since hitting a 40-year high of 9.1% in June 2022.
Consumer price increases stayed high in September, and there was a small rise in gasoline and food costs.
Chick-fil-A releases cookbook:will combine fan-favorite menu items with household ingredients
CVS is pulling over-the-counter allergy and cold medicines that contain the most popular decongestant ingredient from its shelves.
The ingredient, phenylephrine, was found to be no more effective than a placebo when taken orally by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration last month.
More:FDA panel declares decongestant phenylephrine ineffective.
What it is and what products contain it
Since 2007, the efficacy of phenylephrine to provide nasal congestion relief has been challenged.
In September, the group of FDA-assembled advisors unanimously voted oral phenylephrine ineffective "a thorough review of" data going back to 1994, and that the drug metabolizes in the body before it reaches the nasal passages.
The panel vote is not a medical determination.
There were no safety issues found with taking oral phenylephrine.
The experts said some potential benefits of removing the ingredient include "lowering of overall healthcare costs, and avoiding missed opportunities for use of more effective treatments" like going to the doctor.
Medications with phenylephrine generated $1.8 billion in sales last year, according to the FDA report.
Not all pharmacy chains will remove products.
In a statement to USA TODAY, a Rite Aid spokesperson said the company will keep those over-the-counter medications on its shelves:
"Our pharmacists are available to provide guidance to customers on over-the-counter solutions for alleviating symptoms associated with colds and other illnesses."
Kathleen Wong is a travel reporter for USA TODAY based in Hawaii.
You can reach her at kwong@usatoday.com.
The upcoming Mega Millions drawing, scheduled for Oct. 20th, is set to award an estimated jackpot of $91 million to one lucky winner.
Don't miss your chance to play!
The numbers were drawn just after 11 p.m.
ET and we have the results below.
Here's a look at the winning numbers for Friday, Oct. 20.
The winning numbers for Friday night's drawing were 07, 29, 36, 49, 61, and the Mega ball was 22.
To be determined.
The full list of Mega Millions winners can be found on the lottery's website.
When purchasing a Mega Millions ticket, you have the opportunity to select six numbers.
The first five will be chosen from a range of 1 to 70 for the white balls, and the last number will be chosen from 1 to 25 for the coveted golden Mega Ball.
For those who find it daunting to pick their own numbers, the option to select Easy Pick or Quick Pick is available, which will generate the numbers for your ticket at random.
This decision could potentially increase your non-jackpot winnings by a factor of 2, 3, 4, or even 5 times.
Here are the top five Mega Millions jackpots:
Tickets can be purchased in-person at gas stations, convenience stores and grocery stores.
Some airport terminals may also sell lottery tickets.
Must be 18+, 21+ in AZ and 19+ in NE.
Not affiliated with any State Lottery.
Visit jackpocket.com/tos for full terms and conditions.
Many of us have been there before: waking in the middle of the night, often in response to a dream or nightmare, afraid and covered in perspiration.
For instance, some people worry that their sweat causes body odor, while others fret that their obvious sweating is a sign they're nervous or anxious (which it may well be, but they don't want others to know that).
But for people who sweat a lot at night, perspiration can be especially disruptive to a healthy sleep schedule, and even costly due to the amount of laundry it can create.
Nights sweats are repeated episodes of very excessive sweating that occur during sleep - often heavy enough to soak through nightclothes or bedding, per Mayo Clinic.
Such episodes can occur whether one's sleeping environment is hot or cold.
Like episodes of excessive sweating that can occur during the day, night sweats are usually considered generalized hyperhidrosis, or heavy sweating.
Another such cause many include hormonal changes like menopause, which can make it hard for the brain to regulate body temperature, often causing night sweat.
Infection can contribute as well; as can night terrors or bad dreams.
"Stress, increased heart rate, and other stimuli can trigger night sweating," says Anthony Beutler, MD, an associate medical director of sports medicine at Intermountain Health in Salt Lake City.
Other culprits of night sweats include vitamin B12 deficiency, excess weight, dysfunction within the autonomic nervous system or certain disorders of the endocrine system such as thyroid disease.
And each such factor can lead to different degrees of night sweating.
"The composition of sweat varies considerably, depending on its cause," explains Loren Fishman, MD, a professor of physical medicine and rehabilitation at Columbia University.
It's also worth noting that night sweat is not the same as exercise-related sweat in a couple distinct ways.
"The chemical composition of perspiration from night sweats, like that from other emotional or endocrine causes, is different in its chemical composition from exercise-induced perspiration," says Fishman.
To explain this, he says that sweat from normal activity is higher in lactate - a product of metabolism - than the sweat produced while sleeping.
"Exercise-related sweating is triggered by the body during exercise to control body temperature," she explains.
"Night sweats are typically caused by something else."
More:Sweating cools us down, but does it burn calories?
When you're messaging someone, you don't want to overload them with information.
Sometimes, sending a lengthy paragraph can feel like too much.
You also may want to avoid the dreaded "double text," or in some cases, triple or quadruple text.
This is where slang and abbreviations come in to help.
"ICYMI", USA TODAY has been breaking down text slang.
Now, it's time to learn a new one.
"FYI" stands for "for your information."
When used, the term notifies others about something that is important or significant.
The abbreviation can be used in both formal and informal messaging, such as via email to relay a deadline at work or while texting a friend about some interesting gossip.
The usage of "FYI" can be traced back to the 1930s when it was used by journalists to denote that the messages – or parts of the messages – they sent were for the recipient only, not for public viewing, according to Grammarly.
USA TODAY is exploring the questions you and others ask every day.
From "Who has the most Grammys?"
Head to our Just Curious section to see what else we can answer for you.
Grains show up in many parts of our day – cereals and bagels in the morning, sandwiches at lunchtime, rice at dinner or popcorn while watching a movie.
But while the quantity may not be an issue, the quality is: the U.S. Department of Agriculture recommends more of your grain intake be from whole grains than refined.
Here are the healthiest options within that whole grain category.
Grains are an important source of fiber, B vitamins, complex carbohydrates and minerals like iron, magnesium and selenium.
While all whole grains will provide these nutrients, there are a few that stand out.
Dietary fiber helps you feel fuller, aids in digestion and helps prevent constipation.
Research presented at the 2021 American Society for Nutrition conference found fewer than 1 in 10 U.S. adults meet their daily fiber recommendations.
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommend eating 28 grams of fiber per day based on a 2,000-calorie diet.
You’re also getting protein with these three options.
A serving of oats (100 grams) contains nearly 17 grams of protein and 10.6 grams of fiber.
For cooked quinoa, it’s about 3 grams of fiber and 4.4 grams of protein.
For comparison’s sake, the same portion of white rice contains about 2.7 grams of protein and 0.4 grams of fiber.
The USDA recommends at least half your daily grain intake be whole grains, which contain more vitamins and nutrients than refined grains.
The refinement process gives grains a finer texture and longer shelf life – we see this in cereal, white flour, white bread and white rice, for example.
Today, many refined grains are enriched, which means they add back nutrients like B vitamins and iron but not fiber.
Folic acid is recommended during pregnancy because of its role in DNA and RNA formation, but it’s important for everyone.
The benefits of folate include improved digestive system functioning and preventing common cancers, cardiovascular disease, infertility, stroke, dementia and Alzheimer’s disease.
Check the packaging or nutrition labels to tell if a refined grain is enriched.
Organic products may not be fortified.
What is the healthiest bread?
To understand whole grains, you first have to understand grain kernel anatomy.
The kernel is made of three parts:
Whole grains are just as they sound – the entire grain kernel remains intact.
When you refine grains, it strips the grain of the bran and germ and uses just the inside endosperm.
This removes most of the grain's vitamins, minerals, fiber and protein.
You have to look at the ingredient list.
“You want the words ‘whole grain’ to be at the beginning of the ingredient list,” he says.
The easiest swap is to consciously add in more whole grain products to tip you over to that “more than half” whole grain recommendation.
Whole grain cereals can be another good addition to your mornings – routinely consuming ready-to-eat cereals, especially whole grain ones, is associated with significant increases in overall dietary fiber intake.
What foods are high in fiber?
USA TODAY is exploring the questions you and others ask every day.
From "How long to bake a potato?"
− we're striving to find answers to the most common questions you ask every day.
Head to our Just Curious section to see what else we can answer for you.
If you struggle with blemished or aging skin, or from a skin condition such as acne, chances are you've tried many natural remedies to help.
These may have included apple cider vinegar, vitamin supplements, essential oils or even a viral honey and cinnamon mask you may have seen trending on social media.
But chances are, you've also turned to prescription and over-the-counter medications or topical applications in an attempt to find a solution.
While there are many products offered by the $146-billion-dollar skin-care industry which include vitamin C serum and a host of lotions and creams, few such products or ingredients are more sought after than retinol.
It's a type of retinoid - chemical compounds derived from vitamin A or chemically related to it - but is unique in that most retinoids are considered powerful enough to require a prescription while the retinol formula is mild enough to be available in over-the-counter form.
"To my patients, I recommend using a pea-size amount of cream or gel, or about four drops of the serum, to cover the whole face."
Retinol is effective in a number of ways.
It can unclog pores (and thereby improve acne), neutralize free radicals and exfoliate one's skin.
In this way, he says it can help boost collagen production and also minimize wrinkles and fine lines.
Because of such varied functions, "it's used topically for acne, skin aging, discoloration and for certain skin diseases such as psoriasis," she says.
He says the most common one is irritation of the skin.
"It can disrupt the moisture barrier if you use too much or too strong of a retinol for your skin type," he cautions.
Another area of concern is that it's possible for retinol to increase one's sensitivity to the sun.
Retinol is also not generally recommended for use while pregnant.
Palestinian terror groups’ false accusation that Israeli forces destroyed a hospital in Gaza was instantly covered as fact by journalists.
As the unconfirmed allegation was highlighted in headlines, news feeds and push notifications, the reaction was immediate, threatening Jewish communities around the world.
This happened even as the allegation was quickly rebutted by the Israeli government.
And U.S. sources have said that the missile likely was fired from within Gaza by Palestinian Islamic Jihad, a local terror organization that essentially serves as a junior version of Hamas.
As the sun rose, it became clear that, while the misfired missile had claimed casualties, the hospital had not been flattened.
Indeed, independent experts assessed that it had been set ablaze by an explosion on the ground.
Based on overhead imagery, communications intercept and open-source data, governmental and nongovernmental sources confirmed that the damage likely had been caused by a rocket fired by terrorists inside Gaza.
But it was far, far too late.
Journalists' knee-jerk assumption that Israel bombed a hospital already had attained escape velocity, traveling around the world and inflaming hatred along the way.
It was expected for Arab media to report the lie.
Outlets like Al Jazeera has dispensed with any pretense of objectivity.
But it was even more damning to see Western media, including the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal, jump on the Hamas-driven charge and spread it without the normal processes that ensure the integrity of their reporting.
“Israeli Strike Kills Hundreds in Hospital, Palestinians Say,” blared a headline in The Times (later changed to “Israelis and Palestinians Blame Each Other for Blast at Gaza Hospital That Killed Hundreds.”)
In addition, reputable newspapers such as The Washington Post and news organizations such as The Associated Press and Reuters amplified the accusatory claims.
The level of incompetence was staggering – and dangerous.
In the 24 hours after the incident, the misinformation fueled a wave of antisemitic hate.
There are almost too many examples to count.
A synagogue in Germany was firebombed.
Anti-Israel protesters descended on the U.S. Capitol and flooded Amman, Jordan; Beirut, Lebanon; and other capitals.
This is just the beginning.
Some, but not all, news outlets have backtracked on the claim and corrected the record.
Fortunately, no one has been killed as a direct result of this irresponsible coverage.
But the odds seem likely that people might be killed if this kind of misreporting reoccurs.
'Take a lesson from the dead':Fatal stabbing of 6-year-old serves warning to divided US as Israel-Hamas war rages
How does this happen?
When Hamas makes a claim, media outlets must ask hard questions.
As a terrorist organization that forbids free speech and outlaws open expression, it has a track record of spreading lies and propaganda.
Its leaders actively engage in information warfare, using all the means at their disposal.
For example, rather than cite the Ministry of Health in Gaza as a source, it would be more accurate to reference it as the Hamas Health Ministry, because it is an arm of the terrorist government.
Outlets also should stop referring to Hamas operatives as “fighters” or “militants.” They are unrepentant terrorists whose malevolence is confirmed by more than 1,400 body bags in Israel, let alone the over 200 hostages, ranging from infants to the elderly, held against their will in the Gaza Strip.
But the problem is not just the official Hamas line.
Western news agencies cannot operate bureaus in Gaza as they do in Israel and other democracies around the world.
Reporters are not allowed to roam around and pursue stories at will.
Instead, Hamas restricts who can report on the situation – and who cannot.
It is time for journalists to acknowledge their accountability in this crisis.
Irresponsible reporting can enable the spread of a modern-day blood libel.
The blood libel is an ancient charge, a pernicious myth that Jewish people intentionally kill non-Jews for any number of reasons.
An ancient form of fake news, the blood libel fueled antisemitic pogroms in Europe and was later imported to the Middle East.
Today, we see the blood libel in full effect when the world recklessly blames Israel for any number of crimes.
It proliferates when, in this delicate moment, major media outlets fail to apply the normal checks and balances used to minimize misinformation.
It has always been dangerous, but it is even more explosive in the Information Age because Jews around the world will be the victims.
As the Hamas war rages and tensions rise, media services around the world must take responsibility and prevent false information from spreading and fanning the flames of hate.
Jonathan A. Greenblatt is CEO and national director of ADL (the Anti-Defamation League).
As we can see in Ukraine and now the Middle East, wars of aggression, acts of genocide, tyranny and terrorist atrocities do not happen in isolation.
The shadows of the Holocaust loom large, with contemporary Western society constructed upon the principle of "never again."
Yet, disturbingly, echoes of the past resurface as Jewish populations face vile antisemitism in Europe and America, and calls for "peace" mask veiled justifications for Hamas' heinous acts, which, at their core, revel in cruelty and degradation.
The Soviet Union's oppressive legacy endures.
Countless individuals, particularly in Eastern Europe and notably Ukraine, grapple with fractured family histories and tales of ancestors deported, killed or incarcerated.
Such generational trauma requires immense time and understanding to be fully addressed and healed.
The Syrian war, with its novel brand of horror, did not emerge spontaneously.
The alliance between Hezbollah, a notorious Lebanese terrorist entity, and Russia, which at that point was a widely accepted partner of the free world, started in 2015 in Syria and has not stopped.
Now, the repercussions of every past atrocity reverberate globally.
The same culprits, repeatedly emboldened, perpetrate murder, torture and degradation as the world seeks reassurance and the illusion of peace.
Hamas, responsible for the deaths of entire Israeli families, finds camaraderie in Moscow.
Syria's Assad regime deploys chemical warfare on its populace, bolstered by Hezbollah and Russia.
Hezbollah launches assaults on Israel, underpinned by its intricate ties with Iran, Syria and Russia.
Russia's savage invasion of Ukraine persists, with Iranians providing applause and weaponry.
African nations are inundated with propaganda, giving a stage to ruthless Russian mercenaries – while China quietly acquires the continent piece by piece.
And China's menacing stance toward Taiwan, combined with its support for Russia's aggression toward Ukraine, signals a broader threat to the free world.
This vicious cycle offers no genuine peace.
Ukraine working to document war crimes:Ukrainians need America's help to hold Russian war criminals accountable for atrocities
Regrettably, the free world isn't merely an idle observer.
Much of the technology utilized by Russia and terrorist factions originates in the West.
Billions in humanitarian aid have flowed into Gaza, only to line the pockets of Hamas leaders living lavishly in Qatar or to finance militants who funnel these funds into weapon smuggling.
European aid items, including water pipes, have been repurposed by Hamas to fashion missiles aimed at Israel.
Microelectronics are incorporated into missiles that wreak havoc upon civilians in Ukraine and anywhere else terrorists enact their terror.
Why do these companies persist in servicing equipment instrumental in aiding a nation led by an accused war criminal to produce arms?
Greed appears to be the likeliest culprit.
Such convenient "ignorance" of the end-users (Russian arms manufacturers) does not make an excuse for silent war crimes enablers.
To those who argue that Europe or the United States should abstain from intervening in distant conflicts, a sobering reality check is due: Their involvement is already apparent, just not in a way most of the people imagine.
This is evidenced by the surging exports to nations that orbit Russia – for instance, German exports to Kyrgyzstan soared by 949% last year, according to a Reuters analysis, with a significant proportion finding its way to Russia.
Concurrently, China capitalizes on its position as the manufacturing hub for Western tech, striving to replicate and pilfer Western innovations.
The sobering truth is that countries such as China, Iran, Belarus and Russia are already waging a covert war against the free world, and it's high time the latter acknowledged this reality and stopped fighting against itself.
True global tranquility remains elusive until the world recognizes that witnessing brutality is never a standalone event.
The civilizational war has started, and it’s time for all to choose their allegiance.
Ethics can be difficult.
Except when they’re not.
Except they will be.
Because this is Arizona.
For example, soon to come before the Arizona Supreme Court is a case that could revive an 1864, pre-statehood abortion ban that mandates as much as a five-year prison term for providers.
Among the seven members of the court who will decide that case is Bill Montgomery, a hyper-political, hyper-partisan, virulent anti-abortion former prosecutor appointed by former Gov.
The Arizona Mirror and The 19th (a nonprofit, independent news operation out of Austin, Texas) noted in an article that Montgomery said in the past that Planned Parenthood (whose lawyers are arguing against reinstating the 1864 law) “is responsible for the greatest genocide known to man.”
Now for the ethics part.
And please, try not to laugh out loud when you read the next sentence.
Arizona has an official “Code of Judicial Conduct.”
(I can hear you.)
Montgomery didn’t only make the “genocide” comment.
He was never shy about his feelings.
We call for Congress to end federal funding for Planned Parenthood.
There is no reason to fund this charade of women’s health care any longer.
Seems pretty clear that Montgomery’s “impartiality might reasonably be questioned.” And that he should disqualify himself.
Except, perhaps, in Arizona.
This isn’t new.
Ducey first increased the number of judges on the Supreme Court from five to seven (when no one said it was needed), then stacked the court with partisans like Montgomery.
The first time Montgomery came up for consideration, Chief Justice Scott Bales told Montgomery, “One broad statement is that you have very strongly held beliefs that have been expressed in different settings, which give people concerns about your ability as a judge to be fair.”
When the former prosecutor didn’t make the cut that time around, Ducey rigged the supposedly neutral system for selecting judicial candidates to pick the judges he wanted, like Montgomery.
When Montgomery was under consideration, Scott O’Connor, the son of former U.S. Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O’Connor, said selecting someone like him for the state’s highest court “will do no service to the public’s faith in the judicial system.”
What would bolster the public’s faith in the judicial system?
But ethics can be difficult.
Except when they’re not.
Except they will be.
Because this is Arizona.
This is not how the law of conservatorship works in Tennessee.
A court is required to find by clear and convincing evidence, based at least in part on the report of a physician, that the respondent is fully or partially disabled and that he or she is in need of assistance from the court.
Rights are then removed from the respondent and vested in the conservator.
Conservatorship system devours dignity:After Britney Spears' abusive conservatorship, don't reform the system – abolish it
There is no “custody” or adoption proceeding that goes along with a conservatorship.
Under Tennessee law, conservators are required to file an accounting and a status report once a year.
Prison reform gives second chance:First Step Act advanced prison reform, but hundreds are still serving unjust sentences
More will be revealed as this lawsuit progresses, but the case is disturbing.
An 18-year-old could be confused by the language of the original petition which refers to guardianship and custody along with conservatorship.
Barbara Moss is founder of Elder Law of Nashville PLC.
This column first published in The Commercial Appeal in Memphis, Tenn.
Many of us have been there before: waking in the middle of the night, often in response to a dream or nightmare, afraid and covered in perspiration.
For instance, some people worry that their sweat causes body odor, while others fret that their obvious sweating is a sign they're nervous or anxious (which it may well be, but they don't want others to know that).
But for people who sweat a lot at night, perspiration can be especially disruptive to a healthy sleep schedule, and even costly due to the amount of laundry it can create.
Nights sweats are repeated episodes of very excessive sweating that occur during sleep - often heavy enough to soak through nightclothes or bedding, per Mayo Clinic.
Such episodes can occur whether one's sleeping environment is hot or cold.
Like episodes of excessive sweating that can occur during the day, night sweats are usually considered generalized hyperhidrosis, or heavy sweating.
Another such cause many include hormonal changes like menopause, which can make it hard for the brain to regulate body temperature, often causing night sweat.
Infection can contribute as well; as can night terrors or bad dreams.
"Stress, increased heart rate, and other stimuli can trigger night sweating," says Anthony Beutler, MD, an associate medical director of sports medicine at Intermountain Health in Salt Lake City.
Other culprits of night sweats include vitamin B12 deficiency, excess weight, dysfunction within the autonomic nervous system or certain disorders of the endocrine system such as thyroid disease.
And each such factor can lead to different degrees of night sweating.
"The composition of sweat varies considerably, depending on its cause," explains Loren Fishman, MD, a professor of physical medicine and rehabilitation at Columbia University.
It's also worth noting that night sweat is not the same as exercise-related sweat in a couple distinct ways.
"The chemical composition of perspiration from night sweats, like that from other emotional or endocrine causes, is different in its chemical composition from exercise-induced perspiration," says Fishman.
To explain this, he says that sweat from normal activity is higher in lactate - a product of metabolism - than the sweat produced while sleeping.
"Exercise-related sweating is triggered by the body during exercise to control body temperature," she explains.
"Night sweats are typically caused by something else."
More:Sweating cools us down, but does it burn calories?
If you struggle with blemished or aging skin, or from a skin condition such as acne, chances are you've tried many natural remedies to help.
These may have included apple cider vinegar, vitamin supplements, essential oils or even a viral honey and cinnamon mask you may have seen trending on social media.
But chances are, you've also turned to prescription and over-the-counter medications or topical applications in an attempt to find a solution.
While there are many products offered by the $146-billion-dollar skin-care industry which include vitamin C serum and a host of lotions and creams, few such products or ingredients are more sought after than retinol.
It's a type of retinoid - chemical compounds derived from vitamin A or chemically related to it - but is unique in that most retinoids are considered powerful enough to require a prescription while the retinol formula is mild enough to be available in over-the-counter form.
"To my patients, I recommend using a pea-size amount of cream or gel, or about four drops of the serum, to cover the whole face."
Retinol is effective in a number of ways.
It can unclog pores (and thereby improve acne), neutralize free radicals and exfoliate one's skin.
In this way, he says it can help boost collagen production and also minimize wrinkles and fine lines.
Because of such varied functions, "it's used topically for acne, skin aging, discoloration and for certain skin diseases such as psoriasis," she says.
He says the most common one is irritation of the skin.
"It can disrupt the moisture barrier if you use too much or too strong of a retinol for your skin type," he cautions.
Another area of concern is that it's possible for retinol to increase one's sensitivity to the sun.
Retinol is also not generally recommended for use while pregnant.
Seven months ago, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill student Elizabeth Grace Burton died two days after overdosing on a blend of drugs and alcohol, according to the Assembly, which was the first to report her death this week.
(The state report detected fentanyl in Burton’s urine, but officials did not say it contributed to her death.)
The university would not confirm with USA TODAY if Burton was included in that tally.
Fentanyl is a synthetic opioid prescribed for severe pain management.
It’s up to 50 times stronger than heroin and 100 times stronger than morphine.
Just 2 milligrams — an amount small enough to fit on the tip of a pencil — can be lethal.
Because it’s so potent, fentanyl is often added to other drugs such as cocaine, methamphetamine and heroin, making them cheaper and more dangerous, particularly for teens, college students and other young adults.
“This scenario is sadly not uncommon, and it can happen to anyone,” said Dr. Ryan Marino, an emergency physician and addiction medicine specialist at University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center.
“This is a reminder of how an unregulated drug supply is always going to be unpredictable and unsafe.”
The best and only way to eliminate the risk of accidental fentanyl exposure is to avoid drugs all together.
But Marino says a more realistic piece of advice for those who plan on using them is to "never use alone."
Here are other important things to know.
You cannot see, taste or smell any amount of fentanyl in drugs, the CDC says.
Never assume drugs are safe because you know where or who they came from, experts say; your body could also react differently every time you use drugs.
People can use test strips that detect fentanyl in different drugs like cocaine, heroin and methamphetamine, and drug forms, such as pills, powder and injectables, in about five minutes.
It involves dissolving a small amount of a drug in water that you dip a piece of paper in.
If the test is positive, throw the drugs out.
Still, experts recommend testing drugs anyway.
“While they certainly aren’t foolproof, they’re an important tool we have that can reduce harms from an unsafe drug supply,” Marino said.
Fentanyl test strips are available at your local health department or community organization; they can also be purchased online.
Keep in mind, however, that some states consider these tests “criminal drug paraphernalia,” Marino said.
Symptoms of an opioid overdose include:
If you aren’t sure if a person is high or overdosing, the CDC suggests treating it like an overdose to be safe.
Here’s what you should do:
Avoid putting a person suspected of overdosing in a cold shower or bath; hitting them to wake them up; or trying to make them vomit, as that can increase their risk of choking.
And no, you can't overdose on fentanyl just by touching it.
In many cases — no.
Most states have Good Samaritan laws that protect the person who is overdosing or the person who called 911 from certain criminal penalties.
She discovered a woman wanting everyone to guess her age.
The 33-year-old had 30 followers at the time.
Now, she has 1.1 million, and regularly posts about "consensual doxxing."
The one-time Chicago restaurant server now makes enough money as a TikTok content creator to produce these videos full-time.
People have criticized her for the term she made up.
There's nothing "consensual" about doxxing, when you publicly expose someone's personal information (such as a home address or phone number) in order to cause harm.
But that's just it: she's facetious.
Think of her as TikTok's Nancy Drew.
"I look at it like a puzzle, and I've always loved puzzles," she says, and also wants to educate people about their online presence.
Experts say "consensual doxxing" can be a useful tool for learning about how much information you've put out online about yourself or can simply be a fun activity – but consider it a cautionary tale, too.
"Unfortunately, these videos highlight an uncomfortable truth: our lives are way more exposed online than we'd like to imagine."
After her second video: Hundreds of comments per day.
That number has held steady – she picks one or two out of these leads per day to pursue – partially because of the effort she puts into the task.
"It's evolved into people wanting to see the most creative way I found it," she says.
In her first viral video, for example, the subject in question had no videos, his profile picture had a cartoon filter over his face and the only remarkable attribute was that he was wearing glasses.
She dug deep through his followers to find a family member, scrolled through her likes on Facebook and found someone else's profile picture where a man was wearing glasses.
It correlated with a comment he made on TikTok about being an engineer, and that he lived in Florida, and so on.
Sometimes it's impossible to find people's birthdays when their profile is private, they have no followers, they follow no one and/or their username just has the word "user" and a bunch of numbers.
"Obviously, I cannot do anything with that," she says.
She estimates she finds 70% to 80% of the people whose birthdays she looks up.
A note about the method to her madness: She doesn't use public records, just social media.
"I want to try to show you that info that you have provided, is the reason that I found your birthday, even though you think you're locked down, your digital footprint is not as good as you think," she says.
Brad Fulton, associate professor of management and social policy at the Indiana University – Bloomington, adds: "It’s important for people to know how much of their personal information can be found online, and consensual doxxing can provide a relatively safe way for someone to discover the extent of their online exposure."
In case you missed:'Dimple maker' trend is taking over TikTok, but could it cause permanent damage?
Sometimes people reach out asking her for tasks beyond birthdays – like to help solve cases.
While flattering, she leaves that up to crime-fighting professionals.
"I'm hoping that it reaches people who are looking to be more private on the internet," she says.
Is it a real thing?
Time to be blunt.
James Patterson is less author and more writing machine.
Send the James Patterson 8000 machine a story idea and, presto, a plot-twisting bestseller emerges.
But the truth of his staggering success – around 200 books and a net worth reported above $800 million – is far simpler.
Other than playing early morning golf with his wife Sue, he’d rather be at the laptop hammering out words.
“I came across a quote recently that relates to us all, which is, ‘My time here is short, what can I do most beautifully?’” Patterson says during a conversation with USA TODAY.
And there are different ways to do that.
And I do think I’m a good partner in that pursuit.
Collaboration is not a word often associated with writers.
Many prefer the solitary if agonizing pursuit of word craft.
Or, as the fabled sportswriter Red Smith once described writing: It is merely sitting at a typewriter and opening up a vein.
But Patterson welcomes the assist.
And he will soon drop a new book with a “wonderful actor who everyone loves.” He won’t say more.
For Patterson, the art of collaboration is the natural human state.
The idea surfaced first in the mid-‘90s, when he and pal Peter de Jonge finished a round of golf and started talking about a story idea and the next thing they knew, they were writing up “Miracle on the 17th Green.”
“So much good stuff comes from collaboration, most TV shows and movies are all collaboration,” he says.
“And if we’re going to save the planet, that’ll take collaboration.”
The duo is done with “8 Months to Live” and honing in on “4 Months to Live,” writing as fiercely as if they also had the Grim Reaper at their door.
“That’s how we work, and we’ve become best friends along the way.”
Asked how the ideas come, and Patterson relates a story so improbable it can only be true.
As they hustled back to shelter, they passed an old man battling the rain on a bicycle.
“I saw the guy, I waved, and a word came out,” he says, not sharing what word.
Without naming names, Patterson is frank.
But most do “happen.” He says his interactions with Clinton (they co-wrote 2018’s “The President Is Missing” and 2021’s “The President’s Daughter”) were smooth, with the Florida-based author shuttling chapters to the former president in New York.
“He’s very smart and a good writer,” says Patterson.
When it came to working with singing and acting icon Parton (2022’s “Run, Rose, Run”), Patterson again mined his co-author’s real life story to forge a tale of a young singer-songwriter on the rise and on the run from her past.
“For her, it came from the heart,” he says.
I gave her an outline, and two days later she had notes and seven songs written.
Generally speaking, Patterson says he comes up with a story synopsis which gets shared with collaborators who then weigh in with their own thoughts and ideas.
Then comes a very detailed outline, which is critical to Patterson’s process.
As for the actual writing, it depends on the collaborator.
Those with extensive writing chops get less oversight, where newcomers require Patterson to spend more time with the manuscript.
But he’s not complaining.
He said he’s been working seven days a week since he was a teen, and finds nothing more satisfying that telling tales, alone or with others.
He doesn’t do big cocktails parties, too phony; he prefers the intimacy of a night out chatting with another couple.
There are the morning golf outings with Sue, often embarked upon so early the grounds crew is still on the course.
“So we just pick up our balls and walk on,” he says.
“We’re back home by 8 a.m.” And then it’s back to the keyboard.
“I don’t have writer’s block, I have writer’s diarrhea,” jokes the man who has published millions of words.
“But every time I start something, I am always hoping that the next book is the best thing I’ve ever done.”
Gwyneth Paltrow has been offering lifestyle advice for more than a decade, but don't expect her to escort you into old age.
The Oscar-winning actress says she may just disappear from public life when the time comes to sell her lifestyle and health company Goop.
"Or … I might just disappear, and no one will ever see me again."
Goop., which launches on Amazon and Target on Sunday, Oct. 22.
The lower-priced line of skincare and wellness brands launched under Goop Beauty features "clinically proven beauty products" like moisturizers, exfoliating scrubs, and shampoos, according to a press release.
And Amazon, too, is a plus because it makes the product even more accessible.
Read about Gwyneth Paltrow Trial:The Gwyneth Paltrow ski trial has our attention.
It's strange, juicy and exactly what the internet wanted.
I don't know, I find it hard.
"Then, of course, I need it for work, and they always make me do these stupid things on it."
This story includes detailed plot points of the new movie "Killers of the Flower Moon" and the real-life events on which it's based.
The 3-hour-and 26-minute film, starring Robert De Niro, Leonardo DiCaprio and Lily Gladstone, tells the story of Osage Nation tribal members, newly wealthy from the discovery of oil on their otherwise parched reservation lands, and the duplicitous non-Native Americans who swoop in to steal their bounty.
But while it plays like an allegory, the story is true.
“Because of the vast oil deposits on their lands, by the 1920s the Osage were among the wealthiest people per capita in the world.”
People of the Osage Nation had been moved around by the federal government for years before winding up in a barren stretch of Oklahoma, which wasn’t worth much at the turn of the 20th century.
But when oil deposits were discovered, everything changed.
And while “few Americans owned a car at that time, many Osage had numerous cars, as well as many servants, often white.”
‘Maybe we’re all capable of this’:Martin Scorsese on ‘Killers of the Flower Moon’ movie
But as the book and movie explain, sometimes there were shootings or slow poisonings to make the deaths look like mysterious ailments.
Many people were complicit: Doctors with their poison, morticians covering up causes of death, lawmen staying silent.
“There is no evidence that I know of that Mollie spoke to the president about the murders,” he says.
“But it needs to be underscored that the Osage did go to Washington, D.C., and she might have been on a trip.”
In 1921, a young J. Edgar Hoover, who would wind up as the notorious and longstanding director of the FBI, took over a new office then simply called the Bureau of Investigation.
“At the time, this office had limited jurisdiction over crimes nationally, but it did have jurisdiction over crimes on federal (Native American) lands.”
Hale served his time and died at 87 in Arizona in 1962.
Our critic says:In 'Killers of the Flower Moon,' Martin Scorsese crafts a gripping story of love, murder
Toby Keith is back in the driver's seat amid his battle with stomach cancer, and he's ready to perform for fans again.
The 62-year-old country star announced Friday that he will be headlining two Las Vegas shows in December to "get the band back in sync (and) get me rolling again," Keith said in a video posted to Instagram.
The concerts will take place on Dec. 10 and 11 at Dolby Live Park MGM Las Vegas.
Tickets go on sale at 10 a.m. on Oct. 27 and will be available at ticketmaster.com.
These will be what he called "rehab" shows that allow Keith to get reacquainted with performing.
After being diagnosed with stomach cancer in fall 2021, the performer has taken a two-year break from music.
He's done several public appearances recently, including at two pop-up concerts in Oklahoma and the People’s Choice Country Awards in Nashville.
In his video announcing the upcoming shows, Keith hinted at how his cancer treatments are going.
Or (I can) get up, go outside.
Don't let the old man in, you know what I mean?"
I've never been off a year in my life.
"I've got him by the horns right now, so instead of just sitting around and waiting, we're going to get the band back together," he said.
Last month, Keith was honored with the 2023 Country Icon Award at the People’s Choice Country Awards.
During his first televised performance since sharing his cancer diagnosis in June 2022, he performed "Don't Let the Old Man," his song from Clint Eastwood's 2018 film, "The Mule."
"I feel pretty good," Keith told E!
News at the Nashville awards show.
He added, "It's always zero to 60 and 60 to zero, but I feel good today."
'I feel pretty good':Toby Keith shares update on cancer battle at People's Choice Country Awards
The best advice you can give a college coach is to change jobs every seven or eight years, if they’re lucky enough to make it that long.
It doesn’t apply in every case, of course.
There’s a separate category for coaches who win national championships, though they aren’t necessarily immune either.
Coaches who regularly punch above their weight at programs that don't expect titles might have it best of all in this business because they can usually stay as long as they want.
Even if the school doesn’t really want to fire you, the fans eventually tire of you.
And even with all the money being deposited in your bank account, it’s not the best quality of life.
Meet James Franklin, the coach at Penn State.
He’s had some good stretches.
He’s had a few down periods.
But mainly, he’s just kind of achieved at the same level for 10 years.
And that level isn’t Ohio State or Michigan's level, which means the Nittany Lions have been cut out of the College Football Playoff picture because of two teams they play every year.
Is that good enough?
Penn State needs to beat those teams now and then.
And Saturday seemed like a good chance, with Ohio State somewhat diminished from the offensive monster they were the last few years and Penn State sporting the best defense it’s had under Franklin.
This year might have been as even as the overall talent has ever been.
And for all that, Franklin’s team didn’t even really show up.
Yeah, they were in the game into the fourth quarter.
But they didn’t play well at all offensively, gaining just 240 yards with 49 rushing yards on 26 attempts.
In the end, it was a 20-12 loss with a garbage time touchdown making it look more respectable, dropping Franklin to 1-9 against Ohio State.
He’s fared better against Michigan (3-6), but the Wolverines weren’t a top-10 team in those three good years.
HIGHS AND LOWS: Winners and losers from Week 8 in college football
BIG BUCKS: Brian Kelly earns $500,000 bowl bonus for LSU's sixth win
In other words, the overall picture is more or less the same for Penn State as it was six or seven years ago once Franklin got the program rolling.
Whether they’re right or wrong, how long until the people at Penn State just want something … different?
The romance in college football is often in the hope and the unknown, but that’s gone at Penn State.
They know what the program is and isn’t under Franklin.
At this point, fans could probably predict almost word-for-word what he’s going to say at his press conference.
But as Saturday’s performance showed, still not good enough.
For that reason, Penn State is No.
1 in this week’s Misery Index, a weekly measurement of which fan bases are feeling the most angst about the state of their favorite program.
He got hoodwinked by super agent Jimmy Sexton into giving out a big contract extension, even though Pittman was neither leaving nor being seriously pursued by anyone else.
And it’ll be a lot of money — either $16.1 million or $10.7 million, which is an interesting story on its own.
The contract stipulated that Pittman got an extra year if he won seven games at any point in the deal, which was accomplished last season when the Razorbacks went 7-6.
But if his overall record dipped from the beginning of 2021 dipped below .500 it would be a smaller buyout.
After a 7-3 loss to Mississippi State — Arkansas’ sixth in a row and 10th in its last 12 SEC games — Pittman’s record since 2021 is 18-16.
It’s all funny money these days in college football, but the idea that a game against FIU could be worth $5.4 million to Pittman personally and to Arkansas’ budget is maybe the only funny thing about this disaster of a Razorbacks season.
Now, 2 1/2 seasons and a measly eight total wins later, Indiana would be on the hook for a $20 million buyout if they want to get rid of him.
And they probably need to after dropping to 2-5 overall and 0-4 in the Big Ten with a 31-14 loss to Rutgers.
Hey, Indiana fans had reason to be excited back then.
Indiana wasn’t a one-hit COVID wonder, but it was a two-hit wonder under Allen.
So while Allen obviously had something to do with the success, he totally owns the failure that has followed.
Indiana is a football program used to going back to square one every few years.
It seems they're about to find themselves back in the same spot.
Here’s the state of things currently in East Lansing.
On the night they lost at home 49-0 to their most hated rival with an interim coach who is in place because their old coach admitted to masturbating on the phone with a university vendor who subsequently filed a sexual harassment complaint, somehow the only thing anyone will remember about this game is Adolf Hitler.
We shouldn’t have to explain why it’s bad to have an image of a smiling Hitler on your scoreboard as part of your pre-game entertainment, regardless of context.
(It was a trivia question that the university apologized for and blamed on poor oversight of a third-party vendor.)
But how did that one slip past the game operations people?
Or, as soon as somebody saw anything involving Hitler on the scoreboard, how did someone not just reach as quickly as possible for the button to turn it off?
But however it happened, unspeakable embarrassment keeps coming for the Spartans.
It’s very hard to get to the national championship game.
It’s almost as hard to throw away most of that goodwill with the fan base in a matter of 10 months.
But that’s about where the Horned Frogs find themselves after a 41-3 loss at Kansas State.
At 4-4 with trips to Texas Tech and Oklahoma still on the schedule along with home games against Texas and Baylor, it will be a high-wire act for Sonny Dykes to get this very mediocre team to 6-6.
Somehow, despite being a dog-tired football team, the Knights managed to score on a fourth-and-10 with 1:16 remaining to pull within a two-point conversion of tying Oklahoma in Norman.
And then what did they do?
They tried a terrible, double-pass trick play that required the ball to go seven yards behind the line of scrimmage before a right-handed receiver rolled left.
Meanwhile, UCF had nobody on the right side of the field to draw the defense.
And remarkably, it dropped UCF to 0-for-3 on two-point conversions this year — all on plays with some level of trickery.
For a team that's third in the country in rushing this year, that's not just bizarre, it’s almost inexcusable.
Shane Beamer had an unexpectedly fun first two years with the Gamecocks.
But he’s getting a reputation as the saltiest loser in the sport, which has already gotten old during a spiraling 2-5 season.
After the season opener against North Carolina, he complained about the chain gang delaying an onside kick attempt to start the second half.
Is this stuff a huge deal?
And Beamer is a nice guy, but he spends a lot of time apologizing for stuff he does in the heat of the moment.
And no, we don't mean Conference USA.
We mean the Misery Index, and it’s well-deserved.
After many years as one of the top Championship Subdivision programs with a national title just three seasons ago, you for some reason decided to leave that comfort zone and jump on the FBS train.
And after a 33-27 double-overtime loss to Florida International, you now know how hard it's going to be.
Sam Houston State is now 0-7 since moving up, and in an era of NIL, possible player compensation and a widening gap between the haves and have-nots, how much upside was there really for you to make this move?
The trajectory seemed clear, from complete despair to signs of life to winning records in 2021 and 2022.
But suddenly, the Pirates are back in the bad place — maybe a worse place.
They’re 1-6 after a 10-7 home loss to Charlotte, which had also been struggling at 1-5 coming into the game, and the numbers are all very ugly.
With such a passionate fan base and a highly regarded coach in Mike Houston, who won big at the lower levels including a national FCS title at James Madison, it's all very hard to figure.
PHOENIX — It was like a professional sumo wrestler strolling into an all-you-can-eat Brazilian steak house and ordering a salad.
It was like seeing a Ferrari going 50 mph on the Autobahn.
It was spending the evening with Kevin Hart without cracking a smile.
It was the powerful Philadelphia Phillies stunning everyone in the house Saturday night at Chase Field with a sneak attack that even had their own players scratching their head.
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
The Phillies dismantled the Arizona Diamondbacks 6-1, taking a 3-2 lead in the National League Championship Series.
The D-backs are still trying to figure out what hit them.
Sure, the Phillies still showed off their muscle, hitting three home runs, two within seven pitches for a total of 905 feet.
Still, the play that left everyone gasping for air occurred right out of the gate in the first inning, completely changing the complexion of the NLCS.
He couldn’t stop laughing as he ran to first.
It set up the play of the night, if not the series.
They were attempting a rare double steal.
The execution was perfect.
Harper crashed into Moreno's left shoulder, and scored.
And just like that, the Phillies had their first steal of home in a postseason game in franchise history.
The Phillies, without hitting a home run or even producing an extra-base hit, had a 2-0 lead, and Harper became the oldest player to steal home in a postseason game since the great Jackie Robinson.
Sure, it wasn’t a straight steal of home like Robinson’s in Game 1 of the 1955 World Series, but it counted just the same.
Big collision at the plate.
It was just what the Phillies needed after watching their bullpen blow the last two games.
They have their swagger back just in time for a trip to Citizens Bank Park where they have the biggest home-field advantage in baseball.
If he went, Harper was instructed to take off.
If Moreno doesn’t throw down, the Phillies have two runners in scoring position.
Yet, it was executed to perfection.
Last year, I ran the same play (against the Mets), and I was thrown out by 10 feet.
It’s a big-time play.
He’s got to make a good throw to second, a good throw back to home, he’s got to tag him.
It turned out the Diamondbacks didn’t make one good throw, and you better believe that when they take the field to work out Sunday at Citizens Bank Park, defending the double steal will be on the agenda.
We were anticipating it.
It was well-timed by our guys.
And, oh, did Wheeler come through at a time the Phillies desperately needed it.
“I told him after the game, like, 'You're one of the best pitchers I've ever played with, man.'
I've played with a lot of good ones, and he's easily top three.
It's so much fun to watch.
I love playing behind him.
Certainly, the timing was impeccable.
The Phillies’ bullpen was exhausted, using 11 relievers in the last two games to combine for 26 outs.
Wheeler came out and absolutely dominated.
He pitched seven innings, giving up six hits while striking out eight, leaving with a 6-1 lead.
If it happens, it would be the first World Series rematch since 1977-1978, when the Los Angeles Dodgers and New York Yankees met.
HOUSTON – This little Lone Star State intramural took a turn for the spicy.
And it’s up to the Texas Rangers to ensure the American League Championship Series continues beyond Sunday night.
The intensity of Game 5 was, fortunately for both teams, followed by an off day Saturday before the Rangers and Houston Astros resume pleasantries (hostilities?)
For the first time this year, the Rangers face a must-win situation: A victory would force a Game 7 on Monday night at Minute Maid Park, not the worst proposition given that the road team has won every game in this season.
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
At the least, it seemed they kept their heads just a bit better than the Rangers.
The playoffs aren’t the place to settle scores, especially with the umpiring crew on high alert from the get-go.
Yet the Rangers facing an elimination game and the Game 5 aftermath will make the tension more palpable.
You have to wait and see, just like me.
“Like we don't script it, it just happens.”
Both can certainly take comfort in their playoff resumes.
He was fabulous in the Game 2 matchup against Houston, pitching out of a bases-loaded, no-out jam in the fifth.
He was his own worst enemy in Game 2, making two errors on one play while getting peppered by five singles in the first inning.
Still, Valdez will lean on the experience of his 14 postseason starts.
“It is a lot,” Valdez says through a translator.
“A day off in the playoffs is still a work day.”
Tucker is batting just .108 (5 for 32) this postseason and has been dropped to sixth in the lineup.
“We need to get him going in order for me to move him back up,” says Baker.
“And pretty soon I think he'll be ready.”
Not only has the road team won every game this series, but the home team did not even take a lead until the sixth inning of Game 5.
Perhaps the Minute Maid Park faithful will be more aroused Sunday night after the Game 5 tensions.
It was complete news to him.
The word hadn’t spread to Paris, apparently.
Who knows, maybe they never really wanted to hire her in the first place.
"There may have been some other people pulling strings there, but it’s not a nice way to reward somebody that got you to the playoffs."
FOLLOW THE MONEY: MLB player salaries and payrolls for every major league team
How could he let Andre Dawson and Tony Perez go?
He cringes about what is happening in Miami.
And he worries whether the franchise will ever be successful.
They then turned around and fired several other employees, including amateur scouting director D.J.
So much for the good vibes of a 20-year reunion.
“I said, 'Jack?'
"And that’s how our beautiful relationship started."
The ring weighed a stunning 100.6 grams with the gem weight of 4.75 carats, including 228 white diamonds.
It wasn’t so much a ring, but a portable trophy.
I said, 'Boys, you’re going to get the biggest, greatest thing you ever saw, but just win the damn World Series.'
He was playing at Class AA, strictly as a third baseman, and the Marlins needed an outfielder.
He was on the bench during batting practice before Game 1, and noticed that the Marlins were awestruck by Yankee Stadium, a fear that they didn’t belong.
You’re the owner.
If you believe in him and yourself, you will the Series.
It was a huge risk.
McKeon could have waited until Game 7 with Beckett on regular rest, but the way McKeon figured it, they had no chance winning a Game 7 at Yankee Stadium.
Beckett threw a five-hit, complete-game shutout, beating the Yankees, 2-0, and walked away with the World Series MVP award.
They’ll show Cabrera being knocked down by Roger Clemens, staring him down, and then hitting a home run.
They’ll show Beckett’s brilliant performance.
And they’ll surely show McKeon, chomping on his cigar, leading the Marlins to one of the most unlikely World Series championships in history.
Not only does he belong in the Hall of Fame, but he belongs to go in on a gold chair.
You look at what he’s done for the game, his role as a GM and manager, winning a World Series, how does he not belong?"
It was wonderful.
I still love the game.
I miss the game.
I miss the camaraderie.
I cheer for the Mets.
Stevie Cohen is a friend of mine.
No, thank you.
I’ve had enough.
Hall of Fame pitcher Pedro Martinez is imploring Dominican Republic officials and Major League Baseball to increase their security to stop the rage of armed robberies at baseball’s academies in the Dominican Republic.
There have already been four MLB facilities – St. Louis Cardinals, Miami Marlins, Cleveland Guardians and Detroit Tigers_who have been victimized by armed robberies.
The Dominican Republic police is searching for men who have entered the complexes with gun to steal cash, jewelry, cell phones and baseball equipment.
We send our kids to these academies, feel like they’re protected, and things are happening.
We love baseball 24/7, and want to pass the baton.
We want the next generation of players to be as good as we were, and be more prepared.
It’s more challenging now with social media.
Every phone is a camera, every phone is a microphone, and you can be all over the world in seconds.
That can be challenging.
This is why Martinez believes it’s so important for security to be beefed up at these facilities to assure that no one gets hurt, greatly damaging the sport in a country that lives and breathes baseball.
There was not one player who was middle or upper class.
But because we played baseball, we were spoiled.
We were treated like royalty.
We were untouchable.
No one touched us.
Martinez wants other Latin star voices to be heard in these telecasts.
He wants to let them know the difficulties of growing up impoverished in the Dominican, and suddenly thrust into professional baseball without knowing a word of English, and expected to act like you were born and raised in the United States.
Craig Barry, the executive vice president and chief content officer of Turner Sports, thought it was important to have Martinez and Latin baseball stars to share their experiences during the NLCS.
One day, Pedro and Charles together, can you imagine?
– In an era when managers have had the least power and autonomy in baseball history, there is Alex Cora of the Boston Red Sox, who yields the most power of any manager in the game.
He has declined interview requests for the Cleveland Guardians and New York Mets’ managerial vacancies.
– It’s difficult to find any baseball executives who still believe that San Diego Padres manager Bob Melvin and GM A.J.
There still is tension bubbling beneath the surface.
– Hard to believe there has not been a former Mets manager who has gotten another managerial job since Bobby Valentine, who was fired after the 2002 season.
– Phillies starter Zack Wheeler joins the chorus of baseball veterans who believe that teams are doing a disservice to young starters by not letting them pitch longer in games, and getting out of their own jams.
Just throughout the season, those one or two innings more than other starters sometimes add up over the season.
But it’s not my call.
I don't make that investment, so I can’t tell you how to do it.
You have to pitch in tough situations.
– Fabulous Hall of Fame Era Committee ballot:
The inductees will be announced Dec. 3.
“A lot more focus has to be on individual teams to do better and not just rely on revenue sharing,” Levine said.
You can’t have it.
You don’t go into an NFL stadium or an NBA arena and see that.
… The commissioner has done an incredible job, but now it’s on individual teams.
The Rays averaged 17,781 fans this season while the Marlins averaged 14,355 fans.
– The Dodgers, whose No.
They have won 211 regular-season games in two years but only one in October, after being swept by the Arizona Diamondbacks this year.
Booking airline tickets for your next cruise may seem like a no-brainer, but please don't make the mistake of turning off your brain.
You could be paying for a new flight – or even getting stranded at the port.
Each issue is filled with breaking news, deep insights, and exclusive strategies for becoming a better traveler.
But don't tell anyone!
So much for the guarantee.
She said she's called Princess numerous times but has gotten nowhere.
"Each time we sit on hold for hours, then the line disconnects," said Rasmussen, a retired nurse from North Ogden, Utah.
If you're thinking of taking a cruise soon, maybe you're wondering about airline tickets.
Then again, probably not.
Travel advisors say airline tickets are often an afterthought to the cruise, a decision made at the end of the booking.
But let's not do that today.
Wave season – the time of year when most cruises are booked – is dead ahead.
And with the industry trade association Cruise Lines International Association predicting that global cruise capacity will rise 19% from 2022 to 2028 (up from 625,000 berths to 746,000), you don't want to make a rookie mistake.
"No one needs that kind of drama."
There are no publicly available statistics on the number of passengers who miss their cruise because of airline connections.
But based on the number of cases I've received lately, it seems to be a growing problem.
Passengers don't think about it soon enough, that's true, but cruise lines also impose significant restrictions on their air-inclusive programs.
Booking airline tickets through your cruise line may seem like a good deal, because they often offer guarantees that you will make it to your ship even if your flight is delayed.
There are other benefits.
The special contract fares offered through cruise lines are sometimes cheaper than published airfares.
The cruise line air programs also often allow you to hold flight reservations until the final payment date.
You can change flights at any time before making your final payment.
You can't easily do that if you book directly with the airline.
But there are also some downsides – which is to say, some restrictions apply.
She said that cost her $16,000.
"Although Norwegian Cruise Line provides flight arrangements as part of its cruise offering, we do not have control over the operations of the airlines and are not responsible for any flight modifications or cancelations," a spokesman told me, adding that its claim assessments "are final."
"This is so wrong," said Stewart, a physician from Bakersfield, California.
"They canceled the flight, I missed my cruise – and I am out $16,000!"
Many of the cruise lines' air-inclusive programs have similar restrictions.
They will protect you in most cases, but not all the time.
Experts say you can avoid this "gotcha" clause.
I'll get to that in a moment.
How to stay safer on your trip:'No one plans on security issues' while traveling
You don't have to get left at the dock while your dream cruise sails into the sunset.
Here are some of the worst rookie mistakes I've seen:
Hidden costs:Airlines are hiding the cost of air travel.
Now the government wants to help them.
Some do it on purpose:How airport line cutters 'are tearing the fabric of society apart'
Christopher Elliott is an author, consumer advocate, and journalist.
He founded Elliott Advocacy, a nonprofit organization that helps solve consumer problems.
He publishes Elliott Confidential, a travel newsletter, and the Elliott Report, a news site about customer service.
If you need help with a consumer problem, you can reach him here or email him at chris@elliott.org.
Visa-free travel for short-term visits to the U.S. for Israelis is now available.
Israel officially became part of the U.S. Visa Waiver Program on Thursday, which allows eligible Israeli citizens and nationals to travel to the U.S. for up to 90 days on business or tourism without having to first obtain a visa.
The admittance came earlier than estimated.
On Sept. 27, when admittance to VWP was announced, authorities said it would take until Nov. 30 to complete.
The VWP requires the person looking to come to the U.S. sans visa to "be from a country that extends to U.S. citizens and nationals the privileges we would extend to their citizens and nationals," according to a DHS press release.
Learn more: Best travel insurance
More:US airlines suspend flights to Israel as State Department urges caution
People can apply for the program via the U.S. Customs and Border Protection’s (CBP) Electronic System for Travel Authorization (ESTA) or via its mobile app.
Approval may take up to 72 hours.
To be eligible for VWP, Israeli citizens and nationals must have a biometrically enabled passport book.
Currently, the application is only available in English, but other languages are slated to come on Nov. 1.
The change comes as the conflict continues to build in the Middle East.
The death toll of Israelis and Palestinians surpassed 5,000 on Thursday, becoming the deadliest war on the Gaza Strip.
Kathleen Wong is a travel reporter for USA TODAY based in Hawaii.
You can reach her at kwong@usatoday.com.
Amsterdam will increase its tourist tax in 2024 in a continued effort to crack down on rowdy tourists.
The new rate will be the highest in Europe and the fourth highest globally.
The new tax rate for overnight visitors will be 12.5%, up substantially from 7%, according to an announcement by the city earlier this month.
The more expensive tax means tourists will be contributing more to the very city they're enjoying.
More:Why Amsterdam wants tourists to 'stay away'
Learn more: Best travel insurance
With the average room rate of €175 ($185.32), this translates to a €21.80 ($23.09) per night tax.
Currently, the tax would be €15.25 ($16.03).
Cruise passengers will also be paying more too.
The current tax is €8 ($8.41), and it's slated to go up to €11 ($11.56) per person per day.
By increasing the tourist tax, the city said it won't raise parking fees or property tax rates for its residents, according to the announcement.
The tourist tax revenue will go directly into enhancing Amsterdam neighborhoods, such as growing the city's green spaces.
The city's ongoing battle between troublesome tourists and locals goes back years.
Amsterdam isn't the only city making travelers pay for their share.
A few weeks ago, Iceland announced a tourist tax that would help protect its natural resources, which are a main draw for visitors.
So did Venice and Bali.
Even places in the U.S. charge a tourist tax.
In Honolulu, travelers have to pay a total of 13.25% for their accommodations, and that money supports services like lifeguards and hiking trail maintenance.
Kathleen Wong is a travel reporter for USA TODAY based in Hawaii.
You can reach her at kwong@usatoday.com
UPDATE: This story has been updated with news that within hours of publication of USA TODAY's investigation, MSU suspended Coach Mel Tucker without pay.
Two years ago, one of the nation’s star college football coaches and a prominent rape survivor teamed up to fight the culture of sexual violence in sports.
Their partnership should have been a force for good.
Instead, it has devolved into scandal, with the activist accusing the coach of the same misconduct that both of them preached against.
Accusing him is Brenda Tracy, a rape survivor who has made educating athletes about sexual violence her life’s work.
Over eight months, they developed a professional relationship centered on her advocacy work.
Tucker invited Tracy to campus three times – twice to speak to his players and staff and once to be recognized as an honorary captain at the team's spring football game.
But their relationship was upended during a phone call on April 28, 2022, Tracy says in a complaint she filed with the university’s Title IX office in December that remains under investigation.
According to her complaint, Tracy sat frozen for several minutes while Tucker made sexual comments about her and masturbated.
His violation, she said, reopened 25-year-old wounds from her rape by four men – two Oregon State University football players, a junior college player and a high school recruit.
“The idea that someone could know me and say they understand my trauma but then re-inflict that trauma on me is so disgusting to me, it’s hard for me to even wrap my mind around it,” she told USA TODAY.
“It’s like he sought me out just to betray me.”
In his statements to the Title IX investigator, Tucker acknowledged masturbating on the call but said Tracy grossly mischaracterized the episode.
According to him, they had consensual “phone sex.”
Michigan State hired an outside Title IX attorney to investigate the complaint.
She finished her investigation in July.
A formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated the school’s policy banning sexual harassment and exploitation is scheduled for Oct. 5 and 6, during the Spartans’ bye week.
The stakes are high for everyone.
Tracy says Tucker is following through on a threat to ruin her career and reputation by painting her as a woman who mixes professional and personal relationships and files false reports.
She fears he will undo her legacy.
Tucker, who signed one of the most lucrative contracts in college sports history two years ago, could lose out on the roughly $80 million he is owed if Michigan State fires him for cause, which would be a stunning fall from the elite ranks of college coaches.
Reached by USA TODAY on his cellphone Saturday night, Tucker hung up after a reporter mentioned the case.
Hours after USA TODAY published its investigation, the university suspended Tucker without pay, pending a resolution of the Title IX case.
“This step, suspending Mel Tucker without pay, is … necessary and appropriate for today's circumstances,” Interim President Teresa Woodruff said at a Sunday evening press conference.
“These actions are not taken lightly.”
USA TODAY typically does not identify people who allege sexual harassment.
Tracy agreed to be identified and shared more than 1,200 pages of case documents.
Title IX, the federal law banning sex discrimination in education, requires schools to investigate allegations of sexual harassment that took place in the context of a school program or activity.
Such claims are inherently difficult to adjudicate because of many of the factors at issue in this case: a lack of eyewitnesses and recordings, the passage of time and the thorniness of litigating consent.
Adding to the uncertainty, the institution tasked with sorting out the facts is perhaps best known for missing repeated opportunities to stop one of the most prolific sexual abusers in American history.
Gymnastics and campus physician accused of sexually assaulting more than 300 female athletes under the guise of medical treatments.
He has been sentenced to a minimum of 100 years in prison.
Amid its efforts to rebuild trust among students, employees, alumni and the East Lansing community, Michigan State's leaders must now decide whether the face of its prestigious football program is guilty of sexually harassing one of the country’s most influential advocates against gender-based violence.
For some, how the university navigates the crisis will send a clear message about its commitment to progress.
“This goes beyond coach Tucker and Brenda Tracy,” said Jennifer Gomez, a Boston University professor who researches the effects of interpersonal trauma and violence.
“What happens here has the potential to be very healing or very harmful for lots and lots and lots of other people.”
Tracy and Tucker met in August 2021 during her first visit to Michigan State, after a mutual acquaintance introduced them.
Standing before a packed auditorium in the Spartans’ football operations building, Tracy told a gut-wrenching story of turning her pain into purpose two decades after filing a police report saying she had been gang-raped as a 24-year-old mother of two.
At the end, she challenged the “good men” in the room to use their privilege and influence to educate themselves and call out bad behavior.
By then she had delivered versions of the speech more than 100 times to at least 40,000 athletes and coaches.
Michigan State paid her a $10,000 speaking fee.
Tucker was in his second season as head coach.
A former University of Wisconsin-Madison defensive back, he had spent two decades coaching defenses for 10 college and NFL teams before landing the top job at the University of Colorado in late 2018.
Michigan State lured him away a year later by doubling his salary.
Mel Tucker's career at Michigan State: A timeline
Tucker and Tracy “hit it off” immediately, they would both later tell the Title IX investigator.
They bonded over their love of Jordan sneakers, shelves of which lined Tucker’s office walls.
Tucker had been moved by her speech, and she had been a big hit with players, he told the investigator.
They discussed her coming back to campus in the future.
Tracy left East Lansing feeling she had found a champion in Tucker, she told the investigator.
He seemed engaged with her cause, leading his players in signing her pledge to, among other things, obtain “ongoing, affirmative consent” before engaging in sexual acts with another person.
During that time, the two also talked on the phone at least 27 times, Tracy’s phone bills show – an average of once every two weeks for a half hour.
They often spoke at night to accommodate their work schedules, they said.
They chatted about their jobs and eventually more personal matters, such as their families, mental health and daily lives.
In November, Michigan State signed him to an unprecedented 10-year, $95 million deal that came fully guaranteed, even if it fired him for poor performance.
The only way he could lose out on the money, the contract said, was if he materially breached it, was convicted of a crime or engaged in “conduct which, in the University’s reasonable judgment, would tend to bring public disrespect, contempt or ridicule on the University.”
It was around then that Tucker, who had been married for more than two decades, started becoming interested in Tracy romantically, they both told the investigator.
Whether Tracy reciprocated is where their accounts diverge.
Tucker told the investigator that he and Tracy developed a romantic connection and talked openly about it.
They frequently made flirtatious comments about each other’s looks and bodies, Tucker said.
Tracy told him she wanted a “sugar daddy” who would pay her a monthly amount to be his girlfriend, he said, and that she would be “all over” him if he wasn’t married.
Tucker said they had acknowledged their mutual desire for a romance but agreed it would be “too messy” because of his marriage and the physical distance between them.
By contrast, Tracy told the investigator that Tucker’s romantic interest in her was entirely one-sided.
She said she came to feel he was less interested in her cause than in her.
Tucker messaged her photos of herself that he had found on her Instagram page, making comments such as, “This is the one,” or complimenting her eyes, Tracy said.
Once, Tucker called Tracy via FaceTime.
He was in bed, shirtless.
He talked about his unhappy marriage, describing himself as “more or less single.” Then, during a Nov. 9, 2021, call, she said he asked her, “If I wasn’t a football coach and if I wasn’t married, would you date me?”
Tracy said she responded that she would not because they worked together – one of several times she recalled trying to set boundaries.
She said she made clear to Tucker on a Dec. 1 call that they would only be friends, and he seemed to agree.
Then, after the spring game, Tucker called her four times, phone records show.
Tracy said he repeatedly asked her to meet him alone, without her assistant, and even suggested slipping into her hotel through a back door so no one would see him.
She said no.
Twelve days later came the call.
Tracy was in her home office in Oregon.
Tucker, who was in a hotel in Florida, called her at 12:39 a.m. EST, phone records show.
The call lasted 36 minutes.
According to Tucker, he became aroused when Tracy made a comment about needing to hit the gym more to look better without clothes on.
“Unequivocally, there’s no doubt about it,” Tucker told the investigator, case documents show.
“She was the one who said we’ll do it.”
Tracy denies all of that.
The call started off normal, she said.
But when she sent Tucker a photo of them together from the spring game, she said he responded by commenting on her buttocks and calling himself an “ass man.”
She remembered Tucker’s voice getting deeper and weirder as he continued talking about her buttocks.
She asked him what he was doing, and he said he had a “hard dick” and was touching himself.
“You’re touching yourself?” Tracy asked, according to the investigation report.
Tucker responded, “Yes.”
Tracy said she thought to herself, "Oh my god, this is happening, and I can’t stop it."
Eventually she said something along the lines of, “If you do this, I don’t ever want to hear about it, we are only friends, that’s it.”
When he finished, Tracy said, Tucker told her, “Thank you, good night, sweetheart.” She responded, “Yeah,” and he hung up.
Then she sat at her desk for a while, staring at her phone and crying.
Three months passed between the call and the next time Tracy and Tucker spoke.
At first, Tracy tried to pretend to herself that nothing had happened.
Tucker, however, was not responding to her text messages.
And he abruptly canceled her in-person training, planned for July 25, three days before it was supposed to take place.
A team staffer told her they had double-booked, but Tracy believed she knew the real reason.
When Tracy finally got Tucker on the phone about a week later, he was angry, she said, accusing her and her assistant of gossiping about his marital problems.
Tracy recalled that Tucker made comments such as, “I can’t trust you,” “If you say anything about this, I’ll hear about it,” and “I’ll be fine, it’s you that I am worried about.” She viewed it as a threat to destroy her reputation if she spoke out about him.
Tucker at one point told her he had done nothing wrong.
According to Tracy, she started to say, “Well, something…” referring to his masturbation, and Tucker interrupted, saying, “But nothing happened.”
Tucker recalled the Aug. 2 phone call much differently.
He told the investigator that Tracy apologized to him for discussing his marriage with her assistant, and he accepted.
Although they ended the call on good terms and discussed postponing her visit until next year, Tucker said he had lost trust in Tracy.
The training was never rescheduled, and they never spoke again.
Tracy initially stayed quiet about Tucker for the sake of her career, she said.
Ultimately, she decided that if she let it slide, she wouldn’t be the person she claimed to be – the one who encourages people to speak up about sexual misconduct and hold others accountable.
She filed her complaint in December – eight months after the call.
In dry and bureaucratic language, the record of that complaint begins: “The specific allegations of prohibited conduct against Respondent are as follows …” A notification was delivered to Tucker the following day.
Tucker was “absolutely shocked,” he would tell the university’s investigator.
In subsequent correspondence, he and his attorney suggested Tracy’s motive: She held a vendetta against Spartans athletics because of its history of sexual misconduct scandals and falsely accused him for financial gain.
“To say that I have learned from this situation is an understatement,” Tucker wrote in a letter to the investigator on March 22.
“I will never again allow myself to be duped by kindness.”
A former Indiana sex crimes prosecutor who now heads a private practice, she also previously worked in the Title IX offices at Michigan State and the University of Michigan.
Jacqueline Swanson, Tracy’s attorney who is also her friend, turned over a copy of the notes she took from their conversation on a yellow legal pad.
She shared a screenshot of a Dec. 2 text message in which Tracy told her she had just spoken with Tucker, who had agreed they could only be friends.
“I’m glad it didn’t get weird,” Tracy wrote.
Tracy provided phone bills and emails that corroborated her timeline of events and showed Tucker had been calling her from his personal cellphone.
Tracy said no.
In January, they sent a 12-page letter to the school arguing it lacked jurisdiction to investigate Tucker's “purely personal” relationship with Tracy.
“How far does MSU intend to go in policing the private conduct of its employees, and how does it expect its 20,000+ employees to react when they find out that they no longer have private lives outside the reach of their employer?”
Michigan State was not persuaded.
The alleged conduct would be covered by school policy, it concluded, because it took place in the context of Tracy’s work as a vendor for the school and affected their ongoing business relationship.
The case would go forward.
Tucker sat down for his interview on March 22.
He said he wanted to be transparent and set the record straight.
For instance, Tucker claimed he had made the phone sex call from home in East Lansing – not in a Florida hotel.
He had just returned from a trip to Florida, he said, where he had been doing charity work unrelated to his employment with the school.
An expense report Tucker submitted to Michigan State for his hotel and meal costs showed the trip's purpose was “administrative” and did not involve any personal travel.
The costs were paid by the Spartan Fund, the athletic department’s fundraising arm; he had flown to Florida on a donor’s private plane.
The information, Tucker said, made him question how Tracy “goes about her business.”
“I’m perplexed that Mel Tucker would respond to a complaint of sexual harassment by involving me or ESPN.”
Tucker did not identify any witnesses who could support his version of events, including his associate, whom he said he had promised anonymity.
That same associate, Tucker said, told him that Alvarado, Tracy’s assistant, had been gossiping about his marriage – a claim Alvarado denied.
Along the way, she had learned that one potentially rich source of evidence was missing: Both Tracy and Tucker had deleted their text messages with each other.
Tucker would tell her that he deletes his messages regularly because he receives so many; Tracy said she did so in a panic after their last phone call, feeling she needed to cut all ties with him.
At the hearing, planned for October, both sides will have the opportunity to present evidence and make arguments.
Another outside Title IX attorney hired by the school will then decide whether the evidence shows that Tucker likely violated school rules.
Among the witnesses who will be missing from Tracy’s witness list is her assistant and best friend, Alvarado.
She died in a car accident in June.
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
It was a private event thrown by the school to promote its migrant student services program, which provides financial aid and support to farmworkers seeking college degrees.
After the April 28, 2022, tour, disclosed in records obtained by USA TODAY this week, Tucker met with community leaders and alumni.
That night, Tucker would make the now-infamous phone call from his hotel room in nearby Naples, during which he is accused of masturbating and making unwanted sexual comments to Brenda Tracy, a prominent rape survivor and activist he had hired to speak to his team about sexual violence.
Yet, when Tucker met with the university’s outside investigator in March for his interview in the sexual harassment case against him, he insisted the trip was not work-related – a claim the investigator would disprove in her report.
It’s just one example of Tucker failing to keep his story straight at the most consequential moment of his career.
With his job, reputation and the roughly $80 million left on his contract at stake, Tucker repeatedly made false statements to the investigator and misled her about basic facts, such as his location during the phone call and the date it occurred, a USA TODAY review of more than 1,200 pages of case documents found.
Michigan State suspended Tucker without pay on Sept. 10, hours after Tracy went public for the first time with her story in USA TODAY.
On Monday, the school informed Tucker it plans to fire him for cause based on the conduct he had admitted to and the embarrassment he had caused the school.
Investigation:Michigan State football coach Mel Tucker accused of sexually harassing rape survivor
Although Tucker denied sexually harassing Tracy, he acknowledged masturbating on the call, saying he and Tracy had been in a romantic relationship and had consensual “phone sex.” Tracy said Tucker’s romantic interest in her was completely one-sided and that she had tried to set boundaries multiple times during their yearlong business partnership.
Per his contract, Tucker has until Tuesday to make a case for keeping his job.
Regardless, a formal hearing to determine whether Tucker violated school policies against sexual harassment and exploitation is expected to proceed on Oct. 5 and 6.
He accused the school of conducting a “sham” hearing and having “ulterior motives.” Yet even in these written statements, the central details of his story changed entirely.
Tucker, who previously hung up on a reporter who called him on his cellphone asking about the case, did not respond to a message seeking comment for this story.
Tracy declined to comment for this story.
“Very often you’re weighing credibility based on little bits and pieces of information.”
“I believe a fact finder could assess these pieces of evidence about credibility and make a determination that Brenda is more credible than Mel,” she said.
“In my experience, a clear sign of a lack of credibility is generally taken very seriously.”
The school had informed him of Tracy’s complaint on Dec. 22, the day after she filed it.
Tucker was the only holdout.
Rather than tell his side of the story right away, Tucker and his attorney spent three months trying to stop the investigation, case documents show.
They wrote legal arguments urging Michigan State to drop the case and twice approached Tracy’s attorney proposing a settlement agreement.
Tracy said no, and the school pressed forward.
Only a handful of text messages remained; he and Tracy both told the investigator they had deleted their texts with each other in the months after the April 2022 phone call.
In his interview, which lasted 3 ½ hours, Tucker questioned whether Tracy had mixed up the date of the call.
He said he recalled being at his home in East Lansing when it occurred, but his own records showed that he had been in Florida on April 28, attending a charity function that was “absolutely not a University-sponsored event.”
His seven-page account told a different story – that he had called her while he was “alone in a hotel room.”
But by then she knew what he told her in the interview was untrue: she had already obtained records proving he had not been home in East Lansing.
An expense report he had submitted to the university for reimbursement of his hotel and meals shows Tucker flew to Naples, Florida, to attend a golf fundraiser hosted by The Greg H. Montgomery Jr. Foundation for Ultimate Growth, which raises awareness for suicide prevention.
It showed he stayed at the Hilton from April 27 to 29, that the trip’s purpose was “administrative” and that it did not involve personal travel.
He had flown there on a donor’s private plane.
The event was titled “Working to make dreams a reality,” according to an agenda obtained from the university by USA TODAY through a public records request.
The agenda features Tucker’s name prominently.
Tucker posted photos from the tour on his Twitter account.
That Tucker was on a university-sponsored work trip during the incident was a contributing factor in the university’s determination that it had jurisdiction to investigate, the investigation report shows.
Tucker’s lists of calls and text messages also were missing an important detail: They did not show any communication with Tracy on April 28.
He acknowledged in the interview, however, that he had not reviewed the lists before submitting them and that they may have been incomplete.
Tucker and Tracy did not speak in the three months after the April 28 call.
Meanwhile, their assistants were planning Tracy’s third visit to campus – an in-person training with coaches and players scheduled for July 25.
Tucker canceled that training three days before, the investigation report shows.
When Tracy spoke to him by phone on Aug. 2 seeking to find out why, she would tell the investigator in her interview that Tucker insinuated he would harm her career if she spoke about his conduct.
He never rescheduled her visit, and they never spoke again.
The cancellation became a key focus of the investigator – one of a series of alleged incidents that taken together would meet the definition of sexual harassment, which can include pressuring someone into engaging in sexual behavior for an employment benefit and threatening that rejecting such behavior will carry a negative consequence.
Tucker tried to distance himself from the cancellation in a public statement on Sept. 11, the day after Michigan State suspended him without pay.
“I never cancelled any presentation,” he wrote.
But that statement contradicts what he told the investigator.
Such timing would not make sense, he added, because most of his new players would not yet be on campus.
Tucker also told the investigator why he canceled the visit, blaming it on a scheduling conflict.
He said he had recently hired a mental conditioning coach, Ben Newman, who needed to implement his new program on short notice.
There was limited time in fall camp, Tucker said, and he didn’t want to “overwhelm” the players.
He said he decided to yield the time to Newman.
He had been meeting with them weekly since June 6, the records showed but held no meetings between July 15 and July 28.
One of Tucker’s assistants, who is a witness in the case, also told the investigator that Tucker asked him via text message to cancel it.
He said he was never instructed to reschedule.
Tucker confronted Tracy about the alleged gossiping during the Aug. 2 phone call, they both told the investigator.
Tracy said he berated and bullied her, repeatedly saying he could not trust her.
She said she told him she did not know what he was talking about.
During the Aug. 2 call, Tracy said she pressed Tucker to identify his source – the associate.
In her report, she wrote that he said he had “given (his) word that (he) wouldn’t divulge their name.”
Tucker never revealed the associate’s name to the investigator, nor did he identify anyone who could support his version of events.
In his Sept. 11 public statement, however, he lamented that the hearing would not afford him the opportunity to “offer any substantive evidence of innocence.”
It was not the only claim he attributed to his anonymous associate.
It turned out to be yet another falsehood.
“Neither the organization nor Tracy is or has been the target of any investigative reporting.”
Kenny Jacoby is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY covering sexual harassment and violence and Title IX.
Contact him by email at kjacoby@usatoday.com or follow him on X @kennyjacoby.
Contributing: USA TODAY reporter Steve Berkowitz.
The bullets came in plywood crates.
Any given box was about the size of a small microwave oven.
The printed label stuck to each one demonstrated a militaristic brevity.
“CARTRIDGES FOR WEAPONS, INERT PROJECTILE,” next to a bright yellow hazmat sticker, “EXPLOSIVES.”
Inside the boxes: drab green steel cans of .50-caliber ammunition.
Each round was giant, more than 5 inches long, built to be fired from a gun so big it is typically bolted to a truck.
The bullets were clipped together in long strands for rapid, machine-gun fire.
By the time Bill Brown got to the boxes, they sat double-stacked eight high atop wooden pallets inside a Missouri warehouse.
The pallets went on, row after row.
Three million bullets in all.
It was enough ammunition to feed a single machine gun – if fired nonstop at its rated speed eight hours a day, seven days a week – for almost six months.
Brown’s job was to get it out of there and toward the Ukrainian front lines.
The faster, the better.
“War is bad,” Brown said.
There would be virtually no public record of this Ukrainian arms shipment.
As a weapons dealer, Brown’s company would deliver the bullets under a system known as a direct commercial sale.
Instead, it was part of a shadowy system of brokers, exporters, arms dealers and country-to-country transfers that has become one part of the race to meet demand on distant battlefields.
President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said the effort was delayed in part by the wait for more arms.
Most of America’s $44 billion in documented support to Ukraine came in the form of old U.S. military stock, donated directly by the federal government.
In general, commercial sales over $14 million, and sales of military-grade weaponry like mortars or missiles, require State Department approval and congressional notification.
But other aid comes via private sales.
More than 14,000 U.S. entities are registered to conduct defense trade activities.
Their deals are monitored by an alphabet soup of agencies including Departments of Homeland Security, Commerce, Defense and the Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
Trade secrecy clauses in federal law mean this flow of gear, weapons and ammunition is almost never revealed to the public.
Brown, who works for a small Nevada-based logistics company called Battle Born Munitions, provided USA TODAY with a rare look behind the curtain of these private sales.
Details about the shipment were verified by his employer and the European government that made the purchase.
State Department officials declined to answer questions about the specific shipment Brown described.
This March sale and the secret number of other shipments like it fuel Ukraine’s fight against a Russian invasion.
Those sales also release an unknown amount of weaponry into the world.
What becomes of that weaponry after it’s sold – and especially after it’s delivered – is difficult to track.
As Brown surveyed the warehouse in Missouri, a crew steered forklifts and skid lifts among the stacks of plain wooden boxes.
From high in the trusses, suspended lamp fixtures bathed the boxes in artificial daylight.
Brown lifted his camera and started snapping photos.
In just a few hours, he and his cargo would be boarding a jumbo jet.
From Ukraine:War crimes in Ukraine may be unprecedented.
So is the country's push for swift justice.
The bullets had once been bound for Saudi Arabia.
Lot number SMQ19K401L026 had rolled off the assembly line in 2019 at Lake City Army Ammunition Plant near Kansas City.
Lake City, owned by the government and run by a contractor, sprawls across nearly 4,000 acres of green Missouri farmland.
Roads curve past World War II-era bunkers known as igloos, spaced out amid the countryside – far enough apart that an explosion in one won’t trigger a chain reaction in the others.
Lake City has been pumping out ammunition almost without pause since 1941.
It is the largest small-arms manufacturing plant in the world.
And in 2019, Saudi Arabia was stocking up on weapons during the Trump administration, fueling the war in Yemen and other conflicts that drew criticism from congressional Democrats.
The plant manufactures .50-caliber ammunition on a rolling basis, for both military and commercial buyers.
That’s a testament to just what a legend the bullet – and the gun that shoots it – has become.
In 2019, the technology was already a century old.
The .50 caliber was the brainchild of American gunsmith John Browning during World War I.
Built to respond to German anti-tank rifles, the M2 was first tested in 1918, and it entered widespread service in 1923.
It earned the nickname “Ma Deuce” and has served in combat ever since, bolted to trucks, ships, planes and handheld stands on the battlefield.
The .50-caliber rounds – named for their diameter, about half an inch – can easily hit targets more than a mile away.
At closer ranges, they will blast through solid concrete or armored vehicles.
The gun can fire at a sustained rate of about 40 shots per minute.
Military setups use strings of “linked” ammunition to feed into machine guns.
Spaced out after every fourth bullet, so-called tracer rounds have small pyrotechnic charges that illuminate the line of fire, aiding in targeting.
The gun’s longevity and versatility made it popular for militaries the world over.
But this particular batch of bullets wouldn’t end up being sold to Saudi Arabia.
The Biden administration put a temporary freeze on sales to the Saudi government in 2021 as it reviewed weapons deals approved under Donald Trump.
Instead, Brown said, the bullets were sold to a U.S. ammunition provider, only to be held up again.
Ultimately, they were mothballed.
Then, in spring 2023, the bullets found a buyer, or actually two: first Battle Born; ultimately, the Netherlands.
The European country, a NATO ally, needed a big supply of ammunition.
It wouldn’t be keeping the bullets but giving them to Ukraine.
Its purchase, essentially a donation, would count toward the country’s required NATO contribution.
Brown had a line on exactly what they needed.
It was sitting in the warehouse in Missouri.
He arrived in March to personally oversee the shipment.
As he prepped for delivery, Brown dropped tiny black tracking devices onto several of the pallets.
Just $55 apiece, the units use GPS and cell signals to keep tabs on the load.
The idea was to ensure it wouldn’t fall into the wrong hands.
But packing up the bullets was just the beginning.
As with anything that’s deadly and made of metal, the shipping costs can be extreme.
Forty-five to 60 days on a ship?
Brown – or Chief Bill, as he prefers – is a no-nonsense 35-year veteran of the U.S. Army and former helicopter pilot.
He retired as a chief warrant officer and lives in Orlando.
Now 59, he still spends a lot of time on the road – 10 international trips this year.
He says his arms logistics work takes him to places most Americans would rather avoid – near the Syrian border or to unstable regions of Iraq.
He’ll travel halfway around the world, he quips, “have some soup, and go back to Warsaw to head home.” The trips aren’t really about the destinations.
They’re about the cargo.
On that spring day in Missouri, forklifts carefully loaded 107 pallets of the ammo onto 18 flatbed semitrailers.
They’d all make the eight-hour drive to O’Hare International Airport.
In Chicago, two Boeing 747-400s operated by National Airlines would be ready for the freight.
Four pallets each were stacked and shrink-wrapped to create “air pallets” or “cookie sheets” weighing 12,800 pounds.
Each plane could carry up to 17 of the pallets that ran the length of each plane secured by white cargo netting.
Flight records Brown provided show the two planes departed about seven hours apart, one in early afternoon, one after dark.
The flight would take nine hours.
Brown wasn’t going to the Netherlands, even though it was the buyer.
The planes were bound for Rzeszów, Poland.
The ancient city sits at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains in southeastern Poland.
It has a gleaming modern airport next to a major east-west freeway.
From there, it’s barely 60 miles to the border with Ukraine.
It was an expensive journey.
The trucking company’s bill for those 18 semis?
Chartering the two 747s?
But this shipment of .50-cal rounds was profitable for Battle Born Munitions, according to Brown.
The company purchased the 3 million rounds from Northrop Grumman at a bargain and resold them for more than double the price.
(In subsequent interviews, representatives at BBM disputed the specific totals Brown mentioned, saying the accurate figures were protected by “various commercial and government non-disclosure agreements.” They did not dispute the other specifics of the deal he provided.)
Retail prices for .50-caliber ammunition run roughly $5 per bullet.
At that rate, the whole shipment would have been worth $15 million.
The pricing might also be elastic.
The Dutch mark up the price of the bullets and count it toward their NATO contribution, pegged to a percentage of gross domestic product, Brown said.
The Netherlands has contributed about $15 billion to NATO this year, or about 1.7% of its GDP and just under the NATO mandate of 2%.
Representatives of the Dutch military confirmed the shipment to USA TODAY but declined to comment further about the pricing or details.
The war in Ukraine has only increased the demand for private deals.
The State Department signed off on more than $154 billion in commercial arms deals directly to foreign countries in 2022, a 48% increase from the previous year.
Direct commercial sales represent a modest portion of the contribution to Ukraine compared with the $44 billion donated by the U.S., but they still amounted to more than $600 million in sales from U.S. companies to the Ukrainian government last year alone.
That doesn’t include sales to other countries that also support Ukraine – sales like the one Brown described.
Jim Bartlett, an attorney with expertise in the specialized international arms transactions, said private U.S. businesses are playing a small but important role in the conflict.
“American companies are happy to export defense articles to foreign buyers approved by the U.S. State Department,” Bartlett said.
Those sales also come with risks.
Direct sales face fewer regulatory controls, oversight and enforcement, said Robert Nichols, an international military sales expert and attorney at the law firm Nichols Liu.
“You can imagine the range of characters involved in supplying a war effort,” Nichols said.
So far, the Department of Justice has indicted just a handful of arms brokers over deals related to the war in Ukraine.
They allegedly lied to Commerce Department agents and told them the parts were bound for Turkey.
Both pleaded not guilty to the charges this summer.
A State Department spokesman declined to provide details of enforcement actions but said, “The United States takes seriously our responsibility to protect American military and dual-use technologies and prevent their diversion, including through strong enforcement actions.”
NATO said it oversees allied arms deliveries, and that those arms generally reach Ukraine.
NATO itself technically only provides non-non-lethal aid, like fuel, medical supplies and generators.
Brown, of Battle Born, says he fields calls weekly from “clowns” without the proper licensing, whom he reports to the State Department for potential violations.
Some raise red flags when they approach him about transactions that include payment via diamonds or gold.
He prefers traditional wire transfers with approved sales partners since he knows government officials are watching.
He validates the contracts and checks certificates for the final users.
That’s part of why he traveled with the ammunition.
He would be meeting a Dutch military official for the official handoff.
“My job is to keep us all out of jail,” Brown said.
The two 747s touched down in Poland, one before the sun, the other in late morning.
Brown exchanged paperwork with a young Dutch military staffer who signed for the delivery, he said.
They traded military patches as souvenirs.
They snapped a photo together.
The bullets bought by the Netherlands would never touch Dutch soil.
U.S. aid:Billions from the US flows to Ukraine.
Here's where it comes from, and how it adds up
Despite playing a small role proportionately in the war, $600 million in direct commercial sales can buy a lot of small weaponry.
Put another way: It’s hard to sneak away an F-16 or a missile launcher the size of a tractor-trailer.
But a bunch of guns or a pallet of ammo?
Much easier to resell.
After Russia invaded Ukraine in 2014, the Small Arms Survey, a Swiss arms research project, estimated that within a year, battlefield seizures and other forms of diversion led to 300,000 small arms and light weapons going missing, including 100,000 in Crimea alone.
When small arms go missing, they can go missing into another country, maybe one led by a despot or even a terrorist organization.
The U.S. government says diversion of American donations has been widely absent so far in Ukraine.
That could be a combination of intensive “end-use-monitoring” programs and the reality of the battlefield, where supplies are rapidly put to use.
But even if not now, unused ammo could be resold someday.
“These are commodities with very long shelf lives.”
Florida-based Global Ordnance, another State Department-licensed exporter, is a competitor in the direct weapons sales business.
General counsel Bryan Van Brunt said the company has extensive protocols in place to track shipments and make sure the end-users are federally approved, though he declined to provide specifics about those systems.
Brown, with Battle Born Munitions, says the company employs a mix of simple and sophisticated tracking technology to ensure his shipments are tracked to end users.
The black GPS devices he dropped onto his cargo tracked the ammo all the way across the globe.
But that system only works as long as Brown is actually tracking.
“Technically, my role ends when I deliver it to NATO,” he said.
Sometime after the 747s touched down in Poland, along with signing the paperwork and snapping a selfie with the Dutch official, Brown found the tiny black GPS trackers and lifted them off the pallets.
Ukrainian trucks would arrive at the airport to pick up the ammunition.
They would point toward the border, and onward to Lviv, and some distant battlefield.
Brown would point in the opposite direction.
Just like one of his quips: Fly in, have soup, get home.
He headed toward Warsaw, with the GPS trackers in his bag.
Contact him at npenz@usatoday.com or @npenzenstadler, or on Signal at (720) 507-5273.
The geography professor didn’t hide his clown fetish or the fact that he sometimes indulged his urges by recruiting students as subjects.
He posted regularly about it on social media.
He submitted his resignation the same day their story was published.
His interactions with students and open discussion of his fetish happened in both mainstream and tailored digital spaces.
He popped into Facebook groups geared toward new students and niche forums on websites like Reddit.
He posted videos on YouTube.
Over the years, two students reported him to campus police; others complained online.
He left Kent State University after pleading no contest to something different: a theft charge that involved entering his peers’ offices without permission and taking a USB drive.
Nicholls State, for example, told USA TODAY Network reporters it does not routinely check social media for new hires.
The money was appealing but the interactions soured.
“I thought maybe they could prevent anything bad from happening since other girls would go with him.”
She said there was never any followup from campus police – or anyone else.
The two who expressed public concerns on social media told USA TODAY they never heard from their campus officials either.
She said she would pass along that reporters were trying to reach him.
He said his contract was not renewed because he was the target of a “grade inflation task force.”
She has seen the pattern often in her work maintaining a database of publicly documented sexual misconduct by faculty and staff.
As for grad students?
“I don’t on purpose,” she said, “because that’s information that almost never comes out.”
He was working toward his doctorate and researched fading businesses.
His work about shopping malls in the Rust Belt won several awards.
Like many graduate students, he also taught classes.
“I will literally pay you!”
What’s more, she figured out that he was a graduate student, a fact she said he didn’t disclose in his posts.
It arrived at midnight and contained no message, although writing on his shirt read: “I'm not a failure.”
“It’s definitely burned into my mind.”
He would send “get to know you” messages, the police report said, and then ask the student if she was “interested in having her face painted for one of his class projects.”
“She does not have any concerns for her safety, but just wanted this documented,” the police report read.
In July 2017, another student had retweeted a message from Kent State’s Twitter account that asked for Kent State love stories.
She said she tweeted to draw officials’ attention to it and moved on but now wishes she had reported it officially.
College campuses are supposed to offer students special protections from sexual harassment even when it falls short of criminal behavior.
Title IX, often associated with equity in women’s sports, also addresses “sex-based harassment, which encompasses sexual assault and other forms of sexual violence” at schools that receive federal funding.
Colleges infrequently and unevenly enforce the rule, however.
A 2022 USA TODAY investigation found just one of every 12,400 students was suspended in connection with sexual misconduct.
The student who shared her story online said the only response she received was from a graduate student in the geography department, who contacted her on Oct. 1, 2018.
In an email, he wrote that he had seen her post and suspected he knew which faculty member had asked her about face painting.
“I brought it to the attention of some of our faculty because I was pretty sure I knew who it was, but they were certain it wasn’t that individual and that you probably just meant geology,” he wrote.
He went on to reference another student being “approached in (at least by just looking at your tweet) a much more aggressive way.” The grad student asked the undergraduate for more information, but, she told USA TODAY, she didn’t respond.
She said she started drafting a reply, but a year had passed.
She wanted to move on.
Kent State would not say whether any actions were taken after the students’ reports, but Eric Mansfield, a spokesman for the university, said the police department confirmed that the students who filed police reports were provided with “university resources, which would include other non-criminal avenues to pursue (Counseling Services, Title IX, Center for Sexual and Relationship Violence Services, etc.)
Mansfield also said that the university monitors social media but that colleges “can’t always see or track every mention on social media.”
A blotter item in the local newspaper shows police obtained an arrest warrant in connection with a third-degree felony burglary charge.
“Also, we do not comment on personnel matters.”
In more recent years, Buckley has become critical of the law and how schools interpret it.
He told the Columbus Dispatch in 2010 that “the law needs to be revamped.”
Survivors of sexual violence and students accuse universities of using the law to avoid negative media coverage.
Students with a history of bad behavior may jump from one school to another without the public ever knowing about their histories.
One case involved Brandon Austin, who was accused of sexual assault at Providence College in 2013 while on the school’s basketball team.
But Providence College initially said Austin was suspended for violating the school’s code of student conduct and declined to share further details with the Providence Journal, citing federal privacy laws.
Austin denied wrongdoing and was not charged with a crime.
Austin was able to transfer to the University of Oregon, where he was again accused of sexual assault, along with other players.
Police investigated the claims, and the local district attorney declined to press charges.
And it doesn’t apply when a student is “seeking or intending to enroll” at another college.
He blamed the overuse of the law on fear of being sued.
While most U.S. employers conduct background screening, according to trade group data, those inquiries typically focus on criminal history.
Social media receives far less attention even though that is where people are most likely to share their unguarded thoughts.
Undertaking a full review of a person’s social media presence is more difficult than just checking an applicant’s Facebook page.
Does an applicant have an account on X, formerly Twitter?
How about an account with Discord, an online platform frequented by gamers, where leaked Pentagon documents were recently shared?
Or what about a Telegram account, a messaging platform popular among white nationalists?
Further complicating things, it’s common on sites like Reddit for users to adopt usernames and describe experiences with little to no ties to reality.
A little digging, however, can turn up a lot of dirt.
His time as a student and instructor at Kent State is absent.
That is the same handle used on Reddit by someone with a special interest in face paint.
Other posts mention a “clown fetish.” In a forum titled “Creepy,” he wrote, “I convince pretty girls to let me paint their faces,” along with a photo with multiple women in white face paint.
That and other similar posts remained live for years until they were taken down after the Nicholls students published their story in late March.
USA TODAY Network reporters captured screenshots before they disappeared.
With dates in 2019, the posts feature a young woman wearing a Kent State T-shirt.
The material would have been available to administrators at Northern Illinois before the start of the fall 2019 semester.
Joe King, a spokesman for Northern Illinois, said departments hiring new graduate students are “not required to check social media or investigate a disciplinary history.” He added some departments may reach out to the graduate students’ former advisers.
But there are signs the behavior continued.
She said she declined to do it but was aware that other Northern Illinois students had participated.
She asked, had anyone complained?
Many students would find a reason to complain, as Nicholls State student journalist Sally-Anne Torres learned firsthand.
It started in January when one of her fellow reporters picked up an odd rumor: a professor was offering extra credit for students willing to paint their faces like clowns.
Initially, Torres dismissed it because it seemed too unusual and there weren’t a lot of leads to follow.
He blamed his departure on giving too many A’s.
That seemed suspicious to Torres.
“It wasn’t just this innocent thing that a lot of these girls thought it was,” Torres said.
Some, she said, were followed on Twitter by him while others opted into an extra credit assignment he offered.
The women told Torres he sometimes giggled and laughed as they painted their faces in his office.
It seemed unusual at the time, Price said, because his friend wasn’t in the class.
It became more concerning to him on reading the student newspaper’s report.
“I feel frankly disgusted and disappointed that Nicholls couldn’t do a proper background check on this professor, because this is unacceptable,” Price said.
Ramos learned that the person behind the account was likely a professor at the university.
She posted about the behavior in January 2022, but nothing came of it.
On March 27, the same day the student newspaper published its piece, Ramos posted screenshots of her discoveries on Twitter with the message, “Found a Nicholls state university professor on Reddit.”
“I wish the university had acted sooner because all this information was public on the internet,” she told USA TODAY.
No one from the university, she said, has ever reached out.
He can be reached at CCampo@gannett.com.
The soap opera that has consumed members of Congress for nearly three weeks over electing a new speaker is testing the patience of the voters who sent them to Washington, a new USA TODAY/Suffolk University Poll finds.
An overwhelming 67% say the House should elect a speaker as soon as possible, given the need to approve wartime aid for Israel and Ukraine and to prevent a government shutdown that looms next month.
Just 25% of those surveyed say they don't care whether a speaker is elected, on the theory that the impasse is preventing Congress from wasting more taxpayer money.
"I don't think that a speaker in the House is going to do anything other than, you know, just keep kicking that ball along."
The poll of 1,000 registered voters, taken by landline and cell phone Tuesday through Friday, has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.1 percentage points.
In a political world where bipartisanship is the exception, there is a broad consensus on this.
By double-digit margins, the idea of electing a speaker, and fast, was endorsed not only among Democrats (86%-10%) but also Republicans (57%-34%) and independents (59%-32%).
"How often do you see Democrats, Republicans, and independents agree on anything in DC?"
They are all speaking the same seven words in unison: 'Elect a speaker and do your job.'"
The previous House speaker, Rep. Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., was ousted from the post by a handful of combative conservatives, just eight of them but enough given the GOP's narrow majority.
Since then, no potential successor has been able to command the 217 votes needed.
Ohio congressman Jim Jordan was defeated three times before the Republican caucus voted Friday to sideline him.
House Republicans are scheduled to meet late Monday to figure out what to do next.
The scenes of Capitol chaos displayed on cable TV last week may be eroding voters' confidence in the ability of the nation's leaders in the White House and Congress to address the nation's major challenges.
Just 4% of those surveyed express "a lot" of confidence in leaders; another 32% had "some" confidence.
But the largest group, 35%, have "very little" confidence and another 27% had none at all.
"If I could go negative five, I would give it a negative 100," Gibbons said.
Democrats, who traditionally have supported a bigger role for government, have more confidence in its ability to solve problems; 63% had "a lot" or "some" confidence.
But Republicans, whose leaders in recent years have portrayed the government as either incompetent or dangerous, were overwhelmingly skeptical that Washington could be trusted to do anything right.
A plurality of Republicans, 42%, said they had no confidence in government; another 38% had "very little."
Ratings for the Senate are nothing to brag about, with 36% having a favorable view, and 42% an unfavorable one.
But ratings for the House are even worse.
Just 25% see it favorably; more than double that, 54%, view it unfavorably.
Once there is a speaker, most voters have a suggestion of what they want them to do next: A compromise that avoids a government shutdown when the latest temporary funding bill expires Nov. 17.
More than six in 10, 61%, want negotiations to reach a deal.
"I mean, don't we live in a bipartisan world?"
But there's a catch.
While just 31% want their representatives to stand firm on demands to cut spending, even if it means a government shutdown, that group includes a 55% majority of Republicans.
Only 37% in the GOP endorse a negotiated compromise.
And Republicans control what happens in the House − assuming, of course, they succeed in electing a speaker.
A prominent Detroit synagogue board president was found stabbed to death early Saturday outside her home.
Police have yet to identify a motive or a suspect in her killing.
Religious leaders and public officials decried the killing.
The American Jewish Committee said it was "heartbroken" at the news, calling her a "ray of sunlight to all who knew her" and "a passionate Muslim-Jewish bridge builder."
I have no words.
She always had a sweet smile to offer and the warmest eyes to greet you.
Our community is devastated and we are shocked.
Detroit Police offered no clarity about the motive behind the killing by the end of the day, but Chief James White said Saturday night the department was continuing to investigate.
"Understandably, this crime leaves many unanswered questions," he said in a statement.
Earlier, Detroit police said they were investigating a report that a woman had been found unresponsive, with multiple stab wounds, in the 1300 block of Joliet Place in the city's Lafayette Park neighborhood.
A trail of blood led back to the victim's home, where police said they believe the crime occurred.
The FBI referred all questions to local police.
In addition to leading the reopening and renovation of the downtown synagogue, she was poised to get a new job.
"She was endlessly positive, just a wonderful person who was doing so much good and could bring so much happiness and joy," Chang said.
In her name we will never give up.
"Separately, in politics & in the Jewish community, she dedicated her short life to building understanding across faiths, bringing light in the face of darkness," the congresswoman wrote.
She was driven by her sincere love of her community, state and country.
"By extending her hand and creating space for connection between Muslims and Jews, she has exemplified the values of healing the world," The Detroit Jewish News article said.
"So if you think you can intimidate me, go … suck it up, buttercup!"
Washington, D.C., was gridlocked this week as House Republicans failed to elect a new speaker.
The caucus nominated Jordan, an ultraconservative representative from Ohio.
But, she told reporters, she had concerns about whether Jordan could unify the party, and she was worried about the looming threat of a government shutdown.
"As soon as the vote was had in conference, and then, not two hours later, we had that coming out."
She cast her vote Wednesday for U.S. Rep. Kay Granger of Texas, a Republican who chairs the Appropriations Committee.
Jordan then lost a secret ballot and withdrew his nomination.
She anticipates House Republicans will successfully choose a speaker "next week."
"I have told everybody I’m not doing anything until Sunday."
Katie Akin is a politics reporter for the Register.
Reach her atkakin@registermedia.com.
Follow her on Twitter at @katie_akin.
Trying to squeeze every last drop of life out of your smartphone?
It’s one thing to deal with a battery that doesn’t last a day and crashing apps to avoid spending a big chunk of change.
But using your phone past its end of life is risky business.
So is clicking any link that comes your way.
It's a bummer hackers are weaving them into artificial intelligence chatbot results.
Let’s look at one of the easiest ways to keep your digital life safer: Only using devices that get current security updates.
The lifespan lowdown
Today, the average lifespan of smartphones is around 2.5 years.
It could be even less for some devices – between 15 and 18 months.
That’s not much when phones cost hundreds or even thousands of dollars.
Bigger brands like Apple and Samsung tend to have longer lifespans than smaller companies.
Here are the average lifespans for some of today’s most popular phones:
◾ iPhone – 4 to 8 years
◾ Samsung – 3 to 6 years
◾ Google Pixel – 3 to 5 years
◾ Huawei – 2 to 4 years
These are averages, meaning your mileage may vary.
Find your number
Your phone’s lifespan clock starts from when it was made, not when you purchased it.
That makes keeping track of all this a little tricky.
If you’re unsure when your phone was made, you can find out with some sleuthing.
◾ Do you have the phone’s original box?
The manufacture date should be listed on the package or in any included documentation.
◾ If you tossed the box, the information should be listed within your phone’s settings under “About” or a similar option.
◾ You can also use your phone’s serial number to decipher when it was made.
Many manufacturers hide the date or year within these numbers.
The serial number is tucked in your phone’s settings.
◾ There are special dial codes and boot logging menus, too, that can show you this info.
Are your eyes glazing over?
I thought so.
There’s an easier way
Instead of doing all the steps above, a great place to check your phone’s end of life, or EOL for short, is dropping by the site end of life.date.
This straightforward site lists EOL dates and lifecycles for devices, software programs and more.
At the very top, there’s a search box.
Type your make and model in there, and presto, the info you need is right on the screen.
Or choose from the four major manufacturers listed in the Devices row.
If you can’t find your phone there, scroll through the complete list of products and manufacturers in the left-hand menu.
When you click on a manufacturer, its phones are listed chronologically.
You can view each phone’s release date, when it was discontinued and if the manufacturer still supports it.
This is serious stuff
Using a phone past its EOL data spells trouble.
That’s you if you’re still using an iPhone 5C, Google Pixel 5, or Samsung S10S – among many others.
You won’t get the latest and greatest features and advancements, but that’s not the biggest issue.
Once a smartphone reaches its expiration, the manufacturer no longer pushes security updates to that device.
This means any bugs and security problems in your phone will go unfixed.
An outdated phone is a gold mine for hackers, who could quickly access everything from your bank accounts and company information to your health data.
They could even steal your voice through audio data from phone calls and voicemails.
Do yourself a favor and make sure your phone is safe and secure.
If not, it’s time to start shopping!
Keep your tech-know going
Search for it wherever you get your podcasts.
For your convenience, hit the link below for a recent episode.
PODCAST PICK:Block war videos online, home swapping in NYC & goodbye to passwords
Plus, a website that makes it easy to find any movie on streaming.
The health features your watch can keep track of, and how to keep your location off Google Maps.
Listen to the podcast here or wherever you get your podcasts.
Kim takes calls and dispenses advice on today's digital lifestyle, from smartphones and tablets to online privacy and data hacks.
For her daily tips, free newsletters and more, visit her website.
When you're messaging someone, you don't want to overload them with information.
Sometimes, sending a lengthy paragraph can feel like too much.
You also may want to avoid the dreaded "double text," or in some cases, triple or quadruple text.
This is where slang and abbreviations come in to help.
"ICYMI", USA TODAY has been breaking down text slang.
Now, it's time to learn a new one.
"FYI" stands for "for your information."
When used, the term notifies others about something that is important or significant.
The abbreviation can be used in both formal and informal messaging, such as via email to relay a deadline at work or while texting a friend about some interesting gossip.
The usage of "FYI" can be traced back to the 1930s when it was used by journalists to denote that the messages – or parts of the messages – they sent were for the recipient only, not for public viewing, according to Grammarly.
USA TODAY is exploring the questions you and others ask every day.
From "Who has the most Grammys?"
Head to our Just Curious section to see what else we can answer for you.
Lots of candy.
To get at that candy, trick-or-treaters might well have to ring your doorbell.
Halloween is possibly the day of the year when your doorbell gets used the most, so why not make it part of the spooky season festivities?
Thanks to modern technology and the creation of smart doorbells, that's easy to do.
Ditch the classic ding-dong and instead opt for a more holiday-appropriate sound, like a howl, a cackling witch, or other creepy sounds.
Looking to add some spooky lighting to your Halloween setup?
Watch this video to see how you can easily take your Halloween lights to the next level.
There are a lot of smart doorbells on the market.
With so many options, the exact steps on how to change your doorbell sound will vary depending on which smart device you have.
To change your doorbell sound:
The sounds that are available will vary depending on which doorbell you have.
The festive doorbell chimes are only available for a limited period.
Purchases you make through our links may earn us and our publishing partners a commission.
Reviewed helps you find the best stuff and get the most out of what you already own.
Our team of home experts test everything from air purifiers to vacuum cleaners help you shop for the best of the best.
We already knew Bad Bunny was a wrestling fan – and a participant after his appearance at a WWE event in May.
Now, Bad Bunny fans can fight as the performer themselves in the new WWE 2K23 video game.
WWE 2K23 The Bad Bunny Edition, which includes the Bad Bunny character clad in the clothing he wore in the Backlash 2023 event in Puerto Rico and more perks, is out now.
This version of the game, priced at $139.99 for PCs on Steam, Microsoft Xbox Series X and Xbox One, and Sony PlayStation 5 and PS4 game consoles, is rated Teen for ages 13 and up.
It also includes the Icon Edition of the video game released back in March (priced at $119.99), with a season pass for downloadable content, throwback versions of John Cena and other wrestlers, exclusive arenas and more.
Another version, the Bad Bunny Bundle ($89.99), has all the special content related to the performer and the WWE 2K23 Cross-Gen Standard Edition for PlayStation or Xbox consoles, plus virtual currency.
Bad Bunny:He and Kendall Jenner go Instagram official with joint Gucci campaign
Players who already own the WWE 2K23 video game can separately purchase the Bad Bunny Superstar Pack for $9.99.
Don't own the game yet?
The standard version is 50% off through Oct. 25 for PlayStation consoles (digital download) and PCs on Steam.
The video game announcement comes amid a busy time for the rapper and singer.
And this week, he announced his Most Wanted Tour, with a four-month, 31-city itinerary, kicking off Feb. 21 in Salt Lake City, Utah, and running through May to end with three consecutive shows in Miami.
Oh, and on Saturday night, Bad Bunny is not only the host on "Saturday Night Live," but also the musical guest, too.
Gaming monitors:2023's best 24-inch gaming monitors
What's everyone talking about?
Sign up for our trending newsletter to get the latest news of the day
A grocery store in Petersburg, Alaska had an unexpected customer Tuesday, leaving store employees and other shoppers in shock.
A black bear cub was spotted roaming the produce aisle at the Petersburg's Trading Union IGA, scaring customers, Alaska News Source reported.
Alaska State Troopers, two wildlife troopers and units from the Petersburg Police Department were called to the scene, where officers chased the cub through the aisles of fruits and vegetables with a steel catch pole, video footage from the incident shows.
After some struggle, authorities were able to corner and catch the young cub where the shopping carts are stored.
The black bear was escorted out and loaded into the back of a trooper vehicle, after a lot of fuss and protest.
Watch:Mama bear, cub raid Krispy Kreme delivery van in Alaska, scarf dozens of doughnuts
The bear cub unfortunately had to be euthanized, Justin Freeman, a public information officer with the Alaska State Troopers told USA TODAY.
Freeman said that the decision was made in coordination with the Alaska Department of Fish and Game for a variety of reasons.
"The bear was small and emaciated for this time of year," explained Freeman.
The spokesperson further said that the bear would not likely be able to handle the stress of transportation to a holding facility, and no known facilities had placement for a black bear.
Watch:Black bear takes casual stroll in Asheville, North Carolina, spooks tourists
There are an estimated 100,000 black bears in the state of Alaska, according to the Department of Fish and Game.
Here's what the department recommends if you encounter a bear:
Reach her at sshafiq@gannett.com and follow her on X, the platform formerly known as Twitter @saman_shafiq7.
She's gentle, but loves a fuss.
She'll outdo you any day in a sniffing contest.
Nanny, a 4-year-old black and white 'moggy' with a tan streak on her face and big hazel cat eyes is a rare breed.
Or so the animal rescue sheltering her posted on social media Thursday.
And has a very large noggin.
According to the World Health Organization, the disorders, also called birth defects, are structural or functional abnormalities present from birth in both humans and animals.
Although WHO said the disorders can contribute to long-term disability.
Cat breaks record for loudest purr:'She likes to be loud with television'
Reach her at nalund@usatoday.com and follow her on X @nataliealund.
Animal encounters can be magical, and at an aquarium in Gulfport, Mississippi, an adorable toddler had the experience of a lifetime when a baby dolphin stopped to chat.
Dolphins are said to be the most intelligent animals on the planet after humans.
They're also extremely social.
Watch the video below to see a toddler's cute reaction to a chatty little dolphin
Humankind is your go-to spot for good news!
Click here to submit your uplifting, cute, or inspiring video moments for us to feature.
Also, click here to subscribe to our newsletter, bringing our top stories of the week straight to your inbox.
A Southwest Airlines cabin crew family reunion, a sweet toddler meeting his newborn baby sister for the first time, and a pair of rambunctious grandma BFFs topped our Humankind stories of the week.
During a Southwest Airlines flight from Dallas, Texas, the pilot took a moment to inform passengers about a very special cabin crew on board.
Air hostess Angel had been working for Southwest for 27 years.
But that's not all– their father Gregg, a retired flight captain, was on board too!
If that isn't a bestie, we don't know what is.
Watch a surprise on a Southwest flight, a toddler meeting his baby sister, a sweet father-son driving lesson, and more on the week's Best of Humankind.
When two-year-old Matteo Clarke entered the hospital room where his newborn sister lay, he was in a hurry to see her.
"Where's my sister?"
When Matteo finally got to see and hold the baby in his arms, his excitement at meeting his new best friend was palpable.
And the core memory is surely something the 11-year-old will never forget.
Finally, in the UK, Phil Garner found a bedraggled duck named Freda at a local fishing pond.
After taking the bird home, Phil and his wife Julia nursed her back to full strength.
Freda stayed with them for 18 months, then mysteriously disappeared.
But eventually, the prodigal duck returned home with a new boyfriend and 11 ducklings in tow!
Now Phil, Julia, Freda, and her brood are one big happy family.
WASHINGTON – After House Republicans voted to drop Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, as their speaker nominee, a mad dash for the top job has started within the deeply divided House Republican conference.
After voting to abandon Jordan as their nominee by a vote of 112-86, GOP lawmakers are headed home for the weekend to recuperate after a chaotic series of events on Capitol Hill.
In the meantime, some Republicans have immediately declared their candidacy with others still considering a run.
House Republicans will hear from prospective speakers when they return to Washington for a candidate forum at 6:30 p.m. Monday.
The earliest the House could elect a new speaker is Tuesday.
Here's who is running for speaker or seriously considering a run.
3 ranking House Republican.
McCarthy still commands the respect of the vast majority of the House Republican conference.
He can unite the conference.
He understands the dynamics of the conference.
The Oklahoma Republican is chair of the Republican Study Committee, a caucus of around 170 GOP lawmakers making it the largest group of House Republicans.
Scott ran against Jordan in an internal vote within the House Republican conference to select a nominee.
Scott lost the nomination by a vote of 124-81.
"There's a lot of people that appreciated what we did," Scott told USA TODAY about his first speaker campaign.
With Jordan out however, Bergman immediately jumped in the race announcing his candidacy.
Rep. Mike Johnson, R-La., vice chair of the House Republican conference, is currently making calls considering a run for speaker.
Rep. Pete Sessions, R-Texas, also launched a bid for speaker immediately following Jordan's exit.
"Congressman Sessions believes he can forge a positive path as a conservative leader who can unite the Conference," Sessions' office said in a statement.
If you'd like to contribute to our future reporting and share your experience as a source, you can click here to fill out this quick form.
One of the main reasons I was offered this opportunity was that no one else wanted to do it.
It was April 2020.
The pandemic had just started, and all of a sudden, I was considered an “essential worker” being asked to travel the country.
Normally, the idea of traveling sparks images of exploring fun restaurants and unique places, meeting up with friends or family, or getting to know new people – none of this was even an option.
Most businesses were closed.
The idea of even booking a hotel was difficult because every city, county, and state had different regulations as to who was allowed to be there.
Everyone I knew was staying at home and enjoying a small circle of people to quarantine with while I was getting to leave the house and experience new places.
I thought I had beat the system!
Making my way up the coast was breathtakingly beautiful.
I had wrapped up my work in California and was driving up the Pacific Coast Highway, with a pit stop at Redwoods National Park planned the next day on the way to Oregon.
The night was getting late, and I needed to find a spot to sleep, so I booked a hotel on my phone and pulled into the small military town of Fort Bragg.
Learn more: Best travel insurance
“Checking in?” the guy at the motel asked.
“Yes, I have a reservation.” I handed him my ID.
“Are you working in town?”
“Yes sir, I just finished and am on my way north.”
“I need proof that you have a job in town, or unfortunately, you won’t be allowed to stay here,” he said.
“Unfortunately, if you don’t have work here tomorrow, it would be against the law for you to stay here.” I was sent away.
Mendocino County did not want me to stay the night, apparently, so I had to sleep in my car tucked off of the highway instead.
How I scaled Patagonia with ALS:'The right wheelchair will take you anywhere a pair of legs can'
I was completely alone and isolated.
The excitement of traveling was quickly wearing off.
That rip current sign was in my head again.
It said, “If you need help, yell or wave for assistance.” Only spending time with myself was going to be the greatest challenge I had ever faced.
Most people have family and friends surrounding them in these moments of life transition.
Everyone I knew was miles and miles away, self-isolating with their loved ones.
Making my way north through Portland and Seattle, I discovered that artists in nearly every city put murals up on the plywood that businesses used to board up their buildings.
Everywhere I went, there were more plywood murals, and I started taking photos of them in every city.
It gave me something to take my mind off of having to be my own best friend and attempting to enjoy my own company.
The pandemic made so many great cities look like empty, post-apocalyptic shells of themselves.
They were depressed, empty, and dangerous.
They looked like how I felt inside.
As society was going through a difficult transition, so was I.
But these murals were something else, a sign of hope.
I began to see them as a sign that even in moments of transition, we can still make the best of things and create something beautiful.
My creativity had long been in hibernation.
I had bought a camera a few years prior in an attempt to share a hobby with my wife, who was always setting up elaborate photoshoots.
I didn't even really know how to use my camera, but I began experimenting, walking around these abandoned cities and capturing this historical moment in time.
I couldn’t help but wonder if these cities would ever return to their former glory.
Would they be better than they were before?
Was there a chance that everything, including my life, would be better in the future?
"So if you think you can intimidate me, go … suck it up, buttercup!"
Washington, D.C., was gridlocked this week as House Republicans failed to elect a new speaker.
The caucus nominated Jordan, an ultraconservative representative from Ohio.
But, she told reporters, she had concerns about whether Jordan could unify the party, and she was worried about the looming threat of a government shutdown.
"As soon as the vote was had in conference, and then, not two hours later, we had that coming out."
She cast her vote Wednesday for U.S. Rep. Kay Granger of Texas, a Republican who chairs the Appropriations Committee.
Jordan then lost a secret ballot and withdrew his nomination.
She anticipates House Republicans will successfully choose a speaker "next week."
"I have told everybody I’m not doing anything until Sunday."
Katie Akin is a politics reporter for the Register.
Reach her atkakin@registermedia.com.
Follow her on Twitter at @katie_akin.
Imagine a young married couple.
One partner invests heavily in his employer’s 401(k), saving for both spouses.
The other focuses on paying the bills and contributes nothing to her retirement plan, missing out on the employer's matching funds.
“My income was going toward our expenses, and he was going to focus on retirement,” she said.
“And I had a great company match, and I didn’t pay attention to that.”
The marriage eventually ended.
Her lost retirement savings provide a cautionary tale.
Protect your assets: Best high-yield savings accounts of 2023
“I don’t even want to think about it,” she said.
In fact, one in four married couples fails to take full advantage of employers who make matching contributions to 401(k) retirement plans, a recent study found.
The oversight costs them nearly $700 a year, on average.
Most plans offer a match: The employer contributes to a 401(k), matching some or all of the funds paid into the plan by the worker.
In one typical model, the employer matches half of every dollar a worker contributes, up to a maximum of 6% of the worker’s pay.
The study found that about 24% of married couples left money on the table by failing to claim some of an employer’s matching funds.
Those couples lost $682 a year, on average, money they could recover simply by changing the allocation of their retirement contributions.
The findings are based on IRS tax data and retirement plan descriptions.
The researchers stressed that their focus was not on couples that don’t save for retirement, or don’t save enough.
Instead, they looked at couples that could increase their savings merely by shifting contributions from one spouse to the other.
“It’s all about how you allocate money across accounts.”
In some couples, the researchers found, only one spouse contributed to a retirement plan, while the other ignored a plan with a generous employer match.
Other couples split retirement savings equally when they should have put more money into an account with a larger match.
“And I think a lot of people need to realize that this is not about the individual.”
The new study underscores a lack of cooperation between spouses on an important matter of household finance.
The researchers said it also speaks to the broader issue of financial communication in marriage.
The researchers found that couples that had been married longer, and couples with children, tended to do a better job at communicating and coordinating retirement savings.
Couples in shorter relationships did worse.
Couples headed for divorce were also less likely to coordinate their retirement contributions.
The researchers discovered this by studying the saving patterns of marriages that ended in divorce.
Investment advisers often recommend that American workers save 10% to 15% of their pre-tax income for retirement.
They also urge them to max out any matching funds from the employer, which boosts the worker’s effective savings rate.
If a company matches up to 6% of your salary in 401(k) contributions, "maxing out" means contributing at least that much of your annual pay.
“The first priority for any investor should be to save enough to get at least the entire employer match,” said Rob Williams, managing director of financial planning at Charles Schwab.
Yet, many partners leave the money untapped.
Vanguard, for example, reports that 31% of its retirement plan participants failed to claim some or all of an employer’s matching funds in 2022.
Retirement savings rates are lower for younger workers, whose retirement falls in the more distant future.
Among Vanguard participants, the retirement savings rate in 2022 ranged from 5.2% for workers under 25 to 9% for those over 65.
More on inflation's bite:High costs disrupt life in more ways than we can see
In the 2023 Retirement Confidence Survey, conducted by the nonprofit Employee Benefit Research Institute, 84% of workers voiced concern that the rising cost of living will make it harder for them to save money for retirement.
An employer match may not seem like much money.
But “it’s a 100% match up to 3% of your salary.”
An employee with a $50,000 salary would see a $1,500 contribution grow to $3,000.
“Football belongs to everybody.”
Think about those words and what they mean to you.
They probably tell you how much the American version of the sport captivates the country every weekend of the fall.
But consider the source of these words: They’re from a woman, a former Division I athlete but one who never really got a chance to play football.
“But that’s all we had.”
It wasn’t much, a game played by girls as a kind of afterthought to the “real thing” the boys played.
Several decades later, though, amid a broader national picture of equity, it’s a sport girls are making distinctly their own.
Flag football has become one of the hottest and fastest growing sports for kids to play For girls specifically, though, it’s one they have seized with a national wave of enthusiasm.
Already soaring in popularity at the youth levels, girls flag football has achieved high school varsity status in eight states (Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, California, Florida Georgia, New York and Nevada) as either a fall or spring sport and 18 more states have pilot programs that could achieve that status soon.
There are 15,000-plus girls playing flag football at more than 700 high schools, according to the NFHS.
It's a sport we learned last week will be offered for men and women at the 2028 Los Angeles Olympic Games and one the NFL is supporting with youth initiatives and grant programs to assist states in starting programs at schools.
It's also just fun.
What is the allure behind this vibrant girls sport that is sweeping America?
USA TODAY Sports takes a closer look:
“We’re representing our school!”
“We’re representing our family!”
“Most of all, we’re representing each other!”
That cheer was captured by a CBS report about a local high school flag football team in the San Francisco Bay Area.
Girls across the country are playing a sport they previously only watched their brothers play.
On this team, though, there are two girls who watched their dad play.
You may have heard of him – Hall of Fame quarterback Steve Young.
Likewise, coaches like Young nationwide are seeing girls experience those “Ah-ha!” moments we all cherish when they throw a spiral, line up for a formation or correctly follow a snap count for the first time.
“They go on four, no one flinched,” Young said in a local TV interview.
Girls are feeling it, and loving it, taking a game with which most of us are familiar and carving it into something distinctly their own.
COACH STEVE: Sports parents, you're out of control; behave or get off the sideline
Flag is football with no hitting, even in a football-crazed state in Alabama.
(“NON-CONTACT SPORT,” it says in the state’s rules listed online.)
It’s a sport kids can play (and parents can watch) without worrying about being leveled.
But that doesn’t mean they’re not playing football.
He didn’t put on pads until he played tackle football in high school.
He learned football’s fundamentals playing flag, a game of strategy and precision.
“The games that we don’t win, we aren’t playing together as a team,” Avery Brewster, a senior co-captain on Mission Viejo’s high school team in California, told USA TODAY Sports.
COACH STEVE: Think you're a good sports parent?
Flag football delves deeply into a component of football we see every time we watch a video of a coach handing out a game ball.
A 2018 study on teen sport in America by the Women’s Sports Foundation found that boys who participated in full-contact football had some of the highest self-esteems among youth sports participants.
It’s a game where youth and high school rosters can go more than 50 deep and yet have each player make a unique contribution and feel a part of the team.
“It’ll be interesting to see how this carries over to flag football but (football is) one of the few sports that is really welcoming to the child and adolescent who’s carrying extra weight, especially those that are carrying quite a bit of extra weight who really struggle with finding other opportunities for sport participation,” she says, “and football sometimes is the only option that they have.”
Yes, flag football players already have role models they can emulate like Mexico quarterback Diana Flores, who was featured in a commercial at the last Super Bowl in which she evades a dizzying number of defenders, including broadcaster Erin Andrews and her mother.
But they can also admire the girl next to them who, like them, is trying something new.
“I just think it’s really cool that they have the opportunity to do this and feel included and feel not alone in everything,” says Katie Neilson, another senior co-captain on Mission Viejo’s team in California who has only been playing the sport since her sophomore year.
In California, where girls flag is being offered as a varsity sport for the first time this fall, more than 400 schools are participating in it.
Emmy Walton got a sense of the sport’s soaring popularity when she and her organization, Women of Will (WoW), helped host a tournament at Mission Viejo High last month.
The event drew 21 schools from four sports hotbeds in the southern part of the state: Los Angeles County, Orange County, the Inland Empire and San Diego.
 “I would have been all over flag football if it was an option for me,” says Walton, a four-year varsity soccer player at Cal State Fullerton and the national account manager for Women of Will.
Women of Will, which partners with apparel and equipment outfits BSN Sports and Under Armour, is a unique, girls-only sports high school sponsorship program.
“When we grew up, there wasn’t even girls athletic wear,” Walton says.
It was all just like boys, and it was all baggy and everything.
I can’t imagine not having the experiences and the life lessons I learned from playing sports.
“We want to give them something that will leave a legacy of empowering female athletes in creating a culture change on campus of these ladies having a safe space to rise up as leaders.”
It’s been about 20 years since Walton played prep sports.
When she walks around a high school campus these days, she gets a much different picture than the one once saw through teenaged eyes.
Students pass her with their heads down or their ears plugged with wireless earpieces.
Some of them don’t talk even to the people they pass and see.
Then Walton goes out to the athletic fields or into the gymnasiums.
There, the communication is as vibrant as ever.
She sees girls like she once was with sense of direction, spirit and purpose.
She sees something else, too.
They’re playing football.
“These girls can be pioneers,” she says.
“I hope that colleges are seeing how fast this sport is growing and how important it is to offer it.”
“By getting kids excited about flag, they get excited about football … We’re getting families to embrace the sport of football with a different lens.”
After all, as she knows, football belongs to everybody.
He spent 10 years coaching his two sons’ baseball and basketball teams.
He and his wife, Colleen, are now sports parents for a high schooler and middle schooler.
His column is posted weekly.
For his past columns, click here.
Got a question for Coach Steve you want answered in a column?
Email him at sborelli@usatoday.com
The best advice you can give a college coach is to change jobs every seven or eight years, if they’re lucky enough to make it that long.
It doesn’t apply in every case, of course.
There’s a separate category for coaches who win national championships, though they aren’t necessarily immune either.
Coaches who regularly punch above their weight at programs that don't expect titles might have it best of all in this business because they can usually stay as long as they want.
Even if the school doesn’t really want to fire you, the fans eventually tire of you.
And even with all the money being deposited in your bank account, it’s not the best quality of life.
Meet James Franklin, the coach at Penn State.
He’s had some good stretches.
He’s had a few down periods.
But mainly, he’s just kind of achieved at the same level for 10 years.
And that level isn’t Ohio State or Michigan's level, which means the Nittany Lions have been cut out of the College Football Playoff picture because of two teams they play every year.
Is that good enough?
Penn State needs to beat those teams now and then.
And Saturday seemed like a good chance, with Ohio State somewhat diminished from the offensive monster they were the last few years and Penn State sporting the best defense it’s had under Franklin.
This year might have been as even as the overall talent has ever been.
And for all that, Franklin’s team didn’t even really show up.
Yeah, they were in the game into the fourth quarter.
But they didn’t play well at all offensively, gaining just 240 yards with 49 rushing yards on 26 attempts.
In the end, it was a 20-12 loss with a garbage time touchdown making it look more respectable, dropping Franklin to 1-9 against Ohio State.
He’s fared better against Michigan (3-6), but the Wolverines weren’t a top-10 team in those three good years.
HIGHS AND LOWS: Winners and losers from Week 8 in college football
BIG BUCKS: Brian Kelly earns $500,000 bowl bonus for LSU's sixth win
In other words, the overall picture is more or less the same for Penn State as it was six or seven years ago once Franklin got the program rolling.
Whether they’re right or wrong, how long until the people at Penn State just want something … different?
The romance in college football is often in the hope and the unknown, but that’s gone at Penn State.
They know what the program is and isn’t under Franklin.
At this point, fans could probably predict almost word-for-word what he’s going to say at his press conference.
But as Saturday’s performance showed, still not good enough.
For that reason, Penn State is No.
1 in this week’s Misery Index, a weekly measurement of which fan bases are feeling the most angst about the state of their favorite program.
He got hoodwinked by super agent Jimmy Sexton into giving out a big contract extension, even though Pittman was neither leaving nor being seriously pursued by anyone else.
And it’ll be a lot of money — either $16.1 million or $10.7 million, which is an interesting story on its own.
The contract stipulated that Pittman got an extra year if he won seven games at any point in the deal, which was accomplished last season when the Razorbacks went 7-6.
But if his overall record dipped from the beginning of 2021 dipped below .500 it would be a smaller buyout.
After a 7-3 loss to Mississippi State — Arkansas’ sixth in a row and 10th in its last 12 SEC games — Pittman’s record since 2021 is 18-16.
It’s all funny money these days in college football, but the idea that a game against FIU could be worth $5.4 million to Pittman personally and to Arkansas’ budget is maybe the only funny thing about this disaster of a Razorbacks season.
Now, 2 1/2 seasons and a measly eight total wins later, Indiana would be on the hook for a $20 million buyout if they want to get rid of him.
And they probably need to after dropping to 2-5 overall and 0-4 in the Big Ten with a 31-14 loss to Rutgers.
Hey, Indiana fans had reason to be excited back then.
Indiana wasn’t a one-hit COVID wonder, but it was a two-hit wonder under Allen.
So while Allen obviously had something to do with the success, he totally owns the failure that has followed.
Indiana is a football program used to going back to square one every few years.
It seems they're about to find themselves back in the same spot.
Here’s the state of things currently in East Lansing.
On the night they lost at home 49-0 to their most hated rival with an interim coach who is in place because their old coach admitted to masturbating on the phone with a university vendor who subsequently filed a sexual harassment complaint, somehow the only thing anyone will remember about this game is Adolf Hitler.
We shouldn’t have to explain why it’s bad to have an image of a smiling Hitler on your scoreboard as part of your pre-game entertainment, regardless of context.
(It was a trivia question that the university apologized for and blamed on poor oversight of a third-party vendor.)
But how did that one slip past the game operations people?
Or, as soon as somebody saw anything involving Hitler on the scoreboard, how did someone not just reach as quickly as possible for the button to turn it off?
But however it happened, unspeakable embarrassment keeps coming for the Spartans.
It’s very hard to get to the national championship game.
It’s almost as hard to throw away most of that goodwill with the fan base in a matter of 10 months.
But that’s about where the Horned Frogs find themselves after a 41-3 loss at Kansas State.
At 4-4 with trips to Texas Tech and Oklahoma still on the schedule along with home games against Texas and Baylor, it will be a high-wire act for Sonny Dykes to get this very mediocre team to 6-6.
Somehow, despite being a dog-tired football team, the Knights managed to score on a fourth-and-10 with 1:16 remaining to pull within a two-point conversion of tying Oklahoma in Norman.
And then what did they do?
They tried a terrible, double-pass trick play that required the ball to go seven yards behind the line of scrimmage before a right-handed receiver rolled left.
Meanwhile, UCF had nobody on the right side of the field to draw the defense.
And remarkably, it dropped UCF to 0-for-3 on two-point conversions this year — all on plays with some level of trickery.
For a team that's third in the country in rushing this year, that's not just bizarre, it’s almost inexcusable.
Shane Beamer had an unexpectedly fun first two years with the Gamecocks.
But he’s getting a reputation as the saltiest loser in the sport, which has already gotten old during a spiraling 2-5 season.
After the season opener against North Carolina, he complained about the chain gang delaying an onside kick attempt to start the second half.
Is this stuff a huge deal?
And Beamer is a nice guy, but he spends a lot of time apologizing for stuff he does in the heat of the moment.
And no, we don't mean Conference USA.
We mean the Misery Index, and it’s well-deserved.
After many years as one of the top Championship Subdivision programs with a national title just three seasons ago, you for some reason decided to leave that comfort zone and jump on the FBS train.
And after a 33-27 double-overtime loss to Florida International, you now know how hard it's going to be.
Sam Houston State is now 0-7 since moving up, and in an era of NIL, possible player compensation and a widening gap between the haves and have-nots, how much upside was there really for you to make this move?
The trajectory seemed clear, from complete despair to signs of life to winning records in 2021 and 2022.
But suddenly, the Pirates are back in the bad place — maybe a worse place.
They’re 1-6 after a 10-7 home loss to Charlotte, which had also been struggling at 1-5 coming into the game, and the numbers are all very ugly.
With such a passionate fan base and a highly regarded coach in Mike Houston, who won big at the lower levels including a national FCS title at James Madison, it's all very hard to figure.
Sebastian Cook is pursuing his dream of becoming a barber.
Some days, he spends up to 12 hours at the Brevard-based academy he attends.
With a rule passed Wednesday by the Florida Board of Education, the 19-year-old transgender man will be barred from accessing a bathroom he feels comfortable using.
"It makes me really terrified to go to school," he said.
I don't look like a woman.
More than 19 million Americans joined an international earthquake drill on Thursday that encouraged people to drop, cover and hold on, a planned event that happened just a day after a quake rattled northern California.
The Earth often shakes the ground across the nation and its territories.
Hillsborough, North Carolina felt an earthquake on Thursday, according to the U.S. Geological Survey.
That North Carolina quake was one of more than 150 earthquakes of at least a 2.0 magnitude across the continental United States in 19 states over the past week.
At least 34 earthquakes of a 2.5 magnitude or higher occurred in Puerto Rico, 30 in Alaska and 10 in Hawaii in the last seven days.
Should you prepare?
Earthquakes can occur anywhere in the country, although they are less frequent in some places.
"We're trying to get people to be more self-sufficient, because in a big earthquake there’s not going to be help from the neighboring city," he said.
“They’re going to be impacted too.”
 And when a big one occurs, it’s likely to trigger others around it.
We “have the ability to record smaller and smaller earthquakes,” not just in California, but in distant locations where there aren’t any people, and even under the seafloor.
Seismometers were established in far-flung locations across the world as the U.S., Russia and China tried to monitor whether the others were conducting underground nuclear tests.
As a college student, he once worked along a fault in Siberia and Mongolia.
Apps alert phones when shaking is detected and social media also has contributed to the more frequent communication of earthquakes.
“People are feeling small earthquakes and posting about it,” he said.
“So it seems like there’s a lot more earthquakes happening, but it’s because there’s a lot more earthquake information happening and happening more frequently.”
It’s normal for seismic activity to temporarily increase or decrease, and neither positively indicates a large earthquake is eminent, according to the geological survey.
The earthquake risk is growing, because of increasing human and economic exposure and the number of assets being built in high earthquake hazard areas, the Federal Emergency Management Agency said in a report earlier this year.
Although Alaska is the most seismically active state in the U.S., the risks and potential impacts are greater in California because it has the highest estimated potential loss due to earthquakes, according to the geological survey.
The Earth’s crust is like the shell of an egg.
It’s very thin compared to the planet.
The Pacific plate moves to the northwest at a speed of 3-4 inches a year, while the North American plate moves to the west-southwest at about an inch a year, according to the Pacific Northwest Seismic Network.
The motion of the plates around the globe is the primary source of strain that leads to earthquakes.
Major quakes are often preceded by smaller quakes, foreshocks, and followed by additional quakes, aftershocks, which can also be quite large.
Earthquakes often occur in groups of mostly small earthquakes with no identifiable mainshock, according to the geological survey.
A group of researchers at the University of Utah are studying the swarms of earthquakes that occur there.
The “seismic groups” strike a region over a short period of time and dozens have been recorded in Central Utah over 40 years.
That occurs repeatedly, the researchers said.
Of all the sequences of seismic activity in the region, 80% are swarms, the researchers said.
The university’s seismologists are analyzing that data to try to determine their significance.
In the way that people would like to know — a day or a week in advance?
But the probability of a significant earthquake in a specific area within a number of years can be calculated.
For example, they know there will be aftershocks after big earthquakes, he said.
The Statewide California Earthquake Center recently received a grant to establish a science "gateway" to improve analysis of rupture forecasts, which could provide information about the likelihood of having earthquakes of different sizes at different locations, and simulate the coupled evolution of earthquakes and faults for the first time.
An earthquake can only be as big as the fault line where it occurs, so you have to have a large, long fault to have a large earthquake.
For example, in the 2015 movie “San Andreas,” with Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson, a 9.1 magnitude earthquake in Los Angeles triggered a 9.6 magnitude earthquake in San Francisco.
The fault isn't big enough.
It would be unlikely for Southern California to have an earthquake of greater than 8.3 magnitude, the USGS said.
They’ve had an earthquake as large as a 7.9 magnitude earthquake in the past.
Those occur chiefly in coastal regions where an oceanic plate in the earth’s crust meets a continental plate along a tectonic plate boundary and slides beneath it.
One subduction zone occurs in Alaska, where a 9.2 earthquake shook the Prince William Sound region in 1964.
It remains the most powerful on record in North America.
The quake and the resulting tsunami killed 131 people.
Subduction zones occur around the Pacific, in an area sometimes called the "Ring of Fire" for its earthquakes and volcanic eruptions.
It includes the Pacific Northwest, the area of the U.S. at greatest risk, and the west coast of South America, where the largest recorded earthquake in the world – 9.5 – occurred in Chile on May 22, 1960.
Actual shaking rarely causes injury.
Injuries and death occur when walls and roofs collapse and glass and other objects fly or fall, especially when people try to move during the shaking, according to Shake Out.
No matter where you are, don't move if you can avoid it until you're sure it's safe.
We recognize that mistakes may happen – or that new information can emerge after a story is published – and we pledge to address all concerns quickly, fairly and transparently.
If a correction or clarification is warranted, we will highlight that in the original file and explain to readers why the change was made.
Any correction or clarification would also be published on our corrections log.
To report corrections & clarifications, contact:
Please indicate whether you're responding to content online or in the newspaper.
The following corrections & clarifications have been published on stories produced by USA TODAY's newsroom:
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated who is affected by this rule.
The story has been updated to reflect the proposed rule affects satellite and cable providers.
Money: A previous version of this story misstated the number of people 62 and older who have student debt loans.
Sports: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed the locations for Big Ten games.
"5 Things" podcast: On the Oct. 5 show in our segment about school psychologists, we misstated the ratio of counselors to students at a school in Hershey, Pennsylvania.
At 1 to 1000, it is half of the recommended ratio.
Money: An earlier version of this story mischaracterized the competitiveness of Capital One's savings-account interest rates.
The reference has been removed.
Jarrett Payton covers the Chicago Bears.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the amount of Fox Corp.'s settlement with Dominion Voting Systems in a defamation lawsuit.
Money: The UAW strike affects 38 locations across 20 states.
An earlier alert undercounted the number of states affected.
See the list.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly identified an organization.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified the Higher Education Advisory Group.
Sports: A headline on the story incorrectly described Christian Coleman's winning time in the men's 100 meters.
He won with a time of 9.83 seconds, tied for the world's fastest time this season.
News: This article was updated to remove incorrect details about math courses and departments at the University of California, Santa Cruz.
News: A previous version of this video misstated the Longwood Garden's distance from the prison.
His personal security guard ran onto the field to restrain the person.
A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the name of the home team.
News: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified Chester County Prison.
It's the University of Pennsylvania.
News: A previous version of this video misstated how many co-defendants had been booked.
Money: An earlier version of this story incorrectly listed among states with no Social Security tax Minnesota, which expanded in May 2023 a state tax exemption for benefits without eliminating the tax.
News: An earlier version of this story contained inaccurate or incomplete facts about the history of language.
Social media: A previous version of this post graphic contained a name misspelling of Scooter Braun.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the extent of the standing water around Dodger Stadium.
Sports: The USA TODAY Sports’ MLB power rankings in the Aug. 15 edition misstated the leader of the American League Central Division.
The Minnesota Twins lead the division.
News: A previous version of this video misidentified USA TODAY’s National Political correspondent, David Jackson.
Entertainment: The location of the bookstore in an earlier version of this story was incorrect.
Wild Geese Bookshop is located in Franklin, Indiana.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the next opponent for the U.S. women should they advance from their Round of 16 game vs. Sweden.
The Americans would then play the winner of Japan vs. Norway in the quarterfinals.
Money: Due to a typo, an earlier version of this story misstated total U.S. sales of the Kia Stinger.
The automaker has sold more than 65,000 Stinger sedans in the U.S. since the model's launch.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees between Madrid, Spain, and a mountainous area in Spain.
It also misstated a temperature difference in Fahrenheit degrees in reference to average temperatures in Tunisia.
News: An earlier version incorrectly identified Victoria McQueen's title at her high school.
She is student body president.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified the Norwegian Gem.
It is a Jewel-class cruise ship.
News: A previous version of this video incorrectly stated the origins of Blue Moon.
Sports: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported the Iowa State teams being investigated by the Iowa Racing and Gaming Commission.
The school does not have a baseball program.
News: This article has been updated to include additional nonpartisan sources of data and research.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated 10-year-old J'Adore's diagnosis date.
News: In a 1A story on July 5 about primary care doctors, the relationship between physicians and health professionals such as nurse practitioners and physician assistants was unclear.
Paraprofessionals generally work under the supervision of a licensed physician.
Entertainment: A photo included in an earlier version of this report was misidentified as The Beatles.
The new record featuring John Lennon’s vocals will be a song.
Graphics: A previous version of this story misstated the number of competing teams in the Tour de France.
News: This story has been updated to clarify how many people died on the Titanic.
Money: This story has been updated to clarify details about local liquor laws.
News: A June 19 article on Page 2A misstated the year the 13th Amendment was passed.
Life: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated when the rescue was made.
Travel: A previous version of this story incorrectly described the Airbus A321 with new livery.
The aircraft is part of JetBlue’s existing fleet.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the number of states under red flag warnings.
News: A previous version of this story incorrectly named ISR courses.
The courses are called Infant Swimming Resource courses.
News: This story has been updated to correct how far away the body was found from where the missing doctor was last seen.
News: An earlier version of this story did not make clear which versions of the AP African American Studies course framework excluded the word "queer."
It has been updated to clarify that versions in May 2022 and February 2023 did not include the word.
Travel: An earlier version of the story incorrectly listed how police resolved the case.
News: A previous version of this article incorrectly referred to the tornado data provided by the Storm Prediction Center of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Sports: A story on the documentary movie “It Ain’t Over” in the May 12 edition misstated the number of league MVP titles won by Yogi Berra.
The Yankees legend won three.
The information has been updated.
Those portions have been removed.
Sports: A previous version of this story misstated the Australian Open women's singles champion.
News: In some editions, the March 30 1A story about attackers targeting schools misstated the partners in the mass killing database.
They are USA TODAY, The Associated Press and Northeastern University.
News: This story originally included an inaccurate detail related to one woman's application for a domestic violence restraining order.
The information on Alison Kessler has been updated.
News: An earlier version of this story misstated the comparative price between electric vehicles and gas-powered vehicles.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this story misstated the year of Paul Walker's death.
News: A previous version of this article misstated Terry Wilson's employment status.
He remains a Fresno State employee but was granted leave from the position to serve as a staff-wide union representative.
News: An earlier version of this podcast incorrectly stated that USA TODAY ran the Dilbert comic strip.
It was the USA TODAY Network, not USA TODAY.
News: USA TODAY did not publish the Dilbert comic strip.
A previous version of this article was incorrect.
Facebook: A previous version of this post contained photos from other events earlier this month in Florida.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated salary figures of bartenders and pharmacists.
News: A story on Page 1A Feb. 16 about corporate diversity gave the incorrect date of Southern Co.’s annual meeting.
It takes place later this year.
News: A previous version of this graphic misstated the title of a movie.
News: A previous version of this article misstated the number of Maryland’s Eastern Shore counties.
Social media: An earlier version of this video had an incorrect description.
News: An earlier version misstated the requirements in the Biden administration’s proposed Title IX rule for determining the outcome of sexual assault cases.
The proposed regulation would require schools to use the “preponderance of evidence” standard most of the time.
News: An earlier version of this video misstated the status of a House Ethics Committee investigation.
Social media: A previous post misidentified the award Beyoncé won.
News: A previous version of this story misstated the home state of Sen. Chris Coons.
He is from Delaware.
Social media: A previous version of this post included an incorrect year of death.
News: An earlier version misstated the name of Hillsdale College's spokesperson, Emily Stack Davis.
Money: An earlier version of this story misstated the new price of the Tesla Model Y.
It is $52,990.
Entertainment: An earlier version of this gallery included a photo incorrectly identifying Paige Butcher.
Travel: A previous version of this story misidentified who created Seven Principles of Leave No Trace.
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2016
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2017
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2018
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2019
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2020
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2021
More: Corrections & Clarifications 2022
The USA TODAY Opinion section publishes analysis, argument and essays on a wide variety of subjects.
We're looking for timeliness (pegged to news), persuasion pitched to the other side, new information, novel arguments, revelatory insights, passion without partisanship, first-person experience, original reporting that reveals fresh angles and makes news, expert knowledge, and/or a topic that will drive conversation on social media and in the real world.
We accept only pieces that are submitted exclusively to USA TODAY.
We do not accept material that has been published on blogs, social media or anywhere else.
Columns typically run 550 to 750 words.
They should be pasted directly into an email and sent to theforum@usatoday.com.
Pieces should include links (URLs, not headlines or footnotes) to back up quotes and factual material.
People featured in columns must be identified by their real, full names.
We do not publish open letters, class projects or material that has been submitted to multiple outlets.
Rebuttals to editorials and columns published in USA TODAY should be submitted as letters to the editor, not as full-length op-eds.
Due to the volume of submissions, we can’t respond to all columns sent to us.
If our Opinion team is interested in yours, you will hear from us within three business days.
Submissions may be edited for accuracy, clarity, style, standards and length.
Please include with your submission a short biography, two sentences at most, to run at the end of your column, as well as a current photograph, to which you own publishing rights.
If you or a business, trade group or other institution with which you are associated stands to gain financially or in any other way from your column, you should disclose that information in detail.
In most cases, it should also be included in the body of the piece or in the author's biographical information.
Columns are accepted for online publication; print publication is not guaranteed.
All columns published by USA TODAY are available for use online and in print by the more than 250 properties in the USA TODAY Network.
They include Austin; Bergen County, New Jersey; Burlington, Vermont; Cincinnati; Columbus, Ohio; Des Moines; Detroit; El Paso, Texas; Indianapolis; Louisville, Kentucky; Memphis, Tennessee; Milwaukee; Nashville, Tennessee; Phoenix, Reno, Nevada; Palm Beach, Florida; and Wilmington, Delaware.
Authors may post their columns elsewhere 48 hours after they are published at USA TODAY.
By submitting a column to USA TODAY and agreeing to its publication, authors are granting exclusive rights to the piece to the USA TODAY Network for 48 hours and non-exclusive rights thereafter.
To get a sense of our range, preferences and requirements, check out our op-ed section, follow us on Twitter and Facebook, or sign up for our daily Opinion newsletter.
If you're interested in joining conversations about topics in USA TODAY, email letters@usatoday.com, comment on Facebook or use #tellusatoday on Twitter.
Letters are edited for accuracy, clarity and length and to conform to our editorial style and standards.
Submissions of 200 words or fewer have the best chance of being published.
Letters must include a name, address and phone number.
Corrections to published letters or columns follow USA TODAY guidelines.